
61. Ann Hematol. 2015 Aug;94(8):1327-36. doi: 10.1007/s00277-015-2383-2. Epub 2015
Apr 28.

Improved outcome of pediatric patients with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in
the AML-BFM 04 trial.

Schweitzer J(1), Zimmermann M, Rasche M, von Neuhoff C, Creutzig U, Dworzak M,
Reinhardt D, Klusmann JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.

Despite recent advances in the treatment of children with acute megakaryoblastic 
leukemia (AMKL) using intensified treatment protocols, clear prognostic
indicators, and treatment recommendations for this acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
subgroup are yet to be defined. Here, we report the outcome of 97 pediatric
patients with de novo AMKL (excluding Down syndrome [DS]) enrolled in the
prospective multicenter studies AML-BFM 98 and AML-BFM 04 (1998-2014). AMKL
occurred in 7.4 % of pediatric AML cases, at younger age (median 1.44 years) and 
with lower white blood cell count (mean 16.5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(9)/L) as compared to other AML 
subgroups. With 60<U+2009>±<U+2009>5 %, children with AMKL had a lower 5-year overall survival 
(5-year OS; vs. 68<U+2009>±<U+2009>1 %, P log rank<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.038). Yet, we achieved an improved
5-year OS in AML-BFM 04 compared to AML-BFM 98 (70<U+2009>±<U+2009>6 % vs. 45<U+2009>±<U+2009>8 %, P log
rank<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.041). Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in first
remission did not provide a significant survival benefit (5-year OS 70<U+2009>±<U+2009>11 % vs.
63<U+2009>±<U+2009>6 %; P Mantel-Byar<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.85). Cytogenetic data were available for n<U+2009>=<U+2009>78
patients. AMKL patients with gain of chromosome 21 had a superior 5-year OS
(80<U+2009>±<U+2009>9 %, P log rank<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034), whereas translocation t(1;22)(p13;q13) was
associated with an inferior 5-year event-free survival (38<U+2009>±<U+2009>17 %, P log
rank<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04). However, multivariate analysis showed that treatment response (bone
marrow morphology on day 15 and 28) was the only independent prognostic marker
(RR<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.39; 95 % CI, 1.97-9.78). Interestingly, GATA1-mutations were detected in 
six patients (11 %) without previously known trisomy 21. Thus, AMKL (excluding
DS) remains an AML subgroup with inferior outcome. Nevertheless, with intensive
therapy regimens, a steep increase in the survival rates was achieved.

PMCID: PMC4488462
PMID: 25913479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Med. 2015 Apr 21;21:346-54. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2012.00336.

Vitamin D Receptor Polymorphisms Are Associated with Reduced Esophageal Vitamin D
Receptor Expression and Reduced Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Risk.

Janmaat VT(1), Van De Winkel A(1), Peppelenbosch MP(1), Spaander MC(1),
Uitterlinden AG(2), Pourfarzad F(3), Tilanus HW(4), Rygiel AM(5), Moons LM(1),
Arp PP(2), Krishnadath KK(5), Kuipers EJ(1,)(2), Van Der Laan LJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Epidemiology and Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC-University 
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Department of Surgery, Erasmus
MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (5)Center for
Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.

Epidemiological studies indicate that vitamin D exerts a protective effect on the
development of various solid cancers. However, concerns have been raised
regarding the potential deleterious role of high vitamin D levels in the
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). This study investigated genetic
variation in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) in relation to its expression and risk 
of Barrett esophagus (BE) and EAC. VDR gene regulation was investigated by
immunohistochemistry, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and gel shift assays. Fifteen haplotype tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of the VDR gene were analyzed in 858 patients with reflux esophagitis
(RE), BE or EAC and 202 healthy controls. VDR mRNA expression was higher in BE
compared with squamous epithelium. VDR protein was located in the nucleus in BE. 
An rs1989969T/rs2238135G haplotype was identified in the 5' regulatory region of 
the VDR gene. It was associated with an approximately two-fold reduced risk of
RE, BE and EAC. Analysis of a replication cohort was done for BE that confirmed
this. The rs1989969T allele causes a GATA-1 transcription factor binding site to 
appear. The signaling of GATA-1, which is regarded as a negative transcriptional 
regulator, could explain the findings for rs1989969. The rs2238135G allele was
associated with a significantly reduced VDR expression in BE; for the rs1989969T 
allele, a trend in reduced VDR expression was observed. We identified a VDR
haplotype associated with reduced esophageal VDR expression and a reduced
incidence of RE, BE and EAC. This VDR haplotype could be useful in identifying
individuals who benefit most from vitamin D chemoprevention.

PMCID: PMC4534473
PMID: 25910066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biol Open. 2015 Apr 17;4(5):596-607. doi: 10.1242/bio.201410686.

Localized SCF and IGF-1 secretion enhances erythropoiesis in the spleen of murine
embryos.

Tan KS(1), Inoue T(2), Kulkeaw K(2), Tanaka Y(3), Lai MI(4), Sugiyama D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development of Next Generation Medicine, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582 Japan Department of
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia,
43400 Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia. (2)Department of Research and
Development of Next Generation Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582 Japan. (3)Center for Clinical and Translational
Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka 812-8582 Japan Department of
Clinical Study, Center for Advanced Medical Innovation, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka 812-8582 Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor Darul Ehsan, 
Malaysia. (5)Department of Research and Development of Next Generation Medicine, 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582 Japan Center for
Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka 812-8582
Japan Department of Clinical Study, Center for Advanced Medical Innovation,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582 Japan ds-mons@yb3.so-net.ne.jp.

Fetal spleen is a major hematopoietic site prior to initiation of bone marrow
hematopoiesis. Morphologic analysis suggested erythropoietic activity in fetal
spleen, but it remained unclear how erythropoiesis was regulated. To address this
question, we performed flow cytometric analysis and observed that the number of
spleen erythroid cells increased 18.6-fold from 16.5 to 19.5 days post-coitum
(dpc). Among erythropoietic cytokines, SCF and IGF-1 were primarily expressed in 
hematopoietic, endothelial and mesenchymal-like fetal spleen cells. Cultures
treated with SCF and/or IGF-1R inhibitors showed significantly decreased
CD45-c-Kit-CD71+/-Ter119+ erythroid cells and downregulated Gata1, Klf1 and
ß-major globin expression. Administration of these inhibitors to pregnant mice
significantly decreased the number of CD45-c-Kit-CD71+/-Ter119+ cells and
downregulated ß-major globin gene expression in embryos derived from these mice. 
We conclude that fetal spleen is a major erythropoietic site where endothelial
and mesenchymal-like cells primarily accelerate erythropoietic activity through
SCF and IGF-1 secretion.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4434811
PMID: 25887124  [PubMed]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2103-18. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01370-14. Epub 2015 Apr 
13.

TAF10 Interacts with the GATA1 Transcription Factor and Controls Mouse
Erythropoiesis.

Papadopoulos P(1), Gutiérrez L(2), Demmers J(3), Scheer E(4), Pourfarzad F(2),
Papageorgiou DN(5), Karkoulia E(5), Strouboulis J(5), van de Werken HJ(6), van
der Linden R(6), Vandenberghe P(7), Dekkers DH(3), Philipsen S(6), Grosveld F(6),
Tora L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Center for 
Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium petros.papadopoulos@med.kuleuven.be
laszlo@igbmc.fr. (2)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Cellular Signaling and Nuclear Dynamics Program,
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), UMR 7104 
CNRS, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France. (5)Division of
Molecular Oncology, B.S.R.C. Alexander Fleming, Athens, Greece. (6)Department of 
Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (7)Center for Human
Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (8)Cellular Signaling and Nuclear Dynamics 
Program, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), 
UMR 7104 CNRS, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France
petros.papadopoulos@med.kuleuven.be laszlo@igbmc.fr.

The ordered assembly of a functional preinitiation complex (PIC), composed of
general transcription factors (GTFs), is a prerequisite for the transcription of 
protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II. TFIID, comprised of the TATA binding
protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs), is the GTF that is thought to
recognize the promoter sequences allowing site-specific PIC assembly.
Transcriptional cofactors, such as SAGA, are also necessary for tightly regulated
transcription initiation. The contribution of the two TAF10-containing complexes 
(TFIID, SAGA) to erythropoiesis remains elusive. By ablating TAF10 specifically
in erythroid cells in vivo, we observed a differentiation block accompanied by
deregulated GATA1 target genes, including Gata1 itself, suggesting functional
cross talk between GATA1 and TAF10. Additionally, we analyzed by mass
spectrometry the composition of TFIID and SAGA complexes in mouse and human cells
and found that their global integrity is maintained, with minor changes, during
erythroid cell differentiation and development. In agreement with our functional 
data, we show that TAF10 interacts directly with GATA1 and that TAF10 is enriched
on the GATA1 locus in human fetal erythroid cells. Thus, our findings demonstrate
a cross talk between canonical TFIID and SAGA complexes and cell-specific
transcription activators during development and differentiation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4438247
PMID: 25870109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2015;75(1):60-71.

Signals mediating Klotho-induced neuroprotection in hippocampal neuronal cells.

Cheng MF(1), Chen LJ(2), Niu HS(3), Yang TT(4), Lin KC(5), Cheng JT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine College of Medicine,
jtcheng5503@yahoo.com.tw. (2)Institute of Basic Medical Science, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan City, Taiwan. (3)Department of Nursing, Tzu Chi College
of Technology, Hualien City, Taiwan. (4)The School of Chinese Medicine for
Post-Baccalaureate, I-Shou University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Neurology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Yong Kang, Tainan City, Taiwan. (6)Institute
of Medical Sciences, Chang Jung Christian University, Gueiren, Tainan City,
Taiwan.

The erythropoietin (Epo) receptor (EpoR) is expressed in the brain and was shown 
to have neuroprotective effects against brain damage in animal models. A recent
study indicated that EpoR and its activity are the downstream effectors of Klotho
for cytoprotection in the kidney. Thus, we propose that Klotho can stimulate the 
expression of EpoR in neuronal cells to enhance Epo-mediated protection. H19-7
hippocampal neuronal cells were treated with recombinant Klotho. In H19-7 cells, 
Klotho increased the expression of both the EpoR protein and mRNA. Klotho also
enhanced the transcription activity of the EpoR promoter in H19-7 cells.
Moreover, Klotho augmented the Epo-triggered phosphorylation of Jak2 and Stat5
and protected H19-7 cells from hydrogen peroxide cytotoxicity. The silencing of
EpoR abolished the protective effect of Klotho against peroxide-induced
cytotoxicity. Finally, the silencing of GATA1 diminished the Klotho-induced
increase in EpoR protein and mRNA expression as well as its promoter activity. In
conclusion, Klotho increased EpoR expression in neuronal cells through GATA1,
thereby enabling EpoR to function as a cytoprotective protein against oxidative
injury.

PMID: 25856523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cogn Neurodyn. 2015 Apr;9(2):221-9. doi: 10.1007/s11571-014-9318-9. Epub 2015 Jan
21.

Bifurcation dynamics and determination of alternate cell fates in bipotent
progenitor cells.

Li S(1), Liu Y(1), Liu Z(1), Wang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Systems Biology, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444 China.

The gene regulatory networks in which two lineage-affiliated transcription
factors, such as GATA1 and PU.1, inhibit each other but activate themselves so as
to regulate the choice between alternative cell fates have been extensively
studied. These simple networks can generate bistability and explain the
transitions between the alternative cell fates. The commitment of a progenitor
cell to a new fate corresponds to the occurrence of different types of
bifurcations, depending on if a system is symmetrical and how perturbations
affect the system. Here we take a general modeling and analyzing approach and
show that the lateral inhibition with symmetry and asymmetry can lead to
different bifurcation dynamics. Especially, if cell fate decision-making is
initiated with asymmetry or symmetry-breaking perturbations, a progenitor cell
pre-patterns itself into a polarized cell, depending on the asymmetry or
symmetry-breaking perturbations. This study may help us understand the
fundamental features of binary cell fate decisions more clearly and further apply
to a wider range of decision-making processes.

PMCID: PMC4378578
PMID: 25852780  [PubMed]


67. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 May 15;460(4):923-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.03.128. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Knockdown of transcription factor forkhead box O3 (FOXO3) suppresses erythroid
differentiation in human cells and zebrafish.

Wang H(1), Li Y(2), Wang S(3), Zhang Q(4), Zheng J(2), Yang Y(4), Qi H(2), Qu
H(4), Zhang Z(4), Liu F(5), Fang X(6).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; China National
Committee for Terms in Sciences and Technologies, Beijing 100717, China. (2)CAS
Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and
Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100101, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China. (4)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. Electronic address: 
liuf@ioz.ac.cn. (6)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
Electronic address: fangxd@big.ac.cn.

Our previous study on the dynamic transcriptomes activated during human
erythropoiesis suggested that transcription factor forkhead box O3 (FOXO3)
possibly plays a role in erythroid differentiation. Functional studies in human
cell line TF-1 indicated that FOXO3 knockdown repressed erythropoietin
(EPO)-induced erythroid differentiation by activating promoter region of B-cell
translocation gene 1 (BTG1), thereby regulating its expression. In zebrafish,
injection of foxo3b-specific morpholinos (foxo3b MO) resulted in reduced globin
(hbae1 and hbbe2) and gata1 gene expression. Transcriptome analyses of erythroid 
lineage cells isolated from the control and foxo3b morphants revealed the dynamic
regulation of foxo3b. Further study suggested that BTG1 is partially responsible 
for FOXO3 regulation in erythroid differentiation of TF-1 cells but is
inconsequential in zebrafish. Taken together, we found that FOXO3 plays an
important role in erythroid differentiation in both human TF-1 cells and
zebrafish, but the mechanism underlying this regulation still remains unclear.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25843800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biochem J. 2015 Jun 1;468(2):345-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150030.

The tumour suppressor CHD5 forms a NuRD-type chromatin remodelling complex.

Kolla V(1), Naraparaju K(1), Zhuang T(1), Higashi M(1), Kolla S(1), Blobel GA(2),
Brodeur GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, PA, U.S.A.
(2)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, PA, U.S.A.

Eukaryotic gene expression is developmentally regulated, in part by chromatin
remodelling, and its dysregulation has been linked to cancer. CHD5 (chromodomain 
helicase DNA-binding protein 5) is a tumour suppressor gene (TSG) that maps to a 
region of consistent deletion on 1p36.31 in neuroblastomas (NBs) and other tumour
types. CHD5 encodes a protein with chromatin remodelling, helicase and
DNA-binding motifs that is preferentially expressed in neural and testicular
tissues. CHD5 is highly homologous to CHD3 and CHD4, which are the core subunits 
of nucleosome remodelling and deacetylation (NuRD) complexes. To determine if
CHD5 forms a similar complex, we performed studies on nuclear extracts from NBLS,
SY5Y (both with endogenous CHD5 expression), NLF (CHD5 null) and NLF cells stably
transfected with CHD5 cDNA (wild-type and V5-histidine-tagged).
Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed with either CHD5 antibody or antibody to
V5/histidine-tagged protein. We identified NuRD components both by GST-FOG1
(Friend Of GATA1) pull-down and by IP. We also performed MS/MS analysis to
confirm the presence of CHD5 or other protein components of the NuRD complex, as 
well as to identify other novel proteins. CHD5 was clearly associated with all
canonical NuRD components, including metastasis-associated protein (MTA)1/2, GATA
zinc finger domain containing 2A (GATAD2A), histone deacetylase (HDAC)1/2,
retinoblastoma-binding protein (RBBP)4/7 and methyl DNA-binding domain protein
(MBD)2/3, as determined by Western blotting and MS/MS. Our data suggest CHD5
forms a NuRD complex similar to CHD4. However, CHD5-NuRD may also have unique
protein associations that confer functional specificity and may contribute to
normal development and to tumour suppression in NB and other cancers.

PMCID: PMC4487910
PMID: 25825869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 19;10(3):e0119442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119442.
eCollection 2015.

In vivo regulation of erythropoiesis by chemically inducible dimerization of the 
erythropoietin receptor intracellular domain.

Suzuki N(1), Mukai HY(2), Yamamoto M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Interdisciplinary Medical Science, Center for Oxygen Medicine,
United Centers for Advanced Research and Translational Medicine, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (2)Department of Medical
Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

Erythropoietin (Epo) and its receptor (EpoR) are required for the regulation of
erythropoiesis. Epo binds to the EpoR homodimer on the surface of erythroid
progenitors and erythroblasts, and positions the intracellular domains of the
homodimer to be in close proximity with each other. This conformational change is
sufficient for the initiation of Epo-EpoR signal transduction. Here, we
established a system of chemically regulated erythropoiesis in transgenic mice
expressing a modified EpoR intracellular domain (amino acids 247-406) in which
dimerization is induced using a specific compound (chemical inducer of
dimerization, CID). Erythropoiesis is reversibly induced by oral administration
of the CID to the transgenic mice. Because transgene expression is limited to
hematopoietic cells by the Gata1 gene regulatory region, the effect of the CID is
limited to erythropoiesis without adverse effects. Additionally, we show that the
160 amino acid sequence is the minimal essential domain of EpoR for intracellular
signaling of chemically inducible erythropoiesis in vivo. We propose that the
CID-dependent dimerization system combined with the EpoR intracellular domain and
the Gata1 gene regulatory region generates a novel peroral strategy for the
treatment of anemia.

PMCID: PMC4366189
PMID: 25790231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Endocr J. 2015;62(5):431-40. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ14-0427. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

A high concentration of triiodothyronine attenuates the stimulatory effect on
hemin-induced erythroid differentiation of human erythroleukemia K562 cells.

Shiraishi M(1), Yamamoto Y, Hirooka N, Obuchi Y, Tachibana S, Makishima M, Tanaka
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa
359-8513, Japan.

Although thyroid hormone is a known stimulator of erythropoietic differentiation,
severe anemia is sometimes observed in patients with hyperthyroidism and this
mechanism is not fully understood. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effect of triiodothyronine (T3) on hemin-induced erythropoiesis. Human
erythroleukemia K562 cells were used as an erythroid differentiation model. Cell 
differentiation was induced by hemin and the effect of pre-incubation with T3
(0.1 to 100 nM) was analyzed by measuring the benzidine-positive rate, hemoglobin
content, CD71 expression (transferrin receptor), and mRNA expression for
transcription factors related to erythropoiesis and thyroid hormone receptors
(TRs). Hemin, a promoter of erythroid differentiation, increased the levels of
mRNAs for TRa, TRß, and retinoid X receptor a (RXRa), as well as those for
nuclear factor-erythroid 2 (NFE2), GATA-binding protein 1 (GATA1) and
GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2). Lower concentrations of T3 had a stimulatory
effect on hemin-induced hemoglobin production (1 and 10 nM), CD71 expression (0.1
nM), and a-globin mRNA expression (1 nM), while a higher concentration of T3 (100
nM) abrogated the stimulatory effect on these parameters. T3 at 100 nM did not
affect cell viability and proliferation, suggesting that the abrogation of
erythropoiesis enhancement was not due to toxicity. T3 at 100 nM also
significantly inhibited expression of GATA2 and RXRa mRNA, compared to 1 nM T3.
We conclude that a high concentration of T3 attenuates the classical stimulatory 
effect on erythropoiesis exerted by a low concentration of T3 in hemin-induced
K562 cells.

PMID: 25787723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0119279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119279.
eCollection 2015.

Cyclosporin a disrupts notch signaling and vascular lumen maintenance.

Pandey R(1), Botros MA(2), Nacev BA(3), Albig AR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of Biology, Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina, United States of America. (3)Department of Pharmacology
and Molecular Sciences, and Medical Scientist Training Program, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biology, Boise State University, Boise, Idaho, United States of 
America.

Cyclosporin A (CSA) suppresses immune function by blocking the cyclophilin A and 
calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathways. In addition to immunosuppression, CSA has
also been shown to have a wide range of effects in the cardiovascular system
including disruption of heart valve development, smooth muscle cell
proliferation, and angiogenesis inhibition. Circumstantial evidence has suggested
that CSA might control Notch signaling which is also a potent regulator of
cardiovascular function. Therefore, the goal of this project was to determine if 
CSA controls Notch and to dissect the molecular mechanism(s) by which CSA impacts
cardiovascular homeostasis. We found that CSA blocked JAG1, but not Dll4 mediated
Notch1 NICD cleavage in transfected 293T cells and decreased Notch signaling in
zebrafish embryos. CSA suppression of Notch was linked to cyclophilin A but not
calcineurin/NFAT inhibition since N-MeVal-4-CsA but not FK506 decreased Notch1
NICD cleavage. To examine the effect of CSA on vascular development and function,
double transgenic Fli1-GFP/Gata1-RFP zebrafish embryos were treated with CSA and 
monitored for vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, and overall cardiovascular function. 
Vascular patterning was not obviously impacted by CSA treatment and contrary to
the anti-angiogenic activity ascribed to CSA, angiogenic sprouting of ISV vessels
was normal in CSA treated embryos. Most strikingly, CSA treated embryos exhibited
a progressive decline in blood flow that was associated with eventual collapse of
vascular luminal structures. Vascular collapse in zebrafish embryos was partially
rescued by global Notch inhibition with DAPT suggesting that disruption of normal
Notch signaling by CSA may be linked to vascular collapse. However, multiple
signaling pathways likely cause the vascular collapse phenotype since both
cyclophilin A and calcineurin/NFAT were required for normal vascular function.
Collectively, these results show that CSA is a novel inhibitor of Notch signaling
and vascular function in zebrafish embryos.

PMCID: PMC4361394
PMID: 25775018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Feb 23;6:90. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00090. eCollection
2015.

B-GATA transcription factors - insights into their structure, regulation, and
role in plant development.

Behringer C(1), Schwechheimer C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Technische Universität München Freising, 
Germany.

GATA transcription factors are evolutionarily conserved transcriptional
regulators that recognize promoter elements with a G-A-T-A core sequence. In
comparison to animal genomes, the GATA transcription factor family in plants is
comparatively large with approximately 30 members. Here, we review the current
knowledge on B-GATAs, one of four GATA factor subfamilies from Arabidopsis
thaliana. We show that B-GATAs can be subdivided based on structural features and
their biological function into family members with a C-terminal LLM-
(leucine-leucine-methionine) domain or an N-terminal HAN- (HANABA TARANU) domain.
The paralogous GNC (GATA, NITRATE-INDUCIBLE, CARBON-METABOLISM INVOLVED) and
CGA1/GNL (CYTOKININ-INDUCED GATA1/GNC-LIKE) are introduced as LLM-domain
containing B-GATAs from Arabidopsis that control germination, greening,
senescence, and flowering time downstream from several growth regulatory signals.
Arabidopsis HAN and its monocot-specific paralogs from rice (NECK LEAF1), maize
(TASSEL SHEATH1), and barley (THIRD OUTER GLUME) are HAN-domain-containing
B-GATAs with a predominant role in embryo development and floral development. We 
also review GATA23, a regulator of lateral root initiation from Arabidopsis that 
is closely related to GNC and GNL but has a degenerate LLM-domain that is
seemingly specific for the Brassicaceae family. The Brassicaceae-specific GATA23 
and the monocot-specific HAN-domain GATAs provide evidence that
neofunctionalization of B-GATAs was used during plant evolution to expand the
functional repertoire of these transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4337238
PMID: 25755661  [PubMed]


73. Blood. 2015 Apr 16;125(16):2553-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-608042. Epub 2015
Mar 9.

Elucidation of the EP defect in Diamond-Blackfan anemia by characterization and
prospective isolation of human EPs.

Iskander D(1), Psaila B(1), Gerrard G(2), Chaidos A(1), En Foong H(2), Harrington
Y(3), Karnik LC(3), Roberts I(4), de la Fuente J(3), Karadimitris A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haematology, Department of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom; (2)Centre for Haematology, Department of 
Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; 
Imperial Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Imperial College Healthcare National
Health Service Trust and Academic Health Sciences Centre, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, United Kingdom; (3)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, Imperial College Healthcare National Health Service Trust,
London, United Kingdom; and. (4)Department of Paediatrics, Children's Hospital
and Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Oxford University and John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a disorder characterized by a selective defect
in erythropoiesis. Delineation of the precise defect is hampered by a lack of
markers that define cells giving rise to erythroid burst- and erythroid
colony-forming unit (BFU-E and CFU-E) colonies, the clonogenic assays that
quantify early and late erythroid progenitor (EEP and LEP) potential,
respectively. By combining flow cytometry, cell-sorting, and single-cell
clonogenic assays, we identified
Lin(-)CD34(+)CD38(+)CD45RA(-)CD123(-)CD71(+)CD41a(-)CD105(-)CD36(-) bone marrow
cells as EEP giving rise to BFU-E, and
Lin(-)CD34(+/-)CD38(+)CD45RA(-)CD123(-)CD71(+)CD41a(-)CD105(+)CD36(+) cells as
LEP giving rise to CFU-E, in a hierarchical fashion. We then applied these
definitions to DBA and identified that, compared with controls, frequency, and
clonogenicity of DBA, EEP and LEP are significantly decreased in
transfusion-dependent but restored in corticosteroid-responsive patients. Thus,
both quantitative and qualitative defects in erythroid progenitor (EP) contribute
to defective erythropoiesis in DBA. Prospective isolation of defined EPs will
facilitate more incisive study of normal and aberrant erythropoiesis.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25755292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;35(10):1825-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00011-15. Epub 2015 Mar 
9.

The Human GATA1 Gene Retains a 5' Insulator That Maintains Chromosomal
Architecture and GATA1 Expression Levels in Splenic Erythroblasts.

Moriguchi T(1), Yu L(2), Takai J(2), Hayashi M(2), Satoh H(2), Suzuki M(2),
Ohneda K(3), Yamamoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan moriguch@med.tohoku.ac.jp masiyamamoto@med.tohoku.ac.jp. 
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health
and Welfare, Takasaki, Japan.

GATA1 is a key transcription factor for erythropoiesis. GATA1 gene expression is 
strictly regulated at the transcriptional level. While the regulatory mechanisms 
governing mouse Gata1 (mGata1) gene expression have been studied extensively, how
expression of the human GATA1 (hGATA1) gene is regulated remains to be
elucidated. To address this issue, we generated hGATA1 bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) transgenic mouse lines harboring a 183-kb hGATA1 locus covering 
the hGATA1 exons and distal flanking sequences. Transgenic hGATA1 expression
coincides with endogenous mGata1 expression and fully rescues hematopoietic
deficiency in mGata1 knockdown mice. The transgene exhibited copy
number-dependent and integration position-independent expression of hGATA1,
indicating the presence of chromatin insulator activity within the transgene. We 
found a novel insulator element at 29 kb 5' to the hGATA1 gene and refer to this 
element as the 5' CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) site. Substitution mutation of the 
5' CTCF site in the hGATA1 BAC disrupted the chromatin architecture and led to a 
reduction of hGATA1 expression in splenic erythroblasts under conditions of
stress erythropoiesis. Our results demonstrate that expression of the hGATA1 gene
is regulated through the chromatin architecture organized by 5' CTCF
site-mediated intrachromosomal interactions in the hGATA1 locus.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4405652
PMID: 25755285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Cell. 2015 Mar 23;32(6):756-64. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.032. Epub 2015 
Mar 5.

A CRISPR/Cas9 vector system for tissue-specific gene disruption in zebrafish.

Ablain J(1), Durand EM(1), Yang S(1), Zhou Y(2), Zon LI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Stem Cell
Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana 
Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (3)Stem Cell Program and Division
of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. Electronic address: zon@enders.tch.harvard.edu.

CRISPR/Cas9 technology of genome editing has greatly facilitated the targeted
inactivation of genes in vitro and in vivo in a wide range of organisms. In
zebrafish, it allows the rapid generation of knockout lines by simply injecting a
guide RNA (gRNA) and Cas9 mRNA into one-cell stage embryos. Here, we report a
simple and scalable CRISPR-based vector system for tissue-specific gene
inactivation in zebrafish. As proof of principle, we used our vector with the
gata1 promoter driving Cas9 expression to silence the urod gene, implicated in
heme biosynthesis, specifically in the erythrocytic lineage. Urod targeting
yielded red fluorescent erythrocytes in zebrafish embryos, recapitulating the
phenotype observed in the yquem mutant. While F0 embryos displayed mosaic gene
disruption, the phenotype appeared very penetrant in stable F1 fish. This vector 
system constitutes a unique tool to spatially control gene knockout and greatly
broadens the scope of loss-of-function studies in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4379706
PMID: 25752963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Curr Drug Targets. 2015;16(3):226-32.

T cell-activated signaling pathways and locally produced cytokines as potential
targets in celiac disease.

Piechota-Polanczyk A, Salaga M, Huk I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical University of Lodz, Mazowiecka 6/8 St.,
92-215 Lodz, Poland. piechota.aleksandra@wp.pl.

Celiac disease (CD) is an autoimmune disease induced by an autoimmune reaction to
indigested gluten, which occurs in genetically predisposed population. The
etiology of CD is linked to innate and adaptive immunity, mostly mediated by
lymphocytes, especially T cells, infiltrating into the small intestinal wall. The
subpopulations of T cells that infiltrate inflamed intestinal tissues comprise
various CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells. The plethora of T cell subtypes activated 
in CD leads to simultaneous activation of different signaling cascades including 
GATA1, NF-kB, JAK or STAT5 the activity of which may be modified by diet or
drugs. It was recently showed that food allergens may accelerate CD by altering
the interaction between IL-15 and CD4+ T cells in the activation of CD8+ T cells.
Increased levels of cytokines like IL-15 are considered to play a role in CD
development. Furthermore it was showed that some drugs like tofacitinib or
ruxolitinib may influence CD by blocking IL-15 signaling and CD8+ T cell
activity. This mini-review will summarize the current knowledge on the role of
CD4+ T cell and CD8+ T cell in clinical and experimental CD and will describe how
T cell-activated signaling pathways and locally released proteins may be
influenced by dietary factors and drugs used in CD treatment.

PMID: 25738293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genom Data. 2015 Jun 1;4:1-7.

Dynamics of GATA1 binding and expression response in a GATA1-induced erythroid
differentiation system.

Jain D(1), Mishra T(1), Giardine BM(1), Keller CA(1), Morrissey CS(1), Magargee
S(1), Dorman CM(1), Long M(1), Weiss MJ(2), Hardison RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA ; Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA. (2)Dept of Hematology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis TN 38105, USA.

During the maturation phase of mammalian erythroid differentiation, highly
proliferative cells committed to the erythroid lineage undergo dramatic changes
in morphology and function to produce circulating, enucleated erythrocytes. These
changes are caused by equally dramatic alterations in gene expression, which in
turn are driven by changes in the abundance and binding patterns of transcription
factors such as GATA1. We have studied the dynamics of GATA1 binding by ChIP-seq 
and the global expression responses by RNA-seq in a GATA1-dependent mouse cell
line model for erythroid maturation, in both cases examining seven progressive
stages during differentiation. Analyses of these data should provide insights
both into mechanisms of regulation (early versus late targets) and the
consequences in cell physiology (e.g. distinctive categories of genes regulated
at progressive stages of differentiation). The data are deposited in the Gene
Expression Omnibus, series GSE36029, GSE40522, GSE49847, and GSE51338.

PMCID: PMC4338950
PMID: 25729644  [PubMed]


78. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):4345-56.

GATA1 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer cells through
PAK5 oncogenic signaling.

Li Y(1), Ke Q(1), Shao Y(1), Zhu G(1), Li Y(1), Geng N(1), Jin F(2), Li F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Ministry of Public
Health and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry of Education, China
Medical University, Shenyang, China. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, Department 
of Surgical Oncology, Research Unit of General Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key process in tumor metastatic
cascade that is characterized by the loss of cell-cell junctions, resulting in
the acquisition of migratory and invasive properties. E-cadherin is a major
component of intercellular junctions and the reduction or loss of its expression 
is a hallmark of EMT. Transcription factor GATA1 has a critical anti-apoptotic
role in breast cancer, but its function for metastasis has not been investigated.
Here, we found that GATA1, as a novel E-cadherin repressor, promotes EMT in
breast cancer cells. GATA1 binds to E-cadherin promoter, down-regulates
E-cadherin expression, disrupts intercellular junction and promotes metastasis of
breast cancer cell in vivo. Moreover, GATA1 is a new substrate of p21-activated
kinase 5 (PAK5), which is phosphorylated on serine 161 and 187 (S161 and S187).
GATA1 recruits HDAC3/4 to E-cadherin promoter, which is reduced by GATA1 S161A
S187A mutant. These data indicate that phosphorylated GATA1 recruits more HDAC3/4
to promote transcriptional repression of E-cadherin, leading to the EMT of breast
cancer cells. Our findings provide insights into the novel function of GATA1,
contributing to a better understanding of the EMT, indicating that GATA1 and its 
phosphorylation may play an important role in the metastasis of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4414194
PMID: 25726523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Jun;72(12):2323-35. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1866-6. Epub 
2015 Feb 27.

Regulation and function of the NFE2 transcription factor in hematopoietic and
non-hematopoietic cells.

Gasiorek JJ(1), Blank V.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, McGill University, 3755 Chemin de
la Côte Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, QC, H3T 1E2, Canada.

The NFE2 transcription factor was identified over 25 years ago. The NFE2 protein 
forms heterodimers with small MAF proteins, and the resulting complex binds to
regulatory elements in a large number of target genes. In contrast to other CNC
transcription family members including NFE2L1 (NRF1), NFE2L2 (NRF2) and NFE2L3
(NRF3), which are widely expressed, earlier studies had suggested that the major 
sites of NFE2 expression are hematopoietic cells. Based on cell culture studies
it was proposed that this protein acts as a critical regulator of globin gene
expression. However, the knockout mouse model displayed only mild erythroid
abnormalities, while the major phenotype was a defect in megakaryocyte
biogenesis. Indeed, absence of NFE2 led to severely impaired platelet production.
A series of recent data, also summarized here, shed new light on the various
functional roles of NFE2 and the regulation of its activity. NFE2 is part of a
complex regulatory network, including transcription factors such as GATA1 and
RUNX1, controlling megakaryocytic and/or erythroid cell function. Surprisingly,
it was recently found that NFE2 also has a role in non-hematopoietic tissues,
such as the trophoblast, in which it is also expressed, as well as the bone,
opening the door to new research areas for this transcription factor. Additional 
data showed that NFE2 function is controlled by a series of posttranslational
modifications. Important strides have been made with respect to the clinical
significance of NFE2, linking this transcription factor to hematological
disorders such as polycythemias.

PMID: 25721735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Pediatr Int. 2015 Feb;57(1):e14-7. doi: 10.1111/ped.12500.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis in non-Down syndrome neonate.

Ohkawa T(1), Miyamoto S, Sugie M, Tomizawa D, Imai K, Nagasawa M, Morio T,
Mizutani S, Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

We encountered a case of neonatal acute megakaryoblastic leukemia not associated 
with Down syndrome (DS). Molecular cytogenetic analysis of leukemic blast cells
indicated that increased blast cell status was caused by transient abnormal
myelopoiesis with trisomy 21 and GATA1 mutation. Based on these molecular
cytogenetic data, intensive chemotherapy was avoided, and the patient was
successfully cured with low-dose cytarabine. Morphologically, leukemic blast
cells of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in a non-DS neonate are
indistinguishable from a blast cell of transient abnormal myelopoiesis. The
possibility of transient abnormal myelopoiesis should be carefully considered
before intensive chemotherapy is adopted.

© 2015 Japan Pediatric Society.

PMID: 25711269  [PubMed - in process]


81. Blood. 2015 Apr 30;125(18):2825-34. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-607309. Epub 2015 
Feb 18.

Functions of BET proteins in erythroid gene expression.

Stonestrom AJ(1), Hsu SC(1), Jahn KS(2), Huang P(2), Keller CA(3), Giardine
BM(3), Kadauke S(1), Campbell AE(1), Evans P(2), Hardison RC(3), Blobel GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA;
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA; and.
(2)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA;
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Apr 30;125(18):2739-41.

Inhibitors of bromodomain and extraterminal motif proteins (BETs) are being
evaluated for the treatment of cancer and other diseases, yet much remains to be 
learned about how BET proteins function during normal physiology. We used genomic
and genetic approaches to examine BET function in a hematopoietic maturation
system driven by GATA1, an acetylated transcription factor previously shown to
interact with BETs. We found that BRD2, BRD3, and BRD4 were variably recruited to
GATA1-regulated genes, with BRD3 binding the greatest number of GATA1-occupied
sites. Pharmacologic BET inhibition impaired GATA1-mediated transcriptional
activation, but not repression, genome-wide. Mechanistically, BETs promoted
chromatin occupancy of GATA1 and subsequently supported transcriptional
activation. Using a combination of CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genomic engineering and
shRNA approaches, we observed that depletion of either BRD2 or BRD4 alone blunted
erythroid gene activation. Surprisingly, depletion of BRD3 only affected
erythroid transcription in the context of BRD2 deficiency. Consistent with
functional overlap among BET proteins, forced BRD3 expression substantially
rescued defects caused by BRD2 deficiency. These results suggest that
pharmacologic BET inhibition should be interpreted in the context of distinct
steps in transcriptional activation and overlapping functions among BET family
members.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4424630 [Available on 2016-04-30]
PMID: 25696920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Feb 13;16(2):4083-94. doi: 10.3390/ijms16024083.

Autophagy as a regulatory component of erythropoiesis.

Zhang J(1,)(2), Wu K(3), Xiao X(4), Liao J(5), Hu Q(6), Chen H(7), Liu J(5), An
X(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, Central
South University, Changsha 410078, China. jzhang@nybloodcenter.org. (2)Red Cell
Physiology Laboratory, New York Blood Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
jzhang@nybloodcenter.org. (3)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of
Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha 410078, China. wukunlu@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, Central
South University, Changsha 410078, China. xiaojuan_xiao0809@163.com. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China. liaojilingcsu@163.com. (6)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China. huqikang1001@163.com. (7)State Key Laboratory
of Medical Genetics & School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha
410078, China. chenhy5000@126.com. (8)Laboratory of Membrane Biology, New York
Blood Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. xan@nybloodcenter.org. (9)College of Life 
Science, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China. xan@nybloodcenter.org.

Autophagy is a process that leads to the degradation of unnecessary or
dysfunctional cellular components and long-lived protein aggregates.
Erythropoiesis is a branch of hematopoietic differentiation by which mature red
blood cells (RBCs) are generated from multi-potential hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs). Autophagy plays a critical role in the elimination of mitochondria,
ribosomes and other organelles during erythroid terminal differentiation. Here,
the modulators of autophagy that regulate erythroid differentiation were
summarized, including autophagy-related (Atg) genes, the B-cell lymphoma 2
(Bcl-2) family member Bcl-2/adenovirus E1B 19 kDa interacting protein 3-like
(Nix/Binp3L), transcription factors globin transcription factor 1 (GATA1) and
forkhead box O3 (FoxO3), intermediary factor KRAB-associated protein1 (KAP1), and
other modulators, such as focal adhesion kinase family-interacting protein of
200-kDa (FIP200), Ca2+ and 15-lipoxygenase. Understanding the modulators of
autophagy in erythropoiesis will benefit the autophagy research field and
facilitate the prevention and treatment of autophagy-related red blood cell
disorders.

PMCID: PMC4346945
PMID: 25689426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Haematologica. 2015 May;100(5):575-84. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.112714. Epub
2015 Feb 14.

Global transcriptome and chromatin occupancy analysis reveal the short isoform of
GATA1 is deficient for erythroid specification and gene expression.

Chlon TM(1), McNulty M(2), Goldenson B(2), Rosinski A(2), Crispino JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
Present address Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (2)Division 
of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. (3)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
j-crispino@northwestern.edu.

GATA1 is a master transcriptional regulator of the differentiation of several
related myeloid blood cell types, including erythrocytes and megakaryocytes.
Germ-line mutations that cause loss of full length GATA1, but allow for
expression of the short isoform (GATA1s), are associated with defective
erythropoiesis in a subset of patients with Diamond Blackfan Anemia. Despite
extensive studies of GATA1s in megakaryopoiesis, the mechanism by which GATA1s
fails to support normal erythropoiesis is not understood. In this study, we used 
global gene expression and chromatin occupancy analysis to compare the
transcriptional activity of GATA1s to GATA1. We discovered that compared to
GATA1, GATA1s is less able to activate the erythroid gene expression program and 
terminal differentiation in cells with dual erythroid-megakaryocytic
differentiation potential. Moreover, we found that GATA1s bound to many of its
erythroid-specific target genes less efficiently than full length GATA1. These
results suggest that the impaired ability of GATA1s to promote erythropoiesis in 
DBA may be caused by failure to occupy erythroid-specific gene regulatory
elements.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4420206
PMID: 25682601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Mar 1;23(5):960-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.01.023. Epub
2015 Jan 22.

A peptide affinity reagent for isolating an intact and catalytically active
multi-protein complex from mammalian cells.

Saathoff H(1), Brofelth M(1), Trinh A(1), Parker BL(1), Ryan DP(2), Low JK(1),
Webb SR(1), Silva AP(1), Mackay JP(1), Shepherd NE(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia. (2)John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia. (3)School of Molecular Bioscience, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. Electronic address:
nicholas.shepherd@sydney.edu.au.

We have developed an approach for directly isolating an intact multi-protein
chromatin remodeling complex from mammalian cell extracts using synthetic peptide
affinity reagent 4. FOG1(1-15), a short peptide sequence known to target subunits
of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex, was joined via a
35-atom hydrophilic linker to the StreptagII peptide. Loading this peptide onto
Streptactin beads enabled capture of the intact NuRD complex from MEL cell
nuclear extract. Gentle biotin elution yielded the desired intact complex free of
significant contaminants and in a form that was catalytically competent in a
nucleosome remodeling assay. The efficiency of 4 in isolating the NuRD complex
was comparable to other reported methods utilising recombinantly produced
GST-FOG1(1-45).

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25678017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1873-86. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1907. Epub 2015 Feb 
10.

Combined loss of the GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors in male mice disrupts 
testicular development and confers adrenal-like function in the testes.

Padua MB(1), Jiang T, Morse DA, Fox SC, Hatch HM, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610.

The roles of the GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors in testis development were
examined by simultaneously ablating Gata4 and Gata6 with Sf1Cre (Nr5a1Cre). The
deletion of both genes resulted in a striking testicular phenotype. Embryonic
Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) (conditional double mutant) testes were
smaller than control organs and contained irregular testis cords and fewer
gonocytes. Gene expression analysis revealed significant down-regulation of Dmrt1
and Mvh. Surprisingly, Amh expression was strongly up-regulated and remained high
beyond postnatal day 7, when it is normally extinguished. Neither DMRT1 nor GATA1
was detected in the Sertoli cells of the mutant postnatal testes. Furthermore,
the expression of the steroidogenic genes Star, Cyp11a1, Hsd3b1, and Hsd17b3 was 
low throughout embryogenesis. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a prominent
reduction in cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1)- and
3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-positive (3ßHSD) cells, with few
17a-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase-positive (CYP17A1) cells present. In contrast, in
postnatal Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) testes, the expression of the
steroidogenic markers Star, Cyp11a1, and Hsd3b6 was increased, but a dramatic
down-regulation of Hsd17b3, which is required for testosterone synthesis, was
observed. The genes encoding adrenal enzymes Cyp21a1, Cyp11b1, Cyp11b2, and Mcr2 
were strongly up-regulated, and clusters containing numerous CYP21A2-positive
cells were localized in the interstitium. These data suggest a lack of testis
functionality, with a loss of normal steroidogenic testis function, concomitant
with an expansion of the adrenal-like cell population in postnatal conditional
double mutant testes. Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) animals of both
sexes lack adrenal glands; however, despite this deficiency, males are viable in 
contrast to the females of the same genotype, which die shortly after birth.

PMCID: PMC4398756 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25668066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Clin Invest. 2015 Mar 2;125(3):993-1005. doi: 10.1172/JCI75714. Epub 2015 Jan
26.

Pluripotent stem cells reveal erythroid-specific activities of the GATA1
N-terminus.

Byrska-Bishop M, VanDorn D, Campbell AE, Betensky M, Arca PR, Yao Y, Gadue P,
Costa FF, Nemiroff RL, Blobel GA, French DL, Hardison RC, Weiss MJ, Chou ST.

Germline GATA1 mutations that result in the production of an amino-truncated
protein termed GATA1s (where s indicates short) cause congenital hypoplastic
anemia. In patients with trisomy 21, similar somatic GATA1s-producing mutations
promote transient myeloproliferative disease and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
Here, we demonstrate that induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients
with GATA1-truncating mutations exhibit impaired erythroid potential, but
enhanced megakaryopoiesis and myelopoiesis, recapitulating the major phenotypes
of the associated diseases. Similarly, in developmentally arrested
GATA1-deficient murine megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors derived from murine
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), expression of GATA1s promoted megakaryopoiesis, but 
not erythropoiesis. Transcriptome analysis revealed a selective deficiency in the
ability of GATA1s to activate erythroid-specific genes within populations of
hematopoietic progenitors. Although its DNA-binding domain was intact, chromatin 
immunoprecipitation studies showed that GATA1s binding at specific erythroid
regulatory regions was impaired, while binding at many nonerythroid sites,
including megakaryocytic and myeloid target genes, was normal. Together, these
observations indicate that lineage-specific GATA1 cofactor associations are
essential for normal chromatin occupancy and provide mechanistic insights into
how GATA1s mutations cause human disease. More broadly, our studies underscore
the value of ESCs and iPSCs to recapitulate and study disease phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4362246
PMID: 25621499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Pediatr Int. 2015 Aug;57(4):620-5. doi: 10.1111/ped.12586. Epub 2015 Apr 28.

Exchange transfusion in patients with Down syndrome and severe transient
leukemia.

Hayasaka I(1), Cho K(1), Morioka K(1), Kaneshi Y(1), Akimoto T(1), Furuse Y(1),
Moriichi A(1), Iguchi A(2), Cho Y(2), Minakami H(3), Ariga T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Maternity and Perinatal Care Center, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo,
Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (3)Department of Obstetrics, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Among neonates with Down syndrome (DS) and transient leukemia (TL),
hyperleukocytosis (white blood cell [WBC] count >100 × 10(9) /L) is associated
with increased blood viscosity, respiratory failure due to pulmonary
hypertension, multiorgan failure, and increased risk of early death. There have
been no previous studies focusing on the effects of exchange transfusion (ExT) on
WBC count, respiratory status, and other parameters in TL patients with
hyperleukocytosis.
METHODS: An observational retrospective study was carried out at a single center 
of all five DS neonates with TL, GATA1 mutations, and hyperleukocytosis, born at 
a median gestational age of 34 weeks (range, 30-38 weeks) with birthweight 2556 g
(range, 1756-3268 g) during a 24 month study period between September 2011 and
August 2013. All five neonates underwent ExT at a median age of 2 days (range,
0-5 days) before initiation of other cytoreductive therapy with cytarabine, which
was carried out in two patients.
RESULTS: All patients required respiratory support before ExT. After ExT,
respiration status improved in all five patients: WBC count (mean) decreased by
85% from 143 × 10(9) /L to 21 × 10(9) /L. None developed tumor lysis syndrome.
Three survived and two died: one hydrops fetalis neonate born at gestational week
30 died at age 5 days, and another died eventually from acute gastroenteritis 40 
days after leaving hospital at the age of 155 days with complete remission. Two
of the three surviving neonates developed acute megakaryocytic leukemia at age 90
days and 222 days.
CONCLUSION: ExT was very effective in improving hyperleukocytosis and may have
had favorable effects on respiration.

© 2015 Japan Pediatric Society.

PMID: 25615715  [PubMed - in process]


88. Am J Hematol. 2015 May;90(5):386-91. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23952. Epub 2015 Feb 5.

Genome-wide association study follow-up identifies cyclin A2 as a regulator of
the transition through cytokinesis during terminal erythropoiesis.

Ludwig LS(1), Cho H, Wakabayashi A, Eng JC, Ulirsch JC, Fleming MD, Lodish HF,
Sankaran VG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Broad Institute 
of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts; Whitehead Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts; Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) hold tremendous promise to improve our
understanding of human biology. Recent GWAS have revealed over 75 loci associated
with erythroid traits, including the 4q27 locus that is associated with red blood
cell size (mean corpuscular volume). The close linkage disequilibrium block at
this locus harbors the CCNA2 gene that encodes cyclin A2. CCNA2 mRNA is highly
expressed in human and murine erythroid progenitor cells and regulated by the
essential erythroid transcription factor GATA1. To understand the role of cyclin 
A2 in erythropoiesis, we have reduced expression of this gene using short hairpin
RNAs in a primary murine erythroid culture system. We demonstrate that cyclin A2 
levels affect erythroid cell size by regulating the passage through cytokinesis
during the final cell division of terminal erythropoiesis. Our study provides new
insight into cell cycle regulation during terminal erythropoiesis and more
generally illustrates the value of functional GWAS follow-up to gain mechanistic 
insight into hematopoiesis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4409486 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25615569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Exp Hematol. 2015 May;43(5):393-403.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.01.003. Epub
2015 Jan 16.

Thioredoxin-interacting protein regulates the differentiation of murine erythroid
precursors.

Gasiorek JJ(1), Mikhael M(2), Garcia-Santos D(2), Hui ST(3), Ponka P(4), Blank
V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Lady
Davis Institute for Medical Research, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of
Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Division of
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,
USA. (4)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department
of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (5)Lady Davis
Institute for Medical Research, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Medicine,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Physiology, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: volker.blank@mcgill.ca.

Thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) is involved in various cellular processes
including redox control, metabolism, differentiation, growth, and apoptosis. With
respect to hematopoiesis, TXNIP has been shown to play roles in natural killer
cells, dendritic cells, and hematopoietic stem cells. Our study investigates the 
role of TXNIP in erythropoiesis. We observed a rapid and significant increase of 
TXNIP transcript and protein levels in mouse erythroleukemia cells treated with
dimethyl sulfoxide or hexamethylene bisacetamide, inducers of erythroid
differentiation. The upregulation of TXNIP was not abrogated by addition of the
antioxidant N-acetylcysteine. The increase of TXNIP expression was confirmed in
another model of erythroid differentiation, G1E-ER cells, which undergo
differentiation upon activation of the GATA1 transcription factor. In addition,
we showed that TXNIP levels are induced following inhibition of p38 or c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) mitogen-activated protein kinases. We also observed an
increase in iron uptake and a decrease in transferrin receptor protein upon TXNIP
overexpression, suggesting a role in iron homeostasis. In vivo, flow cytometry
analysis of cells from Txnip(-/-) mice revealed a new phenotype of impaired
terminal erythropoiesis in the spleen, characterized by a partial block between
basophilic and late basophilic/polychromatic erythroblasts. Based on our data,
TXNIP emerges as a novel regulator of terminal erythroid differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25600403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Toxins (Basel). 2015 Jan 13;7(1):97-109. doi: 10.3390/toxins7010097.

Nephroprotective role of resveratrol and ursolic Acid in aristolochic Acid
intoxicated zebrafish.

Ding YJ(1), Sun CY(2), Wen CC(3), Chen YH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tamkang University, No. 151 Ying-chuan Road, Tamsui, 
New Taipei City 25137, Taiwan. dingfion@gmail.com. (2)Department of Nephrology,
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung 20491, Taiwan. fish3970@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Tamkang University, Tamsui, New Taipei City 25137, 
Taiwan. ccwen@mail.tku.edu.tw. (4)Department of Chemistry, Tamkang University,
No. 151 Ying-chuan Road, Tamsui, New Taipei City 25137, Taiwan.
yauhung@mail.tku.edu.tw.

The nephrotoxicity of aristolochic acid (AA) is well known, but information
regarding the attenuation of AA-induced toxicity is limited. The aim of the
present study was to study the nephroprotective effects of resveratrol (Resv) and
ursolic acid (UA) in a zebrafish model. We used two transgenic lines,
Tg(wt1b:EGFP) and Tg(gata1:DsRed), to evaluate the nephroprotective effects of
Resv and UA by recording subtle changes in the kidney and red blood cell
circulation. Our results demonstrated that both Resv and UA treatment can
attenuate AA-induced kidney malformations and improve blood circulation.
Glomerular filtration rate assays revealed that both Resv and UA treatment can
restore renal function (100% for Mock; 56.1% ± 17.3% for AA-treated; 80.2% ±
11.3% for Resv+AA; and 83.1% ± 8.1% for UA+AA, n = 15). Furthermore, real-time
RT-PCR experiments showed that pre-treatment with either Resv or UA suppresses
expression of pro-inflammatory genes. In conclusion, our findings reveal that
AA-induced nephrotoxicities can be attenuated by pre-treatment with either Resv
or UA. Therefore, we believe that zebrafish represent an efficient model for
screening AA-protective natural compounds.

PMCID: PMC4303816
PMID: 25590276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2015 May-Jun;18(3):231-6. doi: 10.2350/14-11-1575-CR.1. Epub 
2015 Jan 14.

Extensive placental choriovascular infiltration by maturing myeloid cells in down
syndrome-associated transient abnormal myelopoiesis.

Ravishankar S(1), Hoffman L, Lertsburapa T, Welch J, Treaba D, De Paepe ME.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, Women and Infants Hospital, Providence, RI, USA.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM), a clonal proliferation of predominantly
megakaryocytic precursor cells, affects 4%-10% of newborns with Down syndrome.
Approximately 20%-30% of TAM survivors are at risk of development of acute
myeloid leukemia (myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome, ML-DS). We
report unusual placental findings in a female infant with trisomy 21 born at 38
weeks of gestation. In line with previous descriptions of placental pathology in 
infants with TAM, abundant blast-like cells were present in the lumen of
chorionic and stem villous vessels. In addition, there was multifocal extensive
infiltration of the wall of chorionic vessels by maturing myeloid cells in a
pattern reminiscent of TAM- or leukemia-associated systemic infiltration. The
clinical significance of this unusual choriovascular involvement of the placenta 
in TAM is undetermined.

PMID: 25587735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 22;57(2):304-16. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.009. Epub 2015 
Jan 8.

Developmental control of polycomb subunit composition by GATA factors mediates a 
switch to non-canonical functions.

Xu J(1), Shao Z(2), Li D(3), Xie H(4), Kim W(4), Huang J(5), Taylor JE(6),
Pinello L(7), Glass K(7), Jaffe JD(6), Yuan GC(7), Orkin SH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Children's Research Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Key
Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (7)Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. (8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) plays crucial roles in transcriptional
regulation and stem cell development. However, the context-specific functions
associated with alternative subunits remain largely unexplored. Here we show that
the related enzymatic subunits EZH1 and EZH2 undergo an expression switch during 
blood cell development. An erythroid-specific enhancer mediates transcriptional
activation of EZH1, and a switch from GATA2 to GATA1 controls the developmental
EZH1/2 switch by differential association with EZH1 enhancers. We further examine
the in vivo stoichiometry of the PRC2 complexes by quantitative proteomics and
reveal the existence of an EZH1-SUZ12 subcomplex lacking EED. EZH1 together with 
SUZ12 form a non-canonical PRC2 complex, occupy active chromatin, and positively 
regulate gene expression. Loss of EZH2 expression leads to repositioning of EZH1 
to EZH2 targets. Thus, the lineage- and developmental stage-specific regulation
of PRC2 subunit composition leads to a switch from canonical silencing to
non-canonical functions during blood stem cell specification.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4305004
PMID: 25578878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Front Biol (Beijing). 2014 Oct;9(5):339-346.

Modeling murine yolk sac hematopoiesis with embryonic stem cell culture systems.

Cook BD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The onset of hematopoiesis in mammals is defined by generation of primitive
erythrocytes and macrophage progenitors in embryonic yolk sac. Laboratories have 
met the challenge of transient and swiftly changing specification events from
ventral mesoderm through multipotent progenitors and maturing lineage-restricted 
hematopoietic subtypes, by developing powerful in vitro experimental models to
interrogate hematopoietic ontogeny. Most importantly, studies of differentiating 
embryonic stem cell derivatives in embryoid body and stromal coculture systems
have identified crucial roles for transcription factor networks (e.g. Gata1,
Runx1, Scl) and signaling pathways (e.g. BMP, VEGF, WNT) in controlling stem and 
progenitor cell output. These and other relevant pathways have pleiotropic
biological effects, and are often associated with early embryonic lethality in
knockout mice. Further refinement in subsequent studies has allowed conditional
expression of key regulatory genes, and isolation of progenitors via cell surface
markers (e.g. FLK1) and reporter-tagged constructs, with the purpose of measuring
their primitive and definitive hematopoietic potential. These observations
continue to inform attempts to direct the differentiation, and augment the
expansion, of progenitors in human cell culture systems that may prove useful in 
cell replacement therapies for hematopoietic deficiencies. The purpose of this
review is to survey the extant literature on the use of differentiating murine
embryonic stem cells in culture to model the developmental process of yolk sac
hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4282138
PMID: 25558247  [PubMed]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;35(5):805-15. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01011-14. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

Progenitor stage-specific activity of a cis-acting double GATA motif for Gata1
gene expression.

Moriguchi T(1), Suzuki M(2), Yu L(2), Takai J(2), Ohneda K(3), Yamamoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan moriguch@med.tohoku.ac.jp masiyamamoto@med.tohoku.ac.jp. 
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health
and Welfare, Takasaki, Japan.

GATA1 is a master regulator of erythropoiesis, expression of which is regulated
by multiple discrete cis-acting elements. In this study, we examine the activity 
of a promoter-proximal double GATA (dbGATA) motif, using a Gata1 bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC)-transgenic green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter
(G1BAC-GFP) mouse system. Deletion of the dbGATA motif led to significant
reductions in GFP expression in hematopoietic progenitors, while GFP expression
was maintained in erythroblasts. Consistently, in mice with a germ line deletion 
of the dbGATA motif (Gata1(<U+0394>dbGATA) mice), GATA1 expression in progenitors was
significantly decreased. The suppressed GATA1 expression was associated with a
compensatory increase in GATA2 levels in progenitors. When we crossed
Gata1(<U+0394>dbGATA) mice with Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mice (Gata2(fGN/fGN) mice), the
Gata1(<U+0394>dbGATA)::Gata2(fGN/fGN) compound mutant mice succumbed to a significant
decrease in the progenitor population, whereas both groups of single mutant mice 
maintained progenitors and survived to adulthood, indicating the functional
redundancy between GATA1 and GATA2 in progenitors. Meanwhile, the effects of the 
dbGATA site deletion on Gata1 expression were subtle in erythroblasts, which
showed increased GATA1 binding and enhanced accumulation of active histone marks 
around the 1st-intron GATA motif of the <U+0394>dbGATA locus. These results thus reveal 
a novel role of the dbGATA motif in the maintenance of Gata1 expression in
hematopoietic progenitors and a functional compensation between the dbGATA site
and the 1st-intron GATA motif in erythroblasts.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323484
PMID: 25535330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2015 Feb 19;125(8):1292-301. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-581892. Epub 2014 
Dec 22.

MicroRNA-486-5p is an erythroid oncomiR of the myeloid leukemias of Down
syndrome.

Shaham L(1), Vendramini E(2), Ge Y(3), Goren Y(4), Birger Y(5), Tijssen MR(6),
McNulty M(7), Geron I(2), Schwartzman O(2), Goldberg L(5), Chou ST(8), Pitman
H(3), Weiss MJ(8), Michaeli S(9), Sredni B(10), Göttgens B(6), Crispino JD(7),
Taub JW(11), Izraeli S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Childhood Leukemia Research Institute, Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical
Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Department of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan, Israel; (2)Childhood Leukemia Research Institute, Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel; (3)Department of Oncology, Molecular Therapeutics
Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University School of 
Medicine, Detroit, MI; (4)Rosetta Genomics Ltd, Rehovot, Israel; (5)Childhood
Leukemia Research Institute, Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center,
Ramat-Gan, Israel; (6)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical 
Research and Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; (7)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; (8)Division of Hematology, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA; (9)Department of Life Sciences,
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel; Institute of Nanotechnology & Advanced
Materials, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel; and. (10)Department of Life
Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel; (11)Department of Oncology,
Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI; Division of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Feb 19;125(8):1202-3.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) are at increased risk for acute myeloid
leukemias (ML-DS) characterized by mixed megakaryocytic and erythroid phenotype
and by acquired mutations in the GATA1 gene resulting in a short GATA1s isoform. 
The chromosome 21 microRNA (miR)-125b cluster has been previously shown to
cooperate with GATA1s in transformation of fetal hematopoietic progenitors. In
this study, we report that the expression of miR-486-5p is increased in ML-DS
compared with non-DS acute megakaryocytic leukemias (AMKLs). miR-486-5p is
regulated by GATA1 and GATA1s that bind to the promoter of its host gene ANK1.
miR-486-5p is highly expressed in mouse erythroid precursors and knockdown (KD)
in ML-DS cells reduced their erythroid phenotype. Ectopic expression and KD of
miR-486-5p in primary fetal liver hematopoietic progenitors demonstrated that
miR-486-5p cooperates with Gata1s to enhance their self renewal. Consistent with 
its activation of AKT, overexpression and KD experiments showed its importance
for growth and survival of human leukemic cells. Thus, miR-486-5p cooperates with
GATA1s in supporting the growth and survival, and the aberrant erythroid
phenotype of the megakaryocytic leukemias of DS.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4335082
PMID: 25533034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1849(3):282-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.12.010. 
Epub 2014 Dec 17.

KLF1 stabilizes GATA-1 and TAL1 occupancy in the human ß-globin locus.

Kang Y(1), Kim YW(1), Yun J(1), Shin J(1), Kim A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Biology,
College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: kimaeri@pusan.ac.kr.

KLF1 is an erythroid specific transcription factor that binds to regulatory
regions of erythroid genes. Binding sites of KLF1 are often found near binding
sites of GATA-1 and TAL1. In the ß-globin locus, KLF1 is required for forming
active chromatin structure, although its role is unclear. To explore the role of 
KLF1 in transcribing the human <U+03B3>-globin genes, we stably reduced the expression
of KLF1 in erythroid K562 cells, compromising its association in the ß-globin
locus. The <U+03B3>-globin transcription was reduced with disappearance of active
chromatin structure of the locus in the KLF1 knockdown cells. Interestingly,
GATA-1 and TAL1 binding was reduced in the ß-globin locus, even though their
expressions were not affected by KLF1 knockdown. The KLF1-dependent GATA-1 and
TAL1 binding was observed in the adult locus transcribing the ß-globin gene and
in several erythroid genes, where GATA-1 occupancy is independent from TAL1.
These results indicate that KLF1 plays a role in facilitating and/or stabilizing 
GATA-1 and TAL1 occupancy in the erythroid genes, contributing to the generation 
of active chromatin structure such as histone acetylation and chromatin looping.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25528728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. BMC Genomics. 2014;15 Suppl 9:S12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-S9-S12. Epub 2014
Dec 8.

dCaP: detecting differential binding events in multiple conditions and proteins.

Chen KB, Hardison R, Zhang Y.

BACKGROUND: Current ChIP-seq studies are interested in comparing multiple
epigenetic profiles across several cell types and tissues simultaneously for
studying constitutive and differential regulation. Simultaneous analysis of
multiple epigenetic features in many samples can gain substantial power and
specificity than analyzing individual features and/or samples separately. Yet
there are currently few tools can perform joint inference of constitutive and
differential regulation in multi-feature-multi-condition contexts with
statistical testing. Existing tools either test regulatory variation for one
factor in multiple samples at a time, or for multiple factors in one or two
samples. Many of them only identify binary rather than quantitative variation,
which are sensitive to threshold choices.
RESULTS: We propose a novel and powerful method called dCaP for simultaneously
detecting constitutive and differential regulation of multiple epigenetic factors
in multiple samples. Using simulation, we demonstrate the superior power of dCaP 
compared to existing methods. We then apply dCaP to two datasets from human and
mouse ENCODE projects to demonstrate its utility. We show in the human dataset
that the cell-type specific regulatory loci detected by dCaP are significantly
enriched near genes with cell-type specific functions and disease relevance. We
further show in the mouse dataset that dCaP captures genomic regions showing
significant signal variations for TAL1 occupancy between two mouse erythroid cell
lines. The novel TAL1 occupancy loci detected only by dCaP are highly enriched
with GATA1 occupancy and differential gene expression, while those detected only 
by other methods are not.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we developed a novel approach to utilize the cooperative
property of proteins to detect differential binding given multivariate ChIP-seq
samples to provide better power, aiming for complementing existing approaches and
providing new insights in the method development in this field.

PMCID: PMC4290593
PMID: 25522020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 18;10(12):e1004890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004890.
eCollection 2014.

Altered chromatin occupancy of master regulators underlies evolutionary
divergence in the transcriptional landscape of erythroid differentiation.

Ulirsch JC(1), Lacy JN(1), An X(2), Mohandas N(2), Mikkelsen TS(3), Sankaran
VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)New York Blood Center, New York, New 
York, United States of America. (3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erythropoiesis is one of the best understood examples of cellular
differentiation. Morphologically, erythroid differentiation proceeds in a nearly 
identical fashion between humans and mice, but recent evidence has shown that
networks of gene expression governing this process are divergent between species.
We undertook a systematic comparative analysis of six histone modifications and
four transcriptional master regulators in primary proerythroblasts and erythroid 
cell lines to better understand the underlying basis of these transcriptional
differences. Our analyses suggest that while chromatin structure across
orthologous promoters is strongly conserved, subtle differences are associated
with transcriptional divergence between species. Many transcription factor (TF)
occupancy sites were poorly conserved across species (~25% for GATA1, TAL1, and
NFE2) but were more conserved between proerythroblasts and cell lines derived
from the same species. We found that certain cis-regulatory modules co-occupied
by GATA1, TAL1, and KLF1 are under strict evolutionary constraint and localize to
genes necessary for erythroid cell identity. More generally, we show that
conserved TF occupancy sites are indicative of active regulatory regions and
strong gene expression that is sustained during maturation. Our results suggest
that evolutionary turnover of TF binding sites associates with changes in the
underlying chromatin structure, driving transcriptional divergence. We provide
examples of how this framework can be applied to understand epigenomic variation 
in specific regulatory regions, such as the ß-globin gene locus. Our findings
have important implications for understanding epigenomic changes that mediate
variation in cellular differentiation across species, while also providing a
valuable resource for studies of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4270484
PMID: 25521328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):70-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.109454.

Geminin deletion increases the number of fetal hematopoietic stem cells by
affecting the expression of key transcription factors.

Karamitros D(1), Patmanidi AL(1), Kotantaki P(1), Potocnik AJ(2), Bähr-Ivacevic
T(3), Benes V(3), Lygerou Z(4), Kioussis D(5), Taraviras S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras
26504, Greece. (2)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National Institute for
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK. (3)European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL), Core Facilities and Services, Meyerhofstraße 1, Heidelberg
69117, Germany. (4)Department of Biology, Medical School, University of Patras,
Rio, Patras 26504, Greece. (5)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr. (6)Department of Physiology,
Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras 26504, Greece
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr.

Balancing stem cell self-renewal and initiation of lineage specification programs
is essential for the development and homeostasis of the hematopoietic system. We 
have specifically ablated geminin in the developing murine hematopoietic system
and observed profound defects in the generation of mature blood cells, leading to
embryonic lethality. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) accumulated in the fetal
liver following geminin ablation, while committed progenitors were reduced.
Genome-wide transcriptome analysis identified key HSC transcription factors as
being upregulated upon geminin deletion, revealing a gene network linked with
geminin that controls fetal hematopoiesis. In order to obtain mechanistic insight
into the ability of geminin to regulate transcription, we examined Hoxa9 as an
example of a key gene in definitive hematopoiesis. We demonstrate that in human
K562 cells geminin is associated with HOXA9 regulatory elements and its absence
increases HOXA9 transcription similarly to that observed in vivo. Moreover,
silencing geminin reduced recruitment of the PRC2 component SUZ12 to the HOXA9
locus and resulted in an increase in RNA polymerase II recruitment and H3K4
trimethylation (H3K4me3), whereas the repressive marks H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 were 
reduced. The chromatin landscape was also modified at the regulatory regions of
HOXA10 and GATA1. K562 cells showed a reduced ability to differentiate to
erythrocytes and megakaryocytes upon geminin silencing. Our data suggest that
geminin is indispensable for fetal hematopoiesis and regulates the generation of 
a physiological pool of stem and progenitor cells in the fetal hematopoietic
system.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25516969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Feb;1851(2):172-83. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.11.009.
Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Opposing regulation of megakaryopoiesis by LPA receptors 2 and 3 in K562 human
erythroleukemia cells.

Ho YH(1), Yao CL(2), Lin KH(1), Hou FH(1), Chen WM(1), Chiang CL(3), Lin YN(1),
Li MW(1), Lin SH(1), Yang YJ(1), Lin CC(1), Lu J(4), Tigyi G(5), Lee H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan-Ze University, 
Chung-Li, Taiwan, ROC. (3)School of Biomedical Science, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Cardiology, 
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address:
jenherlu@gmail.com. (5)Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health
Science Center Memphis, Memphis, USA. Electronic address:
gtigyi@physio1.uthsc.edu. (6)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Electrical Engineering, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Angiogenesis Research Center, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Research Center for Developmental Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC;
Center for Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
Electronic address: hsinyu@ntu.edu.tw.

Erratum in
    Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Sep;1851(9):1284.

Erythrocytes and megakaryocytes (MK) are derived from a common progenitor that
undergoes lineage specification. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a lipid growth
factor was previously shown to be a regulator for erythropoietic process through 
activating LPA receptor 3 (LPA3). However, whether LPA affects megakaryopoiesis
remains unclear. In this study, we used K562 leukemia cell line as a model to
investigate the roles of LPA in MK differentiation. We demonstrated that K562
cells express both LPA2 and LPA3, and the expression levels of LPA2 are higher
than LPA3. Treatment with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, a commonly used
inducer of megakaryopoiesis, reciprocally regulates the expressions of LPA2 and
LPA3. By pharmacological blockers and knockdown experiments, we showed that
activation of LPA2 suppresses whereas, LPA3 promotes megakaryocytic
differentiation in K562. The LPA2-mediated inhibition is dependent on ß-catenin
translocation, whereas reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation is a downstream
signal for activation of LPA3. Furthermore, the hematopoietic transcriptional
factors GATA-1 and FLI-1, appear to be involved in these regulatory mechanisms.
Taken together, our results suggested that LPA2 and LPA3 may function as a
molecular switch and play opposing roles during megakaryopoiesis of K562 cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Mar;49(1):157-69. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.11.001. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Recombinant goldfish thrombopoietin up-regulates expression of genes involved in 
thrombocyte development and synergizes with kit ligand A to promote progenitor
cell proliferation and colony formation.

Katakura F(1), Katzenback BA(1), Belosevic M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada; School of Public Health, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: mike.belosevic@ualberta.ca.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the principal regulator of thrombopoiesis and promotes
the proliferation, differentiation and maturation of megakaryocytic progenitor
cells in mammals. In this study we report on the molecular and functional
characterization of goldfish TPO. Quantitative expression analysis of goldfish
tpo revealed the highest mRNA levels in heart, followed by spleen, liver, brain, 
intestine and kidney tissues. Significant decrease of tpo and c-mpl expressions
in goldfish primary kidney macrophage (PKM) cultures, as progenitor to macrophage
development progressed, indicates that TPO is not involved in monopoiesis.
Recombinant goldfish TPO (rgTPO) alone did not induce significant proliferation
of progenitor cells, but TPO in cooperation with recombinant goldfish kit ligand 
A (rgKITLA) supported proliferation of progenitor cells in a dose-dependent
manner. In response to rgTPO or a combination of rgTPO and rgKITLA, the mRNA
levels of thrombopoietic markers cd41 and c-mpl as well as thrombo/erythropoietic
transcription factors gata1 and lmo2 in sorted progenitor cells were
up-regulated, while the mRNA levels of granulopoietic markers (cebpa and gcsfr)
and the lymphoid transcription factor gata3 were down-regulated. Furthermore,
rgTPO and rgKITLA synergistically stimulated thrombocytic colony-formation. Our
results demonstrate that goldfish TPO has similar functions to mammalian TPO as a
regulator of thrombopoiesis, and suggests a highly conserved molecular mechanism 
of thrombocyte development throughout evolution of vertebrates.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2015 Feb;62(1):121-37. doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2014.09.009.

Down syndrome preleukemia and leukemia.

Maloney KW(1), Taub JW(2), Ravindranath Y(3), Roberts I(4), Vyas P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer & Blood Disorders, Children's Hospital Colorado, 13123 East 
16th Avenue, B115, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (2)Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, 3901 Beaubien Boulevard, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. Electronic
address: jtaub@med.wayne.edu. (3)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 3901 
Beaubien Boulevard, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (4)Department of Paediatrics and
Molecular Haematology Unit, University of Oxford and Oxford University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK. (5)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Department of 
Haematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University
Hospitals NHS Trust, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) and acute leukemias acute have unique
biological, cytogenetic, and intrinsic factors that affect their treatment and
outcome. Myeloid leukemia of Down syndrome (ML-DS) is associated with high
event-free survival (EFS) rates and frequently preceded by a preleukemia
condition, the transient abnormal hematopoiesis (TAM) present at birth. For acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), their EFS and overall survival are poorer than
non-DS ALL, it is important to enroll them on therapeutic trials, including
relapse trials; investigate new agents that could potentially improve their
leukemia-free survival; and strive to maximize the supportive care these patients
need.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25435116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Br J Haematol. 2015 Mar;168(6):854-64. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13229. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Loss of function mutations in RPL27 and RPS27 identified by whole-exome
sequencing in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.

Wang R(1), Yoshida K, Toki T, Sawada T, Uechi T, Okuno Y, Sato-Otsubo A, Kudo K, 
Kamimaki I, Kanezaki R, Shiraishi Y, Chiba K, Tanaka H, Terui K, Sato T, Iribe Y,
Ohga S, Kuramitsu M, Hamaguchi I, Ohara A, Hara J, Goi K, Matsubara K, Koike K,
Ishiguro A, Okamoto Y, Watanabe K, Kanno H, Kojima S, Miyano S, Kenmochi N, Ogawa
S, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.

Diamond-Blackfan anaemia is a congenital bone marrow failure syndrome that is
characterized by red blood cell aplasia. The disease has been associated with
mutations or large deletions in 11 ribosomal protein genes including RPS7, RPS10,
RPS17, RPS19, RPS24, RPS26, RPS29, RPL5, RPL11, RPL26 and RPL35A as well as GATA1
in more than 50% of patients. However, the molecular aetiology of many
Diamond-Blackfan anaemia cases remains to be uncovered. To identify new mutations
responsible for Diamond-Blackfan anaemia, we performed whole-exome sequencing
analysis of 48 patients with no documented mutations/deletions involving known
Diamond-Blackfan anaemia genes except for RPS7, RPL26, RPS29 and GATA1. Here, we 
identified a de novo splicing error mutation in RPL27 and frameshift deletion in 
RPS27 in sporadic patients with Diamond-Blackfan anaemia. In vitro knockdown of
gene expression disturbed pre-ribosomal RNA processing. Zebrafish models of rpl27
and rps27 mutations showed impairments of erythrocyte production and tail and/or 
brain development. Additional novel mutations were found in eight patients,
including RPL3L, RPL6, RPL7L1T, RPL8, RPL13, RPL14, RPL18A and RPL31. In
conclusion, we identified novel germline mutations of two ribosomal protein genes
responsible for Diamond-Blackfan anaemia, further confirming the concept that
mutations in ribosomal protein genes lead to Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25424902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Am J Hematol. 2015 Mar;90(3):E44-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23907. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia displays bone marrow reticulin
fibrosis and enhanced angiogenesis: comparisons with primary myelofibrosis.

Åström M(1), Hahn-Strömberg V, Zetterberg E, Vedin I, Merup M, Palmblad J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro University,
Örebro, Sweden; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and
Health, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.

X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia (XLTT) is caused by the mutation
216R<U+2009>><U+2009>Q in exon 4 of the GATA1 gene. Male hemizygous patients display
macrothrombocytopenia, splenomegaly, and a ß-thalassemia trait. We describe two
XLTT families where three males were initially misdiagnosed as having primary
myelofibrosis (PMF) and all five investigated males showed mild-moderate bone
marrow (BM) reticulin fibrosis. Comparative investigations were performed on
blood samples and BM biopsies from males with XLTT, PMF patients and healthy
controls. Like PMF, XLTT presented with high BM microvessel density, low GATA1
protein levels in megakaryocytes, and elevated blood CD34+ cell counts. But
unlike PMF, the BM microvessel pericyte coverage was low in XLTT, and no collagen
fibrosis was found. Further, as evaluated by immunohistochemistry, expressions of
the growth factors VEGF, AGGF1, and CTGF were low in XLTT megakaryocytes and
microvessels but high in PMF. Thus, although the reticulin fibrosis in XLTT might
simulate PMF, opposing stromal and megakaryocyte features may facilitate
differential diagnosis. Additional comparisons between these disorders may
increase the understanding of mechanisms behind BM fibrosis in relation to
pathological megakaryopoiesis.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25421114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Genome Res. 2015 Feb;25(2):213-25. doi: 10.1101/gr.180646.114. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

Genome accessibility is widely preserved and locally modulated during mitosis.

Hsiung CC(1), Morrissey CS(2), Udugama M(3), Frank CL(4), Keller CA(2), Baek
S(5), Giardine B(2), Crawford GE(6), Sung MH(5), Hardison RC(2), Blobel GA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, USA; (3)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (4)Institute for Genome Sciences and
Policy, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA; (5)Laboratory of
Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA; (6)Center for Genomic and
Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina 27708, USA. (7)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; blobel@email.chop.edu.

Mitosis entails global alterations to chromosome structure and nuclear
architecture, concomitant with transient silencing of transcription. How cells
transmit transcriptional states through mitosis remains incompletely understood. 
While many nuclear factors dissociate from mitotic chromosomes, the observation
that certain nuclear factors and chromatin features remain associated with
individual loci during mitosis originated the hypothesis that such mitotically
retained molecular signatures could provide transcriptional memory through
mitosis. To understand the role of chromatin structure in mitotic memory, we
performed the first genome-wide comparison of DNase I sensitivity of chromatin in
mitosis and interphase, using a murine erythroblast model. Despite chromosome
condensation during mitosis visible by microscopy, the landscape of chromatin
accessibility at the macromolecular level is largely unaltered. However, mitotic 
chromatin accessibility is locally dynamic, with individual loci maintaining
none, some, or all of their interphase accessibility. Mitotic reduction in
accessibility occurs primarily within narrow, highly DNase hypersensitive sites
that frequently coincide with transcription factor binding sites, whereas broader
domains of moderate accessibility tend to be more stable. In mitosis, proximal
promoters generally maintain their accessibility more strongly, whereas distal
regulatory elements tend to lose accessibility. Large domains of DNA
hypomethylation mark a subset of promoters that retain accessibility during
mitosis and across many cell types in interphase. Erythroid transcription factor 
GATA1 exerts site-specific changes in interphase accessibility that are most
pronounced at distal regulatory elements, but has little influence on mitotic
accessibility. We conclude that features of open chromatin are remarkably stable 
through mitosis, but are modulated at the level of individual genes and
regulatory elements.

© 2015 Hsiung et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4315295
PMID: 25373146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 23;9(10):e109253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109253.
eCollection 2014.

Overexpression of human GATA-1 and GATA-2 interferes with spine formation and
produces depressive behavior in rats.

Choi M(1), Wang SE(2), Ko SY(2), Kang HJ(3), Chae SY(2), Lee SH(2), Kim YS(4),
Duman RS(5), Son H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Life Science,
Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea; Graduate School
of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry, Center for Genes and Behavior, Departments
of Psychiatry, Neurobiology, and Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.

Functional consequences to which vertebrate GATA transcription factors contribute
in the adult brain remain largely an open question. The present study examines
how human GATA-1 and GATA-2 (hGATA-1 and hGATA-2) are linked to neuronal
differentiation and depressive behaviors in rats. We investigated the effects of 
adeno-associated viral expression of hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 (AAV-hGATA1 and
AAV-hGATA2) in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the dorsal hippocampus on dendrite
branching and spine number. We also examined the influence of AAV-hGATA1 and
AAV-hGATA2 infusions into the dorsal hippocampus on rodent behavior in models of 
depression. Viral expression of hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 cDNA in rat hippocampal
neurons impaired dendritic outgrowth and spine formation. Moreover,
viral-mediated expression of hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 in the dorsal hippocampus caused
depressive-like deficits in the forced swim test and learned helplessness models 
of depression, and decreased the expression of several synapse-related genes as
well as spine number in hippocampal neurons. Conversely, shRNA knockdown of
GATA-2 increased synapse-related gene expression, spine number, and dendrite
branching. The results demonstrate that hGATA-1 and hGATA-2 expression in
hippocampus is sufficient to cause depressive like behaviors that are associated 
with reduction in spine synapse density and expression of synapse-related genes.

PMCID: PMC4207676
PMID: 25340772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1932-44. doi: 10.1101/gr.164178.113. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Divergent functions of hematopoietic transcription factors in lineage priming and
differentiation during erythro-megakaryopoiesis.

Pimkin M(1), Kossenkov AV(2), Mishra T(3), Morrissey CS(3), Wu W(3), Keller
CA(3), Blobel GA(4), Lee D(5), Beer MA(5), Hardison RC(3), Weiss MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; Pediatric Residency Program, Department of Pediatrics,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224, USA; (2)Center for Systems and
Computational Biology, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia 19019, Pennsylvania,
USA; (3)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA; Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA; (4)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;
(5)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21205, USA. (6)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; weissmi@email.chop.edu rch8@psu.edu.

Combinatorial actions of relatively few transcription factors control
hematopoietic differentiation. To investigate this process in
erythro-megakaryopoiesis, we correlated the genome-wide chromatin occupancy
signatures of four master hematopoietic transcription factors (GATA1, GATA2,
TAL1, and FLI1) and three diagnostic histone modification marks with the gene
expression changes that occur during development of primary cultured
megakaryocytes (MEG) and primary erythroblasts (ERY) from murine fetal liver
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. We identified a robust, genome-wide
mechanism of MEG-specific lineage priming by a previously described
stem/progenitor cell-expressed transcription factor heptad (GATA2, LYL1, TAL1,
FLI1, ERG, RUNX1, LMO2) binding to MEG-associated cis-regulatory modules (CRMs)
in multipotential progenitors. This is followed by genome-wide GATA factor
switching that mediates further induction of MEG-specific genes following lineage
commitment. Interaction between GATA and ETS factors appears to be a key
determinant of these processes. In contrast, ERY-specific lineage priming is
biased toward GATA2-independent mechanisms. In addition to its role in MEG
lineage priming, GATA2 plays an extensive role in late megakaryopoiesis as a
transcriptional repressor at loci defined by a specific DNA signature. Our
findings reveal important new insights into how ERY and MEG lineages arise from a
common bipotential progenitor via overlapping and divergent functions of shared
hematopoietic transcription factors.

© 2014 Pimkin et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248311
PMID: 25319996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1945-62. doi: 10.1101/gr.164830.113. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Dynamic shifts in occupancy by TAL1 are guided by GATA factors and drive
large-scale reprogramming of gene expression during hematopoiesis.

Wu W(1), Morrissey CS(1), Keller CA(1), Mishra T(1), Pimkin M(2), Blobel GA(3),
Weiss MJ(3), Hardison RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA; (2)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (3)Division of Hematology,
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We used mouse ENCODE data along with complementary data from other laboratories
to study the dynamics of occupancy and the role in gene regulation of the
transcription factor TAL1, a critical regulator of hematopoiesis, at multiple
stages of hematopoietic differentiation. We combined ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data in
six mouse cell types representing a progression from multilineage precursors to
differentiated erythroblasts and megakaryocytes. We found that sites of occupancy
shift dramatically during commitment to the erythroid lineage, vary further
during terminal maturation, and are strongly associated with changes in gene
expression. In multilineage progenitors, the likely target genes are enriched for
hematopoietic growth and functions associated with the mature cells of specific
daughter lineages (such as megakaryocytes). In contrast, target genes in
erythroblasts are specifically enriched for red cell functions. Furthermore,
shifts in TAL1 occupancy during erythroid differentiation are associated with
gene repression (dissociation) and induction (co-occupancy with GATA1). Based on 
both enrichment for transcription factor binding site motifs and co-occupancy
determined by ChIP-seq, recruitment by GATA transcription factors appears to be a
stronger determinant of TAL1 binding to chromatin than the canonical E-box
binding site motif. Studies of additional proteins lead to the model that TAL1
regulates expression after being directed to a distinct subset of genomic binding
sites in each cell type via its association with different complexes containing
master regulators such as GATA2, ERG, and RUNX1 in multilineage cells and the
lineage-specific master regulator GATA1 in erythroblasts.

© 2014 Wu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248312
PMID: 25319994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2014 Oct;55(10):1738-47.

[Abnormal hematopoiesis in Down syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito E.

PMID: 25297735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 4;15:860. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-860.

Genetic and epigenetic regulation of gene expression in fetal and adult human
livers.

Bonder MJ, Kasela S, Kals M, Tamm R, Lokk K, Barragan I, Buurman WA, Deelen P,
Greve JW, Ivanov M, Rensen SS, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Wolfs MG, Fu J, Hofker
MH, Wijmenga C, Zhernakova A, Ingelman-Sundberg M, Franke L(1), Milani L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB Groningen, the Netherlands. lude@ludesign.nl.

BACKGROUND: The liver plays a central role in the maintenance of homeostasis and 
health in general. However, there is substantial inter-individual variation in
hepatic gene expression, and although numerous genetic factors have been
identified, less is known about the epigenetic factors.
RESULTS: By analyzing the methylomes and transcriptomes of 14 fetal and 181 adult
livers, we identified 657 differentially methylated genes with adult-specific
expression, these genes were enriched for transcription factor binding sites of
HNF1A and HNF4A. We also identified 1,000 genes specific to fetal liver, which
were enriched for GATA1, STAT5A, STAT5B and YY1 binding sites. We saw strong
liver-specific effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms on both methylation
levels (28,447 unique CpG sites (meQTL)) and gene expression levels (526 unique
genes (eQTL)), at a false discovery rate (FDR)<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Of the 526 unique eQTL
associated genes, 293 correlated significantly not only with genetic variation
but also with methylation levels. The tissue-specificities of these associations 
were analyzed in muscle, subcutaneous adipose tissue and visceral adipose tissue.
We observed that meQTL were more stable between tissues than eQTL and a very
strong tissue-specificity for the identified associations between CpG methylation
and gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses generated a comprehensive resource of factors involved 
in the regulation of hepatic gene expression, and allowed us to estimate the
proportion of variation in gene expression that could be attributed to genetic
and epigenetic variation, both crucial to understanding differences in drug
response and the etiology of liver diseases.

PMCID: PMC4287518
PMID: 25282492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2014 Oct 2;124(14):2169-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-08-596353.

Exosome complex and erythropoiesis.

An X(1).

Author information: 
(1)NEW YORK BLOOD CENTER.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Oct 2;124(14):2285-97.

PMID: 25278568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Blood. 2014 Dec 11;124(25):3791-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-584656. Epub 2014
Sep 30.

TNF-mediated inflammation represses GATA1 and activates p38 MAP kinase in
RPS19-deficient hematopoietic progenitors.

Bibikova E(1), Youn MY(1), Danilova N(2), Ono-Uruga Y(1), Konto-Ghiorghi Y(1),
Ochoa R(1), Narla A(1), Glader B(1), Lin S(2), Sakamoto KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA; and. (2)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is an inherited disorder characterized by defects
in erythropoiesis, congenital abnormalities, and predisposition to cancer.
Approximately 25% of DBA patients have a mutation in RPS19, which encodes a
component of the 40S ribosomal subunit. Upregulation of p53 contributes to the
pathogenesis of DBA, but the link between ribosomal protein mutations and
erythropoietic defects is not well understood. We found that RPS19 deficiency in 
hematopoietic progenitor cells leads to decreased GATA1 expression in the
erythroid progenitor population and p53-dependent upregulation of tumor necrosis 
factor-a (TNF-a) in nonerythroid cells. The decrease in GATA1 expression was
mediated, at least in part, by activation of p38 MAPK in erythroid cells and
rescued by inhibition of TNF-a or p53. The anemia phenotype in rps19-deficient
zebrafish was reversed by treatment with the TNF-a inhibitor etanercept. Our data
reveal that RPS19 deficiency leads to inflammation, p53-dependent increase in
TNF-a, activation of p38 MAPK, and decreased GATA1 expression, suggesting a novel
mechanism for the erythroid defects observed in DBA.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4263986
PMID: 25270909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 1;5:5054. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6054.

Haematopoietic focal adhesion kinase deficiency alters haematopoietic homeostasis
to drive tumour metastasis.

Batista S(1), Maniati E(2), Reynolds LE(1), Tavora B(1), Lees DM(1), Fernandez
I(1), Elia G(1), Casanovas O(3), Lo Celso C(4), Hagemann T(2), Hodivala-Dilke
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour Biology, Barts Cancer Institute-a Cancer Research UK Centre 
of Excellence, Queen Mary, University of London, John Vane Science Centre,
Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK. (2)Centre for Cancer and Inflammation, 
Barts Cancer Institute-a Cancer Research UK Centre of Excellence, Queen Mary,
University of London, John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 
6BQ, UK. (3)Translational Research Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology,
IDIBELL, 08907 L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. (4)Department of Life Sciences, 
Sir Alexander Fleming building, Imperial College, London SW72AZ, UK.

Metastasis is the main cause of cancer-related death and thus understanding the
molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying this process is critical. Here, our 
data demonstrate, contrary to established dogma, that loss of
haematopoietic-derived focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is sufficient to enhance
tumour metastasis. Using both experimental and spontaneous metastasis models, we 
show that genetic ablation of haematopoietic FAK does not affect primary tumour
growth but enhances the incidence of metastasis significantly. At a molecular
level, haematopoietic FAK deletion results in an increase in PU-1 levels and
decrease in GATA-1 levels causing a shift of hematopoietic homeostasis towards a 
myeloid commitment. The subsequent increase in circulating granulocyte number,
with an increase in serum CXCL12 and granulocyte CXCR4 levels, was required for
augmented metastasis in mice lacking haematopoietic FAK. Overall our findings
provide a mechanism by which haematopoietic FAK controls cancer metastasis.

PMID: 25270220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 Oct;138(10):1302-6. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2014-0304-CC.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis in neonates: GATA get the diagnosis.

Bombery M(1), Vergilio JA.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann
Arbor.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis occurs exclusively in patients with Down syndrome
(constitutional trisomy 21), manifests in the neonatal period, and is
characterized by circulating megakaryoblasts with varied degrees of multisystem
organ involvement. In most cases, this process resolves spontaneously by 3 to 6
months of age, but for some, the disease can be fatal. Affected patients are
particularly prone to develop acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in early childhood.
Somatic GATA1 mutations are believed to be pivotal in the development of
transient abnormal myelopoiesis and have proven to be a marker of clonal identity
in its evolution to megakaryoblastic leukemia. We describe a study case of
transient abnormal myelopoiesis and review the clinical manifestations,
laboratory features, natural history, molecular genetics, and postulated disease 
pathogenesis of this disorder.

PMID: 25268193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Eur J Pediatr. 2015 Apr;174(4):525-31. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2430-3. Epub 2014 
Sep 30.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia with acquired trisomy 21 and GATA1 mutations in
phenotypically normal children.

Ono R(1), Hasegawa D, Hirabayashi S, Kamiya T, Yoshida K, Yonekawa S, Ogawa C,
Hosoya R, Toki T, Terui K, Ito E, Manabe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, St. Luke's International Hospital, 9-1, Akashi-cho, 
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-8560, Japan, rin.r34@gmail.com.

GATA1 mutations are found almost exclusively in children with myeloid
proliferations related to Down syndrome (DS). Here, we report two phenotypically 
and cytogenetically normal children with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL)
whose blasts had both acquired trisomy 21 and GATA1 mutation. Patient 1 was
diagnosed with transient abnormal myelopoiesis in the neonatal period. Following 
spontaneous improvement of the disease, leukemic blasts increased 7 months later.
He received less intensive chemotherapy, and he is now 6 years old in complete
remission. Patient 2 was diagnosed with AMKL at the age of 18 months. Although he
received intensive chemotherapy and a cord blood transplantation, he died without
gaining remission. In both cases, trisomy 21 and GATA1 mutation were detected
only in leukemic blasts, but not in germline samples. Based on a literature
review, we identified reports describing 14 non-DS AMKL with GATA1 mutation and
acquired trisomy 21. Of those, 12 cases were diagnosed during the neonatal
period, whereas the remaining 2 cases were diagnosed at the age of 22 and
31 months, respectively.CONCLUSION: These cases suggest that GATA1 mutation may
cooperate with the additional chromosome 21 in developing myeloid proliferations 
even in non-DS patients.

PMID: 25266042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Eur J Haematol. 2015 Jun;94(6):491-7. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12452. Epub 2014 Oct 25.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria linked to GATA1-R216W mutation: challenges
for diagnosis.

Di Pierro E(1), Russo R(2,)(3), Karakas Z(4), Brancaleoni V(1), Gambale A(2,)(3),
Kurt I(5), Winter SS(6), Granata F(1), Czuchlewski DR(7), Langella C(2,)(3),
Iolascon A(2,)(3), Cappellini MD(1,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS "Cà-Granda" Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, U.O. di Medicina
Interna, Milan, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie
Mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy. (3)CEINGE
- Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry -
Laboratory of Porphiria, Gulhane Military Academy of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(8)Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di Comunità, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milan, Italy.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is a rare genetic disease that is
characterized by a severe cutaneous photosensitivity causing unrecoverable
deformities, chronic hemolytic anemia requiring blood transfusion program, and by
fatal systemic complications. A correct and early diagnosis is required to
develop a management plan that is appropriate to the patient's needs. Recently
only one case of X-linked CEP had been reported, describing the trans-acting
GATA1-R216W mutation. Here, we have characterized two novel X-linked CEP
patients, both with misleading hematological phenotypes that include
dyserythropoietic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and hereditary persistence of fetal
hemoglobin. We compare the previously reported case to ours and propose a
diagnostic paradigm for this variant of CEP. Finally, a correlation between
phenotype variability and the presence of modifier mutations in loci related to
disease-causing gene is described.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25251786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Hum Pathol. 2014 Nov;45(11):2364-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.07.019. Epub 2014
Aug 16.

Congenital GATA1-mutated myeloproliferative disorder in trisomy 21 complicated by
placental fetal thrombotic vasculopathy.

Loh TJ(1), Lian DW(2), Iyer P(3), Lam JC(3), Kuick CH(1), Aung AC(1), Chang
KT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, KK Women's and Children's
Hospital, 100 Bukit Timah Road, Singapore 229899, Republic of Singapore.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, KK Women's and Children's
Hospital, 100 Bukit Timah Road, Singapore 229899, Republic of Singapore.
Electronic address: Derrick.Lian.WQ@kkh.com.sg. (3)Haematology-Oncology Service, 
Department of Paediatric Subspecialties, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, 100 
Bukit Timah Road, Singapore 229899, Republic of Singapore.

Congenital myeloproliferative disorders and transient leukemic disorders have
been described in the perinatal period in infants with trisomy 21 (Down
syndrome). We report a novel case of a neonate with trisomy 21 with GATA1-mutated
congenital myeloproliferative disorder complicated by placental fetal thrombotic 
vasculopathy featuring chorionic vessel leukemic thrombi, fetal circulation
vascular injuries, and large aggregates of avascular villi. These thrombotic and 
vasculopathic changes within the placenta are likely a reflection of the
hypercoagulable state caused by the myeloproliferative disorder. Placental fetal 
thrombotic vasculopathy is associated with adverse outcomes for the infant, and
should be documented during formal pathological examination of the placenta.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Blood Res. 2014 Sep 5;4(1):41-5. eCollection 2014.

Concomitant a novel ALAS2 mutation and GATA1 mutation in a newborn: a case report
and review of the literature.

Doshi BS(1), Abramowsky C(2), Briones M(3), Bunting ST(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (3)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Aflac Cancer and
Blood Disorders Center Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (4)Department of Pathology,
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Emory University Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.

GATA-1, an X-linked gene, encodes a transcription factor that plays a role in
erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis. GATA-1 mutations have been associated with
various diseases, such as X-linked thrombocytopenia. ALAS2 is an X-linked
erythroid-specific isoenzyme expressed during erythropoiesis. Mutations of ALAS2 
were associated with X-linked sideroblastic anemia. We report a case of newborn
twin boy with anemia and thrombocytopenia at birth. A bone marrow biopsy at 4
months of age showed marked dyserythropoiesis, dysmegakaryopoiesis, and rare
ringed sideroblasts. Gene sequencing study showed a previously reported mutation 
in GATA-1 at c.622G>A location (G208R) and a novel ALAS2 mutation at c.1436G>A
location (R479Q).

PMCID: PMC4165116
PMID: 25232504  [PubMed]


119. Expert Rev Hematol. 2014 Dec;7(6):831-40. doi: 10.1586/17474086.2014.959923. Epub
2014 Sep 18.

Prognosis and management of acute myeloid leukemia in patients with Down
syndrome.

Caldwell JT(1), Ge Y, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)MD/PhD Program, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 110 East Warren
Ave, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) are at a substantially increased risk to develop
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This increase in incidence is tempered, however, by
favorable overall survival rates of approximately 80%, whereas survival for
non-DS children with similar leukemic subtypes is <35%. In this review, the
clinical studies that have contributed to this overall high survival will be
presented and their individual successes will be discussed. Important issues
including intensity of treatment regimens, the role of bone marrow transplants
and prognostic indicators will be reviewed. In particular, the roles of high- vs 
low- vs very low-dose cytarabine will be discussed, as well as potential
therapeutic options in the future and the direction of the field over the next 5 
years. In summary, children with DS and AML should be treated with a
moderate-intensity cytarabine-based regimen with curative intent.

PMID: 25231553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Target Oncol. 2015 Jun;10(2):267-75. doi: 10.1007/s11523-014-0335-8. Epub 2014
Sep 19.

Decreased mRNA expression of GATA1 and GATA2 is associated with tumor
aggressiveness and poor outcome in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Peters I(1), Dubrowinskaja N, Tezval H, Kramer MW, von Klot CA, Hennenlotter J,
Stenzl A, Scherer R, Kuczyk MA, Serth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str.1, 30625, Hannover, Germany, peters.inga@mh-hannover.de.

GATA-binding proteins 1 (GATA1) and 2 (GATA2) are zinc-finger transcription
factors and belong to the GATA family proteins 1-6. GATA1 interacts with the TP53
tumor suppressor gene, and both GATAs have been shown to be involved in cell
growth, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis of several solid tumors. GATA1 and GATA2
expression alterations are associated with poor survival and adverse
clinicopathology in prostate and colorectal cancer, while the significance and
prognostic value in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has not been
investigated as yet. We investigated relative messenger RNA (mRNA) expression
levels of GATA1 and GATA2 in 77 ccRCC and 58 paired adjacent noncancerous renal
tissues by quantitative real-time reverse-transcribed PCR. Relative mRNA
expression levels were determined using the <U+0394><U+0394>Ct method. GATA1 and GATA2
expression levels were significantly decreased in tumor tissues compared with
normal tissues (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, paired t test). In univariate logistic regression
analysis, decreased GATA1 and GATA2 expression levels were associated with
advanced tumor disease (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005 and 0.008), positive distant metastasis
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03 and 0.001), and lymph node metastasis status (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011 and 0.038).
Reduced expression levels of GATA1 and GATA2 were associated with an increased
risk of disease recurrence (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005 and 0.006; hazard ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05 and 0.21).
Pairwise bivariate analysis after adjusting for clinicopathological parameters
revealed relative mRNA expression of GATA1, but not GATA2, as an independent
candidate prognosticator for ccRCC. Our results support that GATA1 and GATA2 are 
involved in ccRCC tumor biology possibly affecting tumor development and
aggressiveness.

PMID: 25230694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Cell. 2014 Sep 29;30(6):660-72. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.008. Epub 2014 
Sep 11.

Cpeb4-mediated translational regulatory circuitry controls terminal erythroid
differentiation.

Hu W(1), Yuan B(2), Lodish HF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
Electronic address: whu@wi.mit.edu. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of Biology and Department of
Bioengineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

While we have considerable understanding of the transcriptional networks
controlling mammalian cell differentiation, our knowledge of posttranscriptional 
regulatory events is very limited. Using differentiation of primary erythroid
cells as a model, we show that the sequence-specific mRNA-binding protein Cpeb4
is strongly induced by the erythroid-important transcription factors Gata1 and
Tal1 and is essential for terminal erythropoiesis. By interacting with the
translation initiation factor eIF3, Cpeb4 represses the translation of a large
set of mRNAs, including its own mRNA. Thus, transcriptional induction and
translational repression combine to form a negative feedback loop to control
Cpeb4 protein levels within a specific range that is required for terminal
erythropoiesis. Our study provides an example of how translational control is
integrated with transcriptional regulation to precisely control gene expression
during mammalian cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4182162
PMID: 25220394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 11;9(9):e107133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107133.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of transcription factor networks involved in umbilical cord
blood CD34+ stem cells-derived erythropoiesis.

Li B(1), Ding L(2), Yang C(2), Kang B(1), Liu L(3), Story MD(2), Pace BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology/Oncology Division, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America. (2)Department of
Radiation Oncology and Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas, United States of America.

Fetal stem cells isolated from umbilical cord blood (UCB) possess a great
capacity for proliferation and differentiation and serve as a valuable model
system to study gene regulation. Expanded knowledge of the molecular control of
hemoglobin synthesis will provide a basis for rational design of therapies for
ß-hemoglobinopathies. Transcriptome data are available for erythroid progenitors 
derived from adult stem cells, however studies to define molecular mechanisms
controlling globin gene regulation during fetal erythropoiesis are limited. Here,
we utilize UCB-CD34+ stem cells induced to undergo erythroid differentiation to
characterize the transcriptome and transcription factor networks (TFNs)
associated with the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch during fetal erythropoiesis. UCB-CD34+ stem
cells grown in the one-phase liquid culture system displayed a higher
proliferative capacity than adult CD34+ stem cells. The <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch was
observed after day 42 during fetal erythropoiesis in contrast to adult
progenitors where the switch occurred around day 21. To gain insights into
transcription factors involved in globin gene regulation, microarray analysis was
performed on RNA isolated from UCB-CD34+ cell-derived erythroid progenitors
harvested on day 21, 42, 49 and 56 using the HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChip.
After data normalization, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis identified transcription
factors (TFs) with significant changes in expression during the <U+03B3>/ß-globin
switch. Forty-five TFs were silenced by day 56 (Profile-1) and 30 TFs were
activated by day 56 (Profile-2). Both GSEA datasets were analyzed using the MIMI 
Cytoscape platform, which discovered TFNs centered on KLF4 and GATA2 (Profile-1) 
and KLF1 and GATA1 for Profile-2 genes. Subsequent shRNA studies in KU812
leukemia cells and human erythroid progenitors generated from UCB-CD34+ cells
supported a negative role of MAFB in <U+03B3>-globin regulation. The characteristics of 
erythroblasts derived from UCB-CD34+ stem cells including prolonged <U+03B3>-globin
expression combined with unique TFNs support novel mechanisms controlling the
<U+03B3>/ß-globin switch during UCB-derived erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4161396
PMID: 25211130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Apr;230(4):783-90. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24803.

GATA-1 deficiency rescues trabecular but not cortical bone in OPG deficient mice.

Meijome TE(1), Hooker RA, Cheng YH, Walker W, Horowitz MC, Fuchs RK, Kacena MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana.

GATA-1(low/low) mice have an increase in megakaryocytes (MKs) and trabecular
bone. The latter is thought to result from MKs directly stimulating osteoblastic 
bone formation while simultaneously inhibiting osteoclastogenesis.
Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is known to inhibit osteoclastogenesis and OPG(-/-) mice
have reduced trabecular and cortical bone due to increased osteoclastogenesis.
Interestingly, GATA-1(low/low) mice have increased OPG levels. Here, we sought to
determine whether GATA-1 knockdown in OPG(-/-) mice could rescue the observed
osteoporotic bone phenotype. GATA-1(low/low) mice were bred with OPG(-/-) mice
and bone phenotype assessed. GATA-1(low/low) × OPG(-/-) mice have increased
cortical bone porosity, similar to OPG(-/-) mice. Both OPG(-/-) and
GATA-1(low/low) × OPG(-/-) mice, were found to have increased osteoclasts
localized to cortical bone, possibly producing the observed elevated porosity.
Biomechanical assessment indicates that OPG(-/-) and GATA-1(low/low) × OPG(-/-)
femurs are weaker and less stiff than C57BL/6 or GATA-1(low/low) femurs. Notably,
GATA-1(low/low) × OPG(-/-) mice had trabecular bone parameters that were not
different from C57BL/6 values, suggesting that GATA-1 deficiency can partially
rescue the trabecular bone loss observed with OPG deficiency. The fact that
GATA-1 deficiency appears to be able to partially rescue the trabecular, but not 
the cortical bone phenotype suggests that MKs can locally enhance trabecular bone
volume, but that MK secreted factors cannot access cortical bone sufficiently to 
inhibit osteoclastogenesis or that OPG itself is required to inhibit
osteoclastogenesis in cortical bone.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4433552
PMID: 25205203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 16;111(37):13337-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1405422111. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Transcription factor EKLF (KLF1) recruitment of the histone chaperone HIRA is
essential for ß-globin gene expression.

Soni S(1), Pchelintsev N(2), Adams PD(3), Bieker JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029; (2)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1BD, Scotland; (3)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University
of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1BD, Scotland; Beatson Institute for Cancer Research,
Glasgow G61 1BD, Scotland; and. (4)Department of Developmental and Regenerative
Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029; Black Family Stem
Cell Institute, Tisch Cancer Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10029 james.bieker@mssm.edu.

The binding of chromatin-associated proteins and incorporation of histone
variants correlates with alterations in gene expression. These changes have been 
particularly well analyzed at the mammalian ß-globin locus, where transcription
factors such as erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF), which is also known as
Krüppel-like factor 1 (KLF1), play a coordinating role in establishing the proper
chromatin structure and inducing high-level expression of adult ß-globin. We had 
previously shown that EKLF preferentially interacts with histone H3 and that the 
H3.3 variant is differentially recruited to the ß-globin promoter. We now find
that a novel interaction between EKLF and the histone cell cycle regulation
defective homolog A (HIRA) histone chaperone accounts for these effects. HIRA is 
not only critical for ß-globin expression but is also required for activation of 
the erythropoietic regulators EKLF and GATA binding protein 1 (GATA1). Our
results provide a mechanism by which transcription factor-directed recruitment of
a generally expressed histone chaperone can lead to tissue-restricted changes in 
chromatin components, structure, and transcription at specific genomic sites
during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4169976
PMID: 25197097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Immunogenetics. 2014 Nov;66(11):635-49. doi: 10.1007/s00251-014-0799-9. Epub 2014
Sep 2.

Hematopoiesis in the equine fetal liver suggests immune preparedness.

Battista JM(1), Tallmadge RL, Stokol T, Felippe MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Equine Immunology Lab, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA, jmb279@cornell.edu.

We investigated how the equine fetus prepares its pre-immune humoral repertoire
for an imminent exposure to pathogens in the neonatal period, particularly how
the primary hematopoietic organs are equipped to support B cell hematopoiesis and
immunoglobulin (Ig) diversity. We demonstrated that the liver and the bone marrow
at approximately 100 days of gestation (DG) are active sites of hematopoiesis
based on the expression of signature messenger RNA (mRNA) (c-KIT, CD34, IL7R,
CXCL12, IRF8, PU.1, PAX5, NOTCH1, GATA1, CEBPA) and protein markers (CD34, CD19, 
IgM, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD11b, CD172A) of hematopoietic development and
leukocyte differentiation molecules, respectively. To verify Ig diversity
achieved during the production of B cells, V(D)J segments were sequenced in
primary lymphoid organs of the equine fetus and adult horse, revealing that
similar heavy chain VDJ segments and CDR3 lengths were most frequently used
independent of life stage. In contrast, different lambda light chain segments
were predominant in equine fetal compared to adult stage, and surprisingly, the
fetus had less restricted use of variable gene segments to construct the lambda
chain. Fetal Igs also contained elements of sequence diversity, albeit to a
smaller degree than that of the adult horse. Our data suggest that the B cells
produced in the liver and bone marrow of the equine fetus generate a wide
repertoire of pre-immune Igs for protection, and the more diverse use of
different lambda variable gene segments in fetal life may provide the neonate an 
opportunity to respond to a wider range of antigens at birth.

PMCID: PMC4198492
PMID: 25179685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014 Aug 30. doi: 10.1002/pbc.25226. [Epub ahead of print]

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis of a newborn not associated with chromosome 21
abnormalities or GATA1 mutations.

Nakashima MO(1), Shetty S, Chicka M, Flagg A, Eng C, Cotta CV.

Author information: 
(1)Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, 44195, Ohio.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) is a disorder of Down syndrome newborns
characterized by megakaryocytic blasts indistinguishable from acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), which undergoes spontaneous remission. Acquired GATA1 mutations
are present in blasts of both TAM and the subsequent AML which sometimes
develops. We present a unique case of a newborn with leukemic megakaryoblasts
indistinguishable from those of TAM who had neither extra material from
chromosome 21 in the germline or blasts, nor evidence of GATA1 mutations. These
findings suggest there are other genetic abnormalities that can lead to TAM
besides GATA1 mutation in the setting of trisomy 21. Pediatr Blood Cancer © 2014 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25175265  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


127. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 27;9(8):e106011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106011.
eCollection 2014.

The identification and structure of an N-terminal PR domain show that FOG1 is a
member of the PRDM family of proteins.

Clifton MK(1), Westman BJ(1), Thong SY(1), O'Connell MR(1), Webster MW(1),
Shepherd NE(1), Quinlan KG(1), Crossley M(1), Blobel GA(2), Mackay JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
(2)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, The Perelman 
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

FOG1 is a transcriptional regulator that acts in concert with the hematopoietic
master regulator GATA1 to coordinate the differentiation of platelets and
erythrocytes. Despite considerable effort, however, the mechanisms through which 
FOG1 regulates gene expression are only partially understood. Here we report the 
discovery of a previously unrecognized domain in FOG1: a PR (PRD-BF1 and RIZ)
domain that is distantly related in sequence to the SET domains that are found in
many histone methyltransferases. We have used NMR spectroscopy to determine the
solution structure of this domain, revealing that the domain shares close
structural similarity with SET domains. Titration with S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine,
the cofactor product synonymous with SET domain methyltransferase activity,
indicated that the FOG PR domain is not, however, likely to function as a
methyltransferase in the same fashion. We also sought to define the function of
this domain using both pulldown experiments and gel shift assays. However,
neither pulldowns from mammalian nuclear extracts nor yeast two-hybrid assays
reproducibly revealed binding partners, and we were unable to detect
nucleic-acid-binding activity in this domain using our high-diversity Pentaprobe 
oligonucleotides. Overall, our data demonstrate that FOG1 is a member of the PRDM
(PR domain containing proteins, with zinc fingers) family of transcriptional
regulators. The function of many PR domains, however, remains somewhat enigmatic 
for the time being.

PMCID: PMC4146578
PMID: 25162672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Sci Rep. 2014 Aug 27;4:6136. doi: 10.1038/srep06136.

Down syndrome-associated haematopoiesis abnormalities created by chromosome
transfer and genome editing technologies.

Kazuki Y(1), Yakura Y(2), Abe S(3), Osaki M(4), Kajitani N(2), Kazuki K(2),
Takehara S(2), Honma K(3), Suemori H(5), Yamazaki S(6), Sakuma T(7), Toki T(8),
Shimizu R(9), Nakauchi H(6), Yamamoto T(7), Oshimura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biomedical Science, Institute of Regenerative Medicine and
Biofunction, Graduate School of Medical Science, Tottori University, 86
Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan; Tel: +81-859-38-6219 [2] Chromosome
Engineering Research Center (CERC), Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago,
Tottori 683-8503, Japan. (2)Chromosome Engineering Research Center (CERC),
Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan. (3)Department 
of Biomedical Science, Institute of Regenerative Medicine and Biofunction,
Graduate School of Medical Science, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago,
Tottori 683-8503, Japan; Tel: +81-859-38-6219. (4)1] Chromosome Engineering
Research Center (CERC), Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori
683-8503, Japan [2] Division of Pathological Biochemistry, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho,
Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan. (5)Department of Embryonic Stem Cell Research,
Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (6)Division of Stem Cell Therapy,
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (7)Department of Mathematical and
Life Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University,
Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki
University Graduate School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.
(9)Department of Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Infants with Down syndrome (DS) are at a high risk of developing transient
abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM). A GATA1 mutation leading to the production of
N-terminally truncated GATA1 (GATA1s) in early megakaryocyte/erythroid
progenitors is linked to the onset of TAM and cooperated with the effect of
trisomy 21 (Ts21). To gain insights into the underlying mechanisms of the
progression to TAM in DS patients, we generated human pluripotent stem cells
harbouring Ts21 and/or GATA1s by combining microcell-mediated chromosome transfer
and genome editing technologies. In vitro haematopoietic differentiation assays
showed that the GATA1s mutation blocked erythropoiesis irrespective of an extra
chromosome 21, while Ts21 and the GATA1s mutation independently perturbed
megakaryopoiesis and the combination of Ts21 and the GATA1s mutation
synergistically contributed to an aberrant accumulation of skewed megakaryocytes.
Thus, the DS model cells generated by these two technologies are useful in
assessing how GATA1s mutation is involved in the onset of TAM in patients with
DS.

PMCID: PMC4145315
PMID: 25159877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nature. 2014 Oct 9;514(7521):242-6. doi: 10.1038/nature13614. Epub 2014 Aug 24.

HSP70 sequestration by free a-globin promotes ineffective erythropoiesis in
ß-thalassaemia.

Arlet JB(1), Ribeil JA(2), Guillem F(3), Negre O(4), Hazoume A(5), Marcion G(5), 
Beuzard Y(4), Dussiot M(6), Moura IC(7), Demarest S(8), de Beauchêne IC(9),
Belaid-Choucair Z(3), Sevin M(5), Maciel TT(7), Auclair C(9), Leboulch P(10),
Chretien S(4), Tchertanov L(9), Baudin-Creuza V(11), Seigneuric R(12), Fontenay
M(13), Garrido C(14), Hermine O(15), Courtois G(16).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratoire INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 1163, centre national de la
recherche scientifique (CNRS) équipe de recherche labellisée 8254, 24 Boulevard
de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [2] Service de Médecine Interne, Faculté de 
médecine Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris-Cité et Assistance publique - Hôpitaux
de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 15 rue Leblanc 75908 Paris, France
[3] Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Assistance
publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015
Paris, France [4] Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France [5]. (2)1] 
Laboratoire INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 1163, centre national de la
recherche scientifique (CNRS) équipe de recherche labellisée 8254, 24 Boulevard
de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [2] Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité
University, Imagine Institute, Assistance publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Necker, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [3] Laboratory of
Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France [4] Département de Biothérapie, Faculté de 
médecine Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris-Cité et Assistance publique - Hôpitaux
de Paris, Hôpital Necker, 149 rue de Sèvres 75015 Paris, France [5]. (3)1]
Laboratoire INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 1163, centre national de la
recherche scientifique (CNRS) équipe de recherche labellisée 8254, 24 Boulevard
de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [2] Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité
University, Imagine Institute, Assistance publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Necker, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [3] Laboratory of
Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France. (4)Commissariat à l'énergie atomique
(CEA), Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies (iMETI), 18 Route 
du Panorama, 92260 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. (5)1] INSERM, unité mixte de
recherche 866, Equipe labellisée Ligue contre le Cancer and Association pour la
Recherche contre le Cancer, and Laboratoire d'Excellence Lipoprotéines et santé
(LipSTIC), 21033 Dijon, France [2] University of Burgundy, Faculty of Medicine
and Pharmacy, 7 boulevard Jeanne d'Arc, 21033 Dijon, France. (6)1] Laboratoire
INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 1163, centre national de la recherche
scientifique (CNRS) équipe de recherche labellisée 8254, 24 Boulevard de
Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [2] Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité
University, Imagine Institute, Assistance publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Necker, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [3] Laboratory of
Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France [4] INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 699,
Hôpital Bichat, 46 rue Henri Huchard, 75018 Paris, France. (7)1] Laboratoire
INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 1163, centre national de la recherche
scientifique (CNRS) équipe de recherche labellisée 8254, 24 Boulevard de
Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [2] Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité
University, Imagine Institute, Assistance publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Necker, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [3] Laboratory of
Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France [4] INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 699,
Hôpital Bichat, 46 rue Henri Huchard, 75018 Paris, France [5] Faculté de médecine
and Université Denis Diderot Paris VII, 5 Rue Thomas Mann, 75013 Paris, France.
(8)Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS), unité mixte de recherche 
8113, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, 61 avenue du président Wilson, 94230
Cachan, France. (9)1] Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS), unité 
mixte de recherche 8113, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, 61 avenue du
président Wilson, 94230 Cachan, France [2] Laboratoire d'Excellence en Recherche 
sur le Médicament et l'Innovation Thérapeutique (LERMIT), Campus Paris Saclay, 5 
rue Jean-Baptiste Clément 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France. (10)1] Commissariat à
l'énergie atomique (CEA), Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies
(iMETI), 18 Route du Panorama, 92260 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France [2] Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck St, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA. (11)INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 779, Université Paris XI, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. (12)University of Burgundy, Faculty of Medicine and
Pharmacy, 7 boulevard Jeanne d'Arc, 21033 Dijon, France. (13)1] Laboratory of
Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France [2] Institut Cochin, INSERM, unité mixte de
recherche 1016, centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS), unité mixte 
de recherche 8104, Université Paris Descartes, and Assistance publique - Hôpitaux
de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Centre, Hôpital Cochin, Service
d'hématologie biologique, 27 rue du Faubourg Saitn-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. 
(14)1] INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 866, Equipe labellisée Ligue contre le
Cancer and Association pour la Recherche contre le Cancer, and Laboratoire
d'Excellence Lipoprotéines et santé (LipSTIC), 21033 Dijon, France [2] University
of Burgundy, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, 7 boulevard Jeanne d'Arc, 21033
Dijon, France [3] Centre anticancéreux George François Leclerc, 1 rue professeur 
Marion, 21079 Dijon, France [4]. (15)1] Laboratoire INSERM, unité mixte de
recherche 1163, centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) équipe de
recherche labellisée 8254, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [2] 
Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Assistance
publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015
Paris, France [3] Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France [4] Service
d'hématologie, Faculté de médecine Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris-Cité et
Assistance publique - Hôpitaux de Paris Hôpital Necker, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015 
Paris, France [5]. (16)1] Laboratoire INSERM, unité mixte de recherche 1163,
centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) équipe de recherche
labellisée 8254, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris, France [2] Paris
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Assistance publique 
- Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker, 24 Boulevard de Montparnasse, 75015 Paris,
France [3] Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, 75015 Paris, France [4].

ß-Thalassaemia major (ß-TM) is an inherited haemoglobinopathy caused by a
quantitative defect in the synthesis of ß-globin chains of haemoglobin, leading
to the accumulation of free a-globin chains that form toxic aggregates. Despite
extensive knowledge of the molecular defects causing ß-TM, little is known of the
mechanisms responsible for the ineffective erythropoiesis observed in the
condition, which is characterized by accelerated erythroid differentiation,
maturation arrest and apoptosis at the polychromatophilic stage. We have
previously demonstrated that normal human erythroid maturation requires a
transient activation of caspase-3 at the later stages of maturation. Although
erythroid transcription factor GATA-1, the master transcriptional factor of
erythropoiesis, is a caspase-3 target, it is not cleaved during erythroid
differentiation. We have shown that, in human erythroblasts, the chaperone heat
shock protein70 (HSP70) is constitutively expressed and, at later stages of
maturation, translocates into the nucleus and protects GATA-1 from caspase-3
cleavage. The primary role of this ubiquitous chaperone is to participate in the 
refolding of proteins denatured by cytoplasmic stress, thus preventing their
aggregation. Here we show in vitro that during the maturation of human ß-TM
erythroblasts, HSP70 interacts directly with free a-globin chains. As a
consequence, HSP70 is sequestrated in the cytoplasm and GATA-1 is no longer
protected, resulting in end-stage maturation arrest and apoptosis. Transduction
of a nuclear-targeted HSP70 mutant or a caspase-3-uncleavable GATA-1 mutant
restores terminal maturation of ß-TM erythroblasts, which may provide a rationale
for new targeted therapies of ß-TM.

PMID: 25156257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Br J Haematol. 2014 Dec;167(5):587-99. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13096. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

Haematopoietic development and leukaemia in Down syndrome.

Roberts I(1), Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatrics and Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Children with constitutional trisomy 21 (cT21, Down Syndrome, DS) are at a higher
risk for both myeloid and B-lymphoid leukaemias. The myeloid leukaemias are often
preceded by a transient neonatal pre-leukaemic syndrome, Transient Abnormal
Myelopoiesis (TAM). TAM is caused by cooperation between cT21 and acquired
somatic N-terminal truncating mutations in the key haematopoietic transcription
factor GATA1. These mutations, which are not leukaemogenic in the absence of
cT21, are found in almost one-third of neonates with DS. Analysis of primary
human fetal liver haematopoietic cells and of human embryonic stem cells
demonstrates that cT21 itself substantially alters human fetal haematopoietic
development. Consequently, many haematopoietic developmental defects are observed
in neonates with DS even in the absence of TAM. Although studies in mouse models 
have suggested a pathogenic role of deregulated expression of several chromosome 
21-encoded genes, their role in human leukaemogenesis remains unclear. As cT21
exists in all embryonic cells, the molecular basis of cT21-associated leukaemias 
probably reflects a complex interaction between deregulated gene expression in
haematopoietic cells and the fetal haematopoietic microenvironment in DS.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25155832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 30;5(18):8188-201.

Wogonin induces cell cycle arrest and erythroid differentiation in
imatinib-resistant K562 cells and primary CML cells.

Yang H(1), Hui H(1), Wang Q(1), Li H(1), Zhao K(1), Zhou Y(1), Zhu Y(2), Wang
X(3), You Q(1), Guo Q(1), Lu N(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Intervention, Key Laboratory of Drug Quality Control and
Pharmacovigilance, Ministry of Education, China Pharmaceutical University, 24
Tongjiaxiang, Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Hematology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University; Department of
Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu 
Province Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida International University,
Miami, FL, USA.

Wogonin, a flavonoid derived from Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi, has been
demonstrated to be highly effective in treating hematologic malignancies. In this
study, we investigated the anticancer effects of wogonin on K562 cells, K562
imatinib-resistant cells, and primary patient-derived CML cells. Wogonin
up-regulated transcription factor GATA-1 and enhanced binding between GATA-1 and 
FOG-1, thereby increasing expression of erythroid-differentiation genes. Wogonin 
also up-regulated the expression of p21 and induced cell cycle arrest. Studies
employing benzidine staining and analyses of cell surface markers glycophorin A
(GPA) and CD71 indicated that wogonin promoted differentiation of K562,
imatinib-resistant K562, and primary patient-derived CML cells. Wogonin also
enhanced binding between GATA-1 and MEK, resulting in inhibition of the growth of
CML cells. Additionally, in vivo studies showed that wogonin decreased the number
of CML cells and prolonged survival of NOD/SCID mice injected with K562 and
imatinib-resistant K562 cells. These data suggested that wogonin induces cycle
arrest and erythroid differentiation in vitro and inhibits proliferation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4226676
PMID: 25149543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Aug 21;10(8):e1003771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003771. 
eCollection 2014.

Tracing the evolution of lineage-specific transcription factor binding sites in a
birth-death framework.

Yokoyama KD(1), Zhang Y(2), Ma J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, United States of America. (2)Department of Bioengineering,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of
America. (3)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of America; Department of
Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois,
United States of America.

Changes in cis-regulatory element composition that result in novel patterns of
gene expression are thought to be a major contributor to the evolution of
lineage-specific traits. Although transcription factor binding events show
substantial variation across species, most computational approaches to study
regulatory elements focus primarily upon highly conserved sites, and rely heavily
upon multiple sequence alignments. However, sequence conservation based
approaches have limited ability to detect lineage-specific elements that could
contribute to species-specific traits. In this paper, we describe a novel
framework that utilizes a birth-death model to trace the evolution of
lineage-specific binding sites without relying on detailed base-by-base
cross-species alignments. Our model was applied to analyze the evolution of
binding sites based on the ChIP-seq data for six transcription factors (GATA1,
SOX2, CTCF, MYC, MAX, ETS1) along the lineage toward human after human-mouse
common ancestor. We estimate that a substantial fraction of binding sites
(~58-79% for each factor) in humans have origins since the divergence with mouse.
Over 15% of all binding sites are unique to hominids. Such elements are often
enriched near genes associated with specific pathways, and harbor more common
SNPs than older binding sites in the human genome. These results support the
ability of our method to identify lineage-specific regulatory elements and help
understand their roles in shaping variation in gene regulation across species.

PMCID: PMC4140645
PMID: 25144359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Nov;10(5):2421-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2491. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Differential co-expression analysis of rheumatoid arthritis with microarray data.

Wang K(1), Zhao L(2), Liu X(1), Hao Z(2), Zhou Y(1), Yang C(1), Li H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Orthopedics, The Harbin Fifth Hospital, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the underlying molecular
mechanisms of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) using microarray expression profiles from
osteoarthritis and RA patients, to improve diagnosis and treatment strategies for
the condition. The gene expression profile of GSE27390 was downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus, including 19 samples from patients with RA (n=9) or
osteoarthritis (n=10). Firstly, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
obtained with the thresholds of |logFC|>1.0 and P<0.05, using the t-test method
in LIMMA package. Then, differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) and
differentially co-expressed links (DCLs) were screened with q<0.25 by the
differential coexpression analysis and differential regulation analysis of gene
expression microarray data package. Secondly, pathway enrichment analysis for
DCGs was performed by the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery and the DCLs associated with RA were selected by comparing the obtained
DCLs with known transcription factor (TF)-targets in the TRANSFAC database.
Finally, the obtained TFs were mapped to the known TF-targets to construct the
network using cytoscape software. A total of 1755 DEGs, 457 DCGs and 101988 DCLs 
were achieved and there were 20 TFs in the obtained six TF-target relations
(STAT3-TNF, PBX1-PLAU, SOCS3-STAT3, GATA1-ETS2, ETS1-ICAM4 and CEBPE-GATA1) and
457 DCGs. A number of TF-target relations in the constructed network were not
within DCLs when the TF and target gene were DCGs. The identified TFs may have an
important role in the pathogenesis of RA and have the potential to be used as
biomarkers for the development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for
RA.

PMID: 25118911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Blood. 2014 Oct 2;124(14):2285-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-571083. Epub 2014
Aug 12.

The exosome complex establishes a barricade to erythroid maturation.

McIver SC(1), Kang YA(1), DeVilbiss AW(1), O'Driscoll CA(1), Ouellette JN(1),
Pope NJ(1), Camprecios G(2), Chang CJ(3), Yang D(4), Bouhassira EE(3), Ghaffari
S(2), Bresnick EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Blood Research Program, Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of 
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI; (2)Department of Developmental and
Regenerative Biology, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY; (3)Department
of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY; and.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison WI.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Oct 2;124(14):2169-71.

Complex genetic networks control hematopoietic stem cell differentiation into
progenitors that give rise to billions of erythrocytes daily. Previously, we
described a role for the master regulator of erythropoiesis, GATA-1, in inducing 
genes encoding components of the autophagy machinery. In this context, the
Forkhead transcription factor, Foxo3, amplified GATA-1-mediated transcriptional
activation. To determine the scope of the GATA-1/Foxo3 cooperativity, and to
develop functional insights, we analyzed the GATA-1/Foxo3-dependent transcriptome
in erythroid cells. GATA-1/Foxo3 repressed expression of Exosc8, a pivotal
component of the exosome complex, which mediates RNA surveillance and epigenetic 
regulation. Strikingly, downregulating Exosc8, or additional exosome complex
components, in primary erythroid precursor cells induced erythroid cell
maturation. Our results demonstrate a new mode of controlling erythropoiesis in
which multiple components of the exosome complex are endogenous suppressors of
the erythroid developmental program.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4183988
PMID: 25115889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Bioinformatics. 2014 Dec 1;30(23):3325-33. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu542.
Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Modeling dynamic functional relationship networks and application to ex vivo
human erythroid differentiation.

Zhu F(1), Shi L(1), Li H(1), Eksi R(1), Engel JD(1), Guan Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, Department of Internal Medicine and Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, MI48109, USA.
(2)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, Department of Internal Medicine and Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, MI48109, USA Department
of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, MI48109, USA Department of
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Michigan, MI48109, USA.

MOTIVATION: Functional relationship networks, which summarize the probability of 
co-functionality between any two genes in the genome, could complement the
reductionist focus of modern biology for understanding diverse biological
processes in an organism. One major limitation of the current networks is that
they are static, while one might expect functional relationships to consistently 
reprogram during the differentiation of a cell lineage. To address this potential
limitation, we developed a novel algorithm that leverages both differentiation
stage-specific expression data and large-scale heterogeneous functional genomic
data to model such dynamic changes. We then applied this algorithm to the
time-course RNA-Seq data we collected for ex vivo human erythroid cell
differentiation.
RESULTS: Through computational cross-validation and literature validation, we
show that the resulting networks correctly predict the (de)-activated functional 
connections between genes during erythropoiesis. We identified known critical
genes, such as HBD and GATA1, and functional connections during erythropoiesis
using these dynamic networks, while the traditional static network was not able
to provide such information. Furthermore, by comparing the static and the dynamic
networks, we identified novel genes (such as OSBP2 and PDZK1IP1) that are
potential drivers of erythroid cell differentiation. This novel method of
modeling dynamic networks is applicable to other differentiation processes where 
time-course genome-scale expression data are available, and should assist in
generating greater understanding of the functional dynamics at play across the
genome during development.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The network described in this article is
available at http://guanlab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/stageSpecificNetwork.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4296147
PMID: 25115705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Haematologica. 2014 Oct;99(10):e205-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.104844. Epub
2014 Aug 1.

Mice over-expressing human erythropoietin indicate that erythropoietin enhances
expression of its receptor via up-regulated Gata1 and Tal1.

Deindl P(1), Klar M(2), Drews D(2), Cremer M(2), Gammella E(3), Gassmann M(4),
Dame C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany
Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care Medicine, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (2)Department of Neonatology, Charité 
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences for
Health, University of Milano, Italyand. (4)Institute of Veterinary Physiology and
Zurich Center for Human Integrative Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zürich,
Switzerland. (5)Department of Neonatology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Germany christof.dame@charite.de.

PMCID: PMC4181272
PMID: 25085352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Anticancer Res. 2014 Aug;34(8):4561-7.

Dok2 likely down-regulates Klf1 in mouse erythroleukemia cells.

Tanaka Y(1), Kulkeaw K(2), Inoue T(2), Tan KS(2), Nakanishi Y(3), Shirasawa S(4),
Sugiyama D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, 
Japan Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital,
Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Research and Development of Next Generation
Medicine, Kyushu University Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Kyushu
University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. (5)Department of Research and
Development of Next Generation Medicine, Kyushu University Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan ds-mons@yb3.so-net.ne.jp.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Docking protein 2 (Dok2) is an adapter protein which is involved 
in hematopoiesis. However, it still remains unclear how Dok2 functions in
regulation of transcription of hematopoietic genes. To address this issue, we
knocked-down Dok2 mRNA in mouse erythroleukemia cells which highly express Dok2
intrinsically.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mouse erythroleukemia cells were transfected with Dok2
siRNA for 24 h and gene expression of erythroid differentiation-related genes,
such as GATA binding protein 1 (Gata1), Krüppel-like factor 1 (Klf1), a-globin
and ß-globin were assessed by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Among the tested genes, expression of Klf1 exhibited a 1.94-fold
increase when compared to the control 24 h after transfection.
Immunocytochemistry and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Dok2
protein localizes in the nucleus and binds to the promoter region of Klf1 gene.
CONCLUSION: Dok2 is able to control Klf1 expression by transcriptional regulation
through directly binding to its promoter region.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25075100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Anticancer Res. 2014 Aug;34(8):4539-50.

Multicolor analysis of cell surface marker of human leukemia cell lines using
flow cytometry.

Inoue T(1), Swain A(2), Nakanishi Y(3), Sugiyama D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development of Next-Generation Medicine, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
yokotomo@hsc.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp ds-mons@yb3.so-net.ne.jp. (2)Department of
Research and Development of Next-Generation Medicine, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Center for Clinical and
Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia cell lines are utilized as tools for molecular analysis.
Their implementation in therapy will require standards for quality control,
including appropriate selection criteria for functional analysis and efficacy
determination.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Characteristics of six human leukemia cell lines
-Kasumi-1, NB-4, MOLM-13, MV-4-11, K562, and Jurkat cells-were investigated using
multiple color analysis of surface antigen expression and comparative analysis of
gene expression.
RESULTS: Differentiation states of Kasumi-1 and MOLM-13 cells are colony-forming 
units-granulocyte/macrophage equivalent cells to myeloblasts with comparatively
high Growth factor independent-1(GFI1) and Transcription factor PU.1 (PU.1)
expression, respectively. NB4 and MV-4-11 express high levels of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha (CEBPa) and differentiate from myeloblasts
to pro-monocytes and myeloblasts, respectively. K562 cells are colony-forming
units-erythroid equivalent cells to erythroblasts, with the highest expression of
GATA-binding factor 2 (GATA2), GATA1 and Friend of gata-1 (FOG1). Jurkat cells
are pro-T to mature T-cells with the highest Neurogenic locus notch-1 homolog
protein 1 (NOTCH1) expression.
CONCLUSION: Our study gives a useful guideline of standards for appropriate usage
of leukemia cell lines for examining novel targets in vitro.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25075097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2014 Sep 4;124(10):1586-96. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-02-556522. Epub 2014
Jul 22.

Gfi-1 regulates the erythroid transcription factor network through Id2 repression
in murine hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Kim W(1), Klarmann KD(1), Keller JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Mouse Cancer and
Genetics Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick,
MD.

Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi-1) is a part of the transcriptional network
that regulates the development of adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. 
Gfi-1-null (Gfi-1(-/-)) mice have reduced numbers of hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs), impaired radioprotective function of hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPCs), and myeloid and erythroid hyperplasia. We found that the development of
HPCs and erythropoiesis, but not HSC function, was rescued by reducing the
expression of inhibitor of DNA-binding protein 2 (Id2) in Gfi-1(-/-) mice.
Analysis of Gfi-1(-/-);Id2(+/-) mice revealed that short-term HSCs, common
myeloid progenitors (CMPs), erythroid burst-forming units, colony-forming units
in spleen, and more differentiated red cells were partially restored by reducing 
Id2 levels in Gfi-1(-/-) mice. Moreover, short-term reconstituting cells, and, to
a greater extent, CMP and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor development, and red
blood cell production (anemia) were rescued in mice transplanted with
Gfi-1(-/-);Id2(+/-) bone marrow cells (BMCs) in comparison with Gfi-1(-/-) BMCs. 
Reduction of Id2 expression in Gfi-1(-/-) mice increased the expression of Gata1,
Eklf, and EpoR, which are required for proper erythropoiesis. Reducing the levels
of other Id family members (Id1 and Id3) in Gfi-1(-/-) mice did not rescue
impaired HPC function or erythropoiesis. These data provide new evidence that
Gfi-1 is linked to the erythroid gene regulatory network by repressing Id2
expression.

PMCID: PMC4155270
PMID: 25051963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Hematol. 2014 Oct;89(10):974-7. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23796. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Genetic deletion of the GATA1-regulated protein a-synuclein reduces oxidative
stress and nitric oxide synthase levels in mature erythrocytes.

Renella R(1), Schlehe JS, Selkoe DJ, Williams DA, LaVoie MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts.

a-Synuclein is highly expressed in neural tissue and during erythropoiesis, where
the key erythroid regulator GATA1 has been found to modulate its expression.
While specific a-synuclein (SNCA) mutations are known to cause autosomal dominant
familial Parkinson's disease, its wild-type function remains under debate. To
investigate the role of a-synuclein in murine hematopoiesis and erythropoiesis,
we utilized Snca knock-out mice and analyzed erythroid compartments for
maturation defects, in vivo erythrocyte survival, and erythrocyte-based reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide synthase (NOS) levels. Our findings show
that while bone marrow and spleen erythropoiesis and peripheral blood erythrocyte
survival in Snca(-/-) mice was comparable to controls, the levels of ROS and of
NOS-2 were significantly decreased in mature erythrocytes in these animals. These
results indicate a role for a-synuclein in regulating oxidative stress in
erythrocytes in vivo and could open new avenues for the investigation of its
function in non-neural tissue.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4533827
PMID: 25043722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 18;9(7):e99017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099017. eCollection
2014.

Generation and characterization of a JAK2V617F-containing erythroleukemia cell
line.

Zhao W(1), Zou K(2), Farasyn T(1), Ho WT(1), Zhao ZJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America. (2)Oklahoma School of Science 
and Mathematics, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

The JAK2V617F mutation is found in the majority of patients with
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). Transgenic expression of the mutant gene
causes MPN-like phenotypes in mice. We have produced JAK2V617F mice with p53 null
background. Some of these mice developed acute erythroleukemia. From one of these
mice, we derived a cell line designated J53Z1. J53Z1 cells were stained positive 
for surface markers CD71 and CD117 but negative for Sca-1, TER-119, CD11b, Gr-1, 
F4/80, CD11c, CD317, CD4, CD8a, CD3e, B220, CD19, CD41, CD42d, NK-1.1, and FceR1.
Real time PCR analyses demonstrated expressions of erythropoietin receptor EpoR, 
GATA1, and GATA2 in these cells. J53Z1 cells grew rapidly in suspension culture
containing fetal bovine serum with a doubling time of ~18 hours. When
transplanted into C57Bl/6 mice, J53Z1 cells induced acute erythroleukemia with
massive infiltration of tumor cells in the spleen and liver. J53Z1 cells were
responsive to stimulation with erythropoietin and stem cell factor and were
selectively inhibited by JAK2 inhibitors which induced apoptosis of the cells.
Together, J53Z1 cells belong to the erythroid lineage, and they may be useful for
studying the role of JAK2V617F in proliferation and differentiation of erythroid 
cells and for identifying potential therapeutic drugs targeting JAK2.

PMCID: PMC4103785
PMID: 25036984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Blood. 2014 Jul 17;124(3):312-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-571687.

Pearson syndrome in a Diamond-Blackfan anemia cohort.

Alter BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Jul 17;124(3):437-40.

In this issue of Blood, Gagne et al describe a cohort of 362 patients clinically 
classified as having Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), in which 175 (48%) were found
to have mutations and deletions in ribosomal protein genes or GATA1, and 8 of the
remaining patients (2.2% overall) had mitochondrial gene deletions consistent
with Pearson marrow-pancreas syndrome (PS). The authors propose that all patients
with presumptive DBA should be tested for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletion
during their initial genetic evaluation.

PMCID: PMC4102705
PMID: 25035146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):703-4. doi: 10.1038/nm.3630.

Reduced translation of GATA1 in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

Boultwood J(1), Pellagatti A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research Molecular Haematology Unit, Nuffield Division of
Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):748-53.

PMID: 24999938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Apr;56(4):903-9. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.938327. Epub 2015
Jan 30.

Clinical and molecular epidemiology of neonatal leukemia in Brazil.

Moura SV(1), Andrade F, Magalhães IQ, Costa I, Silva DB, D'Andrea ML, Pinheiro
VP, Lee ML, Werneck F, Emerenciano M, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional de 
Câncer , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.

The clinical and molecular findings of 77 cases of neonatal leukemia (NL) and 380
of infant leukemia (IL) were selected to distinguish features between NL and IL. 
Somatic gene mutations associated with acute leukemia including FLT3, RAS and
PTPN11 were revisited. There were 42 cases of congenital leukemia associated with
Down syndrome (DS) and 39 of these cases presented features of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML)-M7. Twenty-seven of the DS cases underwent spontaneous remission
and were reclassified as a transient myeloproliferative disorder. GATA1 mutations
were found in 70% of these cases. In non-DS, frequent abnormalities were MLL
rearrangements, mainly MLL-AFF1 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and MLL-MLLT3 in 
AML. The FLT3 mutation was not found, while RAS (n = 4) and PTPN11 (n = 2)
mutations were identified and reported for the first time in NL. There was
substantial evidence to support that somatic abnormalities occur in utero. Thus, 
congenital leukemia is a good model for understanding leukemogenesis.

PMID: 24991719  [PubMed - in process]


145. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 15;289(33):22600-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.547380. Epub
2014 Jun 30.

The regulatory roles of microRNA-146b-5p and its target platelet-derived growth
factor receptor a (PDGFRA) in erythropoiesis and megakaryocytopoiesis.

Zhai PF(1), Wang F(1), Su R(1), Lin HS(1), Jiang CL(1), Yang GH(1), Yu J(1),
Zhang JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Key State Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005,
China. (2)From the Key State Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100005, China junwu_zhang@pumc.edu.cn.

Emerging evidence has shown that microRNAs have key roles in regulating various
normal physiological processes, whereas their deregulated expression is
correlated with various diseases. The miR-146 family includes miR-146a and
miR-146b, with a distinct expression spectrum in different hematopoietic cells.
Recent work indicated that miR-146a has a close relationship with inflammation
and autoimmune diseases. miR-146-deficient mice have developed some abnormal
hematopoietic phenotypes, suggesting the potential functions of miR-146 in
hematopoietic development. In this study, we found that miR-146b was consistently
up-regulated in both K562 and CD34(+) hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs)
undergoing either erythroid or megakaryocytic differentiation. Remarkably,
erythroid and megakaryocytic maturation of K562 cells was induced by excess
miR-146b but inhibited by decreased miR-146b levels. More importantly, an mRNA
encoding receptor tyrosine kinase, namely platelet-derived growth factor receptor
a (PDGFRA), was identified and validated as a direct target of miR-146b in
hematopoietic cells. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function assays showed that
PDGFRA functioned as a negative regulator in erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation. miR-146b could ultimately affect the expression of the GATA-1
gene, which is regulated by HEY1 (Hairy/enhancer-of-split related with YRPW motif
protein 1), a transcriptional repressor, via inhibition of the
PDGFRA/JNK/JUN/HEY1 pathway. Lentivirus-mediated gene transfer also demonstrated 
that the overexpression of miR-146b promoted erythropoiesis and
megakaryocytopoiesis of HSPCs via its regulation on the PDGFRA gene and effects
on GATA-1 expression. Moreover, we confirmed that the binding of GATA-1 to the
miR-146b promoter and induction of miR-146b during hematopoietic maturation were 
dependent on GATA-1. Therefore, miR-146b, PDGFRA, and GATA-1 formed a regulatory 
circuit to promote erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4132768
PMID: 24982425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 10;8(1):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.055. Epub 2014 Jun
26.

Circulation-independent differentiation pathway from extraembryonic mesoderm
toward hematopoietic stem cells via hemogenic angioblasts.

Tanaka Y(1), Sanchez V(2), Takata N(3), Yokomizo T(4), Yamanaka Y(2), Kataoka
H(5), Hoppe PS(6), Schroeder T(6), Nishikawa S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan; Department of
Haematology, Wellcome Trust-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. Electronic address:
yt305@cam.ac.uk. (2)Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Research Centre,
Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada.
(3)Organogenesis and Neurogenesis Group, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN 
Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan. (4)Department 
of Hematology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-2 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Center for
Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe
650-0047, Japan. (6)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich,
4058 Basel, Switzerland.

A large gap exists in our understanding of the course of differentiation from
mesoderm to definitive hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Previously, we reported
that Runx1(+) cells in embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5) embryos contribute to the
hemogenic endothelium in the E10.5 aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region and HSCs 
in the adult bone marrow. Here, we show that two Runx1(+) populations subdivided 
by Gata1 expression exist in E7.5 embryos. The hemogenic endothelium and the HSCs
are derived only from the Runx1(+)Gata1(-) population. A subset of this
population moves from the extra- to intraembryonic region during E7.5-E8.0, where
it contributes to the hemogenic endothelium of the dorsal aorta (DA). Migration
occurs before the heartbeat is initiated, and it is independent of circulation.
This suggests a developmental trajectory from Runx1(+) cells in the E7.5
extraembryonic region to definitive HSCs via the hemogenic endothelium.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24981862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2014 Jun;55(6):633-42.

[Network regulation of Gata1 and Gata2 gene-dynamics underlies erythroid
differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Moriguchi T, Yamamoto M.

PMID: 24975332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 1;393(1):149-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.011. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

Distinct regulation of the anterior and posterior myeloperoxidase expression by
Etv2 and Gata1 during primitive Granulopoiesis in zebrafish.

Glenn NO(1), Schumacher JA(1), Kim HJ(1), Zhao EJ(1), Skerniskyte J(1), Sumanas
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children<U+05F3>s Hospital Medical
Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (2)Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children<U+05F3>s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. Electronic address: saulius.sumanas@cchmc.org.

Neutrophilic granulocytes are the most abundant type of myeloid cells and form an
essential part of the innate immune system. In vertebrates the first neutrophils 
are thought to originate during primitive hematopoiesis, which precedes
hematopoietic stem cell formation. In zebrafish embryos, it has been suggested
that primitive neutrophils may originate in two distinct sites, the anterior
(ALPM) and posterior lateral plate mesoderm (PLPM). An ETS-family transcription
factor Etsrp/Etv2/ER71 has been implicated in vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis in
multiple vertebrates. However, its role during neutrophil development is not well
understood. Here we demonstrate using zebrafish embryos that Etv2 has a specific 
cell-autonomous function during primitive neutropoiesis in the anterior lateral
plate mesoderm (ALPM) but has little effect on erythropoiesis or the posterior
lateral plate mesoderm (PLPM) expression of neutrophil marker myeloperoxidase
mpo/mpx. Our results argue that ALPM-derived neutrophils originate from
etv2-expressing cells which downregulate etv2 during neutropoiesis. We further
show that Scl functions downstream of Etv2 in anterior neutropoiesis.
Additionally, we demonstrate that mpx expression within the PLPM overlaps with
gata1 expression, potentially marking the cells with a dual myelo-erythroid
potential. Intriguingly, initiation of mpx expression in the PLPM is dependent on
gata1 but not etv2 function. Our results demonstrate that mpx expression is
controlled differently in the ALPM and PLPM regions and describe novel roles for 
etv2 and gata1 during primitive neutropoiesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4134770
PMID: 24956419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):748-53. doi: 10.1038/nm.3557. Epub 2014 Jun 22.

Altered translation of GATA1 in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

Ludwig LS(1), Gazda HT(2), Eng JC(3), Eichhorn SW(4), Thiru P(5), Ghazvinian
R(6), George TI(7), Gotlib JR(8), Beggs AH(9), Sieff CA(10), Lodish HF(11),
Lander ES(12), Sankaran VG(13).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Hematology and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department 
of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
[3] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
[4] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [5]
Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. [6] Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (2)1] Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)1] Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (4)1] Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (7)Department of
Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(8)Division of Hematology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA. (9)1] Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for
Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
[2] Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(10)1] Division of Hematology and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department 
of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
[3] Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)1] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA. [2] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [3]
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. (12)1] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Systems Biology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (13)1] Division of Hematology
and Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Whitehead Institute
for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [4] Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [5] Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):703-4.

Ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency occurs in diverse human diseases including
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), congenital asplenia and T cell leukemia. Yet, how 
mutations in genes encoding ubiquitously expressed proteins such as these result 
in cell-type- and tissue-specific defects remains unknown. Here, we identify
mutations in GATA1, encoding the critical hematopoietic transcription factor
GATA-binding protein-1, that reduce levels of full-length GATA1 protein and cause
DBA in rare instances. We show that ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency, the
more common cause of DBA, can lead to decreased GATA1 mRNA translation, possibly 
resulting from a higher threshold for initiation of translation of this mRNA in
comparison with other mRNAs. In primary hematopoietic cells from patients with
mutations in RPS19, encoding ribosomal protein S19, the amplitude of a
transcriptional signature of GATA1 target genes was globally and specifically
reduced, indicating that the activity, but not the mRNA level, of GATA1 is
decreased in patients with DBA associated with mutations affecting ribosomal
proteins. Moreover, the defective hematopoiesis observed in patients with DBA
associated with ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency could be partially overcome 
by increasing GATA1 protein levels. Our results provide a paradigm by which
selective defects in translation due to mutations affecting ubiquitous ribosomal 
proteins can result in human disease.

PMCID: PMC4087046
PMID: 24952648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Sep;164A(9):2240-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36633. Epub 2014
Jun 18.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia with mandibulofacial dystostosis is heterogeneous,
including the novel DBA genes TSR2 and RPS28.

Gripp KW(1), Curry C, Olney AH, Sandoval C, Fisher J, Chong JX; UW Center for
Mendelian Genomics, Pilchman L, Sahraoui R, Stabley DL, Sol-Church K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware.

Patients with physical findings suggestive of Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) or 
mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) and macrocytic anemia diagnostic of
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) have been reported. Disease-causing genes have been
identified for TCS and other MFDs. Mutations in several ribosomal protein genes
and the transcription factor GATA1 result in DBA. However, no disease-causing
mutation had been identified in the reported patients with the combination of
TCS/MFD and DBA phenotype, and we hypothesized that pathogenic mutations in a
single gene could be identified using whole exome analysis. We studied probands
from six unrelated families. Combining exome analysis and Sanger sequencing, we
identified likely pathogenic mutations in 5/6 families. Two mutations in
unrelated families were seen in RPS26, the known DBA10 gene. One variant was
predicted to affect mRNA splicing, and the other to lead to protein truncation.
In another family a likely pathogenic X-linked mutation affecting a highly
conserved residue was found in TSR2, which encodes a direct binding partner of
RPS26. De novo mutations affecting the RPS28 start codon were found in two
unrelated probands, identifying RPS28 as a novel disease gene. We conclude that
the phenotype combining features of TCS with DBA is genetically heterogeneous.
Each of the pathogenic variants identified is predicted to impede ribosome
biogenesis, which in turn could result in altered cell growth and proliferation, 
causing abnormal embryologic development, defective erythropoiesis and reduced
growth. The phenotype combining TCS/MFD and DBA is highly variable, overlaps with
DBA and lies within the phenotypic spectrum of ribosomopathies. © 2014 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4149220
PMID: 24942156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Med Hypotheses. 2014 Aug;83(2):154-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2014.05.005. Epub 2014 
May 20.

Are GATA1 mutations occurring at random in Down syndrome transient leukemia?

Satgé D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Team Biostatistics Epidemiology Public Health, EA 2415, Oncodefi Project,
University Institute for Clinical Research, Montpellier, France. Electronic
address: danielsatge@orange.fr.

The somatic mutation theory of cancer proposes that cancer begins with a somatic 
mutation occurring at random in a single cell that then passes the mutation to
its progeny, generating a clone of premalignant cells. This clone leads to a full
malignant tumor through additional mutations and selection processes. Strikingly,
the best-documented human model of early oncogenesis, i.e., transient
myeloproliferative disorder followed by acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) in
infants with Down syndrome (DS, or trisomy 21), exhibits important discrepancies 
with the SMT. Somatic mutations in megakaryocytic precursors occur at least
100,000 times more frequently in the GATA1 gene in fetuses with DS compared to
the general population. Further, mutations are limited to GATA1 only; the general
mutation rate does not significantly differ between individuals with DS and
euploid individuals. Importantly, the mutations are also lineage-specific,
occurring only in the megakaryocytic lineage, and proliferative anomalies of the 
megakaryocytic lineage are observed before the occurrence of GATA1 mutations.
Thus, GATA1 mutations in fetuses with DS cannot be random events occurring in
normal cells. Here, transcription-associated mutagenesis is proposed as the
mechanism by which the earliest mutations of AMKL occur in DS.
Transcription-associated mutagenesis is observed in non-dividing cells when a
gene is over-expressed. The over-expression of GATA1 in the megakaryocytic
lineage in DS fetal liver cells is proposed to be the cause of targeted GATA1
somatic mutations. As transcription-associated mutagenesis is a universal
process, this mechanism may also apply to early oncogenesis in other situations, 
including after birth and following exposure to a carcinogenic agent. Thus, this 
hypothesis represents a new avenue for understanding and exploring oncogenesis in
the context of DS and in other disease states.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24880866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Sep;96(3):419-26. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2AB0314-145R. Epub 2014
May 27.

The Cebpa +37-kb enhancer directs transgene expression to myeloid progenitors and
to long-term hematopoietic stem cells.

Guo H(1), Ma O(1), Friedman AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. (2)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA afriedm2@jhmi.edu.

C/EBPa is expressed preferentially in myeloid compared with lymphoid or erythroid
cells and directs myeloid lineage specification. C/EBPa is also expressed at
lower levels in HSCs and in several nonhematopoietic tissues. The Cebpa gene has 
a conserved, 450-bp segment at +37 kb that harbors enhancer-specific epigenetic
marks and is activate in a myeloid cell line. Herein, we characterize transgenic 
C57BL/6 mice, in which the Cebpa enhancer and 845-bp promoter regulate a hCD4
reporter. FACS analysis, in vitro colony assays, and in vivo competitive and
secondary transplantation revealed that myeloid but not MEPs or lymphoid
progenitors and also functional LT-HSCs are found almost exclusively in the
Cebpa-hCD4(+) compared with hCD4(-) marrow population. hCD4(+) CMP yielded
predominantly myeloid, whereas hCD4(-) CMP generated mainly Meg/E colonies.
Providing insight into control of CMP maturation, Cebpa and Pu.1 RNAs were
preferentially expressed in hCD4(+) CMP, Scl, Gata2, Gata1, Klf1, Ets1, and Fli1 
predominated in hCD4(-) CMP, and Runx1, Myb, HoxA9, and Erg levels were similar
in both. Cebpa-hCD4 transgene expression was lacking in multiple nonhematopoietic
tissues. In summary, the +37-kb Cebpa enhancer and promoter are sufficient for
marrow myeloid progenitor and LT-HSC-specific expression.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4138201
PMID: 24868087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(12):1827-8. doi: 10.4161/cc.29324. Epub 2014 May 27.

Megakaryocytic irreversible P-TEFb activation.

Elagib KE(1), Goldfarb AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; University of Virginia School of Medicine;
Charlottesville, VA USA.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2013 Dec 23;27(6):607-20.

PMCID: PMC4111741
PMID: 24866976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Eur J Haematol. 2015 May;94(5):456-62. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12382. Epub 2014 Jun 14.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder in neonates without Down syndrome: case
report and review.

Schifferli A(1), Hitzler J, Bartholdi D, Heinimann K, Hoeller S, Diesch T, Kühne 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of haematology/oncology, University Children's Hospital Basel,
Basel, Switzerland.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) is a clonal proliferation of
megakaryoblasts, typically occurring in newborns with Down syndrome. It is
believed that TMD occurs in the presence of GATA1 mutation together with trisomy 
21. However, a limited number of patients with TMD but without Down syndrome have
been reported, all with a blast population with numeric or rarely structural
chromosome 21 abnormalities. We present the first case of a newborn boy with a
TMD without trisomy 21 and without any of the mentioned molecular or cytogenetic 
abnormalities. This case report suggests that unknown disease mechanisms may
provoke or mimic TMD. This case report is followed by a concise review of the
literature discussing the different entities and pathomechanisms of TMD and acute
megakaryocytic leukaemia in patients with or without Down syndrome.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24853125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2014 Oct;111(10):2082-94. doi: 10.1002/bit.25262. Epub 2014
Jul 14.

Dynamic transcription factor activity profiles reveal key regulatory interactions
during megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation.

Duncan MT(1), Shin S, Wu JJ, Mays Z, Weng S, Bagheri N, Miller WM, Shea LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University,
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, Illinois, 60208.

The directed differentiation toward erythroid (E) or megakaryocytic (MK) lineages
by the MK-E progenitor (MEP) could enhance the ex vivo generation of red blood
cells and platelets for therapeutic transfusions. The lineage choice at the MEP
bifurcation is controlled in large part by activity within the intracellular
signal transduction network, the output of which determines the activity of
transcription factors (TFs) and ultimately gene expression. Although many TFs
have been implicated, E or MK differentiation is a complex process requiring
multiple days, and the dynamics of TF activities during commitment and terminal
maturation are relatively unexplored. Herein, we applied a living cell array for 
the large-scale, dynamic quantification of TF activities during MEP bifurcation. 
A panel of hematopoietic TFs (GATA-1, GATA-2, SCL/TAL1, FLI-1, NF-E2, PU.1,
c-Myb) was characterized during E and MK differentiation of bipotent K562 cells. 
Dynamic TF activity profiles associated with differentiation towards each lineage
were identified, and validated with previous reports. From these activity
profiles, we show that GATA-1 is an important hub during early hemin- and
PMA-induced differentiation, and reveal several characteristic TF interactions
for E and MK differentiation that confirm regulatory mechanisms documented in the
literature. Additionally, we highlight several novel TF interactions at various
stages of E and MK differentiation. Furthermore, we investigated the mechanism by
which nicotinamide (NIC) promoted terminal MK maturation using an MK-committed
cell line, CHRF-288-11 (CHRF). Concomitant with its enhancement of ploidy, NIC
strongly enhanced the activity of three TFs with known involvement in terminal MK
maturation: FLI-1, NF-E2, and p53. Dynamic profiling of TF activity represents a 
novel tool to complement traditional assays focused on mRNA and protein
expression levels to understand progenitor cell differentiation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4232189
PMID: 24853077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2014 May 21;9(5):e98139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098139. eCollection
2014.

Identification of microRNAs regulating the developmental pathways of bone marrow 
derived mast cells.

Xiang Y(1), Eyers F(2), Young IG(3), Rosenberg HF(4), Foster PS(2), Yang M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, School of Biomedical Sciences and
Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle and Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia; Department of Physiology,
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's
Republic of China. (2)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, School of
Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle and 
Hunter Medical Research Institute, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory,
Australia. (4)Inflammation Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Allergic
Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in leukocyte differentiation,
although those utilised for specific programs and key functions remain
incompletely characterised. As a global approach to gain insights into the
potential regulatory role of miRNA in mast cell differentiation we characterised 
expression in BM cultures from the initiation of differentiation. In cultures
enriched in differentiating mast cells we characterised miRNA expression and
identified miRNA targeting the mRNA of putative factors involved in
differentiation pathways and cellular identity. Detailed pathway analysis
identified a unique miRNA network that is intimately linked to the mast cell
differentiation program.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified 86 unique miRNAs with expression
patterns that were up- or down- regulated at 5-fold or more during bone marrow
derived mast cells (BMMC) development. By employing TargetScan and MeSH
databases, we identified 524 transcripts involved in 30 canonical pathways as
potentially regulated by these specific 86 miRNAs. Furthermore, by applying
miRanda and IPA analyses, we predict that 7 specific miRNAs of this group are
directly associated with the expression of c-Kit and FceRIa and likewise, that 18
miRNAs promote expression of Mitf, GATA1 and c/EBPa three core transcription
factors that direct mast cell differentiation. Furthermore, we have identified 11
miRNAs that may regulate the expression of STATs-3, -5a/b, GATA2 and GATA3 during
differentiation, along with 13 miRNAs that target transcripts encoding Ndst2,
mMCP4 and mMCP6 and thus may regulate biosynthesis of mast cell secretory
mediators.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This investigation characterises changes in miRNA
expression in whole BM cultures during the differentiation of mast cells and
predicts functional links between miRNAs and their target mRNAs for the
regulation of development. This information provides an important resource for
further investigations of the contributions of miRNAs to mast cell
differentiation and function.

PMCID: PMC4029961
PMID: 24848502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Aug;39(2):125-35. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.05.010.
Epub 2014 May 14.

A conserved zinc finger transcription factor GATA involving in the hemocyte
production of scallop Chlamys farreri.

Yue F(1), Zhou Z(2), Wang L(2), Wang M(2), Song L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 7 Nanhai Rd., Qingdao, Shandong 266071, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 7 Nanhai Rd., Qingdao, Shandong 266071, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 7 Nanhai Rd., Qingdao, Shandong 266071, China. Electronic
address: lshsong@ms.qdio.ac.cn.

GATA are a family of transcription factors characterized by their ability to bind
to the DNA sequence "GATA", and involved in a myriad of cellular processes.
GATA1/2/3 factors are known as the hematopoietic GATA factors, which play
dominated roles in regulating hematopoiesis. In the present study, a gene
encoding GATA transcription factor (designed as CfGATA) was cloned and
characterized from the scallop Chlamys farreri. The full-length cDNA of CfGATA is
of 2058 bp encoding a predicted polypeptide of 457 amino acids with two conserved
zinc finger domains, which shared high similarity with other reported GATA1/2/3
proteins. The mRNA transcripts of CfGATA showed higher expression in gills,
hepatopancreas, hemocytes and heart, and the CfGATA protein expressed in HEK293
cells was found to be localized specifically in the nuclei. The recombinant
CfGATA protein (rCfGATA) exhibited strong ability to bind specific WGATAR DNA
sequence by electrophoretic mobility shift assay in vitro. After CfGATA gene was 
silenced by RNA interference, the hemocyte renewal rate and circulating total
hemocyte count (THC) decreased significantly, which was 7.85-fold and 19.46-fold 
lower than that of PBS control, respectively (P < 0.05). After LPS stimulation,
the expression level of CfGATA mRNA decreased significantly in the hemocytes of
PBS or EGFP dsRNA treated scallops, which was accompanied by the increase of
hemocyte renewal rate and the reduced circulating THC at 24 h. In contrast, the
hemocyte renewal rate and circulating THC did not change significantly in CfGATA 
gene interfered scallops after LPS stimulation. These results suggested that
CfGATA, as a conserved GATA1/2/3 transcription factor, plays essential roles in
regulating hemocyte production of scallop.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24835782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Blood. 2014 Jun 19;123(25):3943-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-514208. Epub 2014 
May 12.

Loss of Stat1 decreases megakaryopoiesis and favors erythropoiesis in a
JAK2-V617F-driven mouse model of MPNs.

Duek A(1), Lundberg P(1), Shimizu T(1), Grisouard J(1), Karow A(1), Kubovcakova
L(1), Hao-Shen H(1), Dirnhofer S(2), Skoda RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Experimental Hematology and. (2)Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

The interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(Stat1) pathway shows higher activity in patients with essential thrombocythemia 
(ET) than in polycythemia vera (PV) and was proposed to be promoting the ET
phenotype. We explored the phenotypic consequences of Stat1 deficiency on the
effects of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)-V617F in vivo by crossing mice expressing
JAK2-V617F with Stat1 knockout mice. JAK2-V617F;Stat1(-/-) double transgenic mice
showed higher red cell parameters and lower platelet counts compared with
JAK2-V617F;Stat1(+/+) mice. Bone marrow transplantation reproduced these
phenotypic changes in wild-type recipients, demonstrating that the effect of
Stat1 is cell-intrinsic and does not require a Stat1-deficient microenvironment. 
Deletion of Stat1 increased burst-forming unit-erythroid and reduced
colony-forming unit-megakaryocyte colony formation driven by JAK2-V617F, but was 
not sufficient to completely normalize the platelet count. Gata1, a key regulator
of megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis, was decreased in Stat1-deficient
platelets. V617F transgenic mice with thrombocytosis had higher serum levels of
IFN<U+03B3> than normal controls and patients with ET showed higher IFN<U+03B3> serum levels
than patients with PV. Together, these results support the concept that
activating Stat1 in the presence of JAK2-V617F, for example, through IFN<U+03B3>,
constrains erythroid differentiation and promotes megakaryocytic development,
resulting in ET phenotype.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 24820309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Exp Hematol. 2014 Aug;42(8):618-29. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.05.004. Epub 2014 
May 9.

Hematopoietic transcriptional mechanisms: from locus-specific to genome-wide
vantage points.

DeVilbiss AW(1), Sanalkumar R(1), Johnson KD(1), Keles S(2), Bresnick EH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Carbone Cancer Center, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA;
University of Wisconsin-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. 
(2)University of Wisconsin-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, Wisconsin,
USA; Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. (3)Carbone Cancer 
Center, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA; University of
Wisconsin-Madison Blood Research Program, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Electronic
address: ehbresni@wisc.edu.

Hematopoiesis is an exquisitely regulated process in which stem cells in the
developing embryo and the adult generate progenitor cells that give rise to all
blood lineages. Master regulatory transcription factors control hematopoiesis by 
integrating signals from the microenvironment and dynamically establishing and
maintaining genetic networks. One of the most rudimentary aspects of cell
type-specific transcription factor function, how they occupy a highly restricted 
cohort of cis-elements in chromatin, remains poorly understood. Transformative
technologic advances involving the coupling of next-generation DNA sequencing
technology with the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP-seq) have enabled
genome-wide mapping of factor occupancy patterns. However, formidable problems
remain; notably, ChIP-seq analysis yields hundreds to thousands of chromatin
sites occupied by a given transcription factor, and only a fraction of the sites 
appear to be endowed with critical, non-redundant function. It has become en
vogue to map transcription factor occupancy patterns genome-wide, while using
powerful statistical tools to establish correlations to inform biology and
mechanisms. With the advent of revolutionary genome editing technologies, one can
now reach beyond correlations to conduct definitive hypothesis testing. This
review focuses on key discoveries that have emerged during the path from single
loci to genome-wide analyses, specifically in the context of hematopoietic
transcriptional mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4125519
PMID: 24816274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS Genet. 2014 May 8;10(5):e1004339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004339.
eCollection 2014.

Biased, non-equivalent gene-proximal and -distal binding motifs of orphan nuclear
receptor TR4 in primary human erythroid cells.

Shi L(1), Sierant MC(1), Gurdziel K(2), Zhu F(3), Cui S(1), Kolodziej KE(4),
Strouboulis J(5), Guan Y(3), Tanabe O(6), Lim KC(1), Engel JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America. (2)Department of Cell and 
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America; Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
United States of America. (3)Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
United States of America. (4)PharmaMatch, Amsterdam, Netherlands. (5)Institute of
Molecular Oncology, BSRC Alexander Fleming, Varkiza, Greece. (6)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America; Department of Integrative Genomics, Tohoku
Medical Megabank, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

We previously reported that TR2 and TR4 orphan nuclear receptors bind to direct
repeat (DR) elements in the e- and <U+03B3>-globin promoters, and act as molecular
anchors for the recruitment of epigenetic corepressors of the multifaceted DRED
complex, thereby leading to e- and <U+03B3>-globin transcriptional repression during
definitive erythropoiesis. Other than the e- and <U+03B3>-globin and the GATA1 genes,
TR4-regulated target genes in human erythroid cells remain unknown. Here, we
identified TR4 binding sites genome-wide using chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) as human primary CD34(+)
hematopoietic progenitors differentiated progressively to late erythroid
precursors. We also performed whole transcriptome analyses by RNA-seq to identify
TR4 downstream targets after lentiviral-mediated TR4 shRNA knockdown in erythroid
cells. Analyses from combined ChIP-seq and RNA-seq datasets indicate that DR1
motifs are more prevalent in the proximal promoters of TR4 direct target genes,
which are involved in basic biological functions (e.g., mRNA processing,
ribosomal assembly, RNA splicing and primary metabolic processes). In contrast,
other non-DR1 repeat motifs (DR4, ER6 and IR1) are more prevalent at gene-distal 
TR4 binding sites. Of these, approximately 50% are also marked with epigenetic
chromatin signatures (such as P300, H3K27ac, H3K4me1 and H3K27me3) associated
with enhancer function. Thus, we hypothesize that TR4 regulates gene
transcription via gene-proximal DR1 sites as TR4/TR2 heterodimers, while it can
associate with novel nuclear receptor partners (such as RXR) to bind to distant
non-DR1 consensus sites. In summary, this study reveals that the TR4 regulatory
network is far more complex than previously appreciated and that TR4 regulates
basic, essential biological processes during the terminal differentiation of
human erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC4014424
PMID: 24811540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS One. 2014 May 6;9(5):e96636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096636. eCollection 
2014.

Growth factor independence 1b (gfi1b) is important for the maturation of
erythroid cells and the regulation of embryonic globin expression.

Vassen L(1), Beauchemin H(1), Lemsaddek W(1), Krongold J(2), Trudel M(1), Möröy
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 
(2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada; 
Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, IRCM, Montréal, Québec, Canada; 
Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Growth factor independence 1b (GFI1B) is a DNA binding repressor of transcription
with vital functions in hematopoiesis. Gfi1b-null embryos die at midgestation
very likely due to defects in erythro- and megakaryopoiesis. To analyze the full 
functionality of Gfi1b, we used conditionally deficient mice that harbor floxed
Gfi1b alleles and inducible (Mx-Cre, Cre-ERT) or erythroid specific (EpoR-Cre)
Cre expressing transgenes. In contrast to the germline knockout, EpoR-Cre
mediated erythroid specific ablation of Gfi1b allows full gestation, but causes
perinatal lethality with very few mice surviving to adulthood. Both the embryonic
deletion of Gfi1b by EpoR-Cre and the deletion in adult mice by Mx-Cre or Cre-ERT
leads to reduced numbers of erythroid precursors, perturbed and delayed erythroid
maturation, anemia and extramedullary erythropoiesis. Global expression analyses 
showed that the Hba-x, Hbb-bh1 and Hbb-y embryonic globin genes were upregulated 
in Gfi1b deficient TER119+ fetal liver cells over the gestation period from day
12.5-17.5 p.c. and an increased level of Hbb-bh1 and Hbb-y embryonic globin gene 
expression was even maintained in adult Gfi1b deficient mice. While the
expression of Bcl11a, a regulator of embryonic globin expression was not affected
by Gfi1b deficiency, the expression of Gata1 was reduced and the expression of
Sox6, also involved in globin switch, was almost entirely lost when Gfi1b was
absent. These findings establish Gfi1b as a regulator of embryonic globin
expression and embryonic and adult erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC4011847
PMID: 24800817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Int J Hematol. 2014 Jun;99(6):794-7. doi: 10.1007/s12185-014-1584-0. Epub 2014
Apr 26.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis in a phenotypically normal newborn with
polyclonal trisomy 21.

Corazza F(1), Astolfi A, Libri V, Franzoni M, Serravalle S, Alessandroni R,
Melchionda F, Pession A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, 
University of Bologna, Via Massarenti 11, Building 13, 40138, Bologna, Italy.

We report a rare case of transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) in a
phenotypically normal neonate. The presence of a palpable hepatomegaly prompted
in-depth laboratory tests, which revealed the presence of severe
hyperleukocytosis, with blast cells present in a peripheral blood smear. Although
no signs of Down syndrome were present, we suspected TAM. Further analysis
identified a mutation in GATA1 along with the unique finding of two different
trisomic cell lines, detected upon karyotyping; one with trisomy 21 only, and one
with trisomies 21 and 22, which was present in a subpopulation of peripheral
blood cells. These genetic abnormalities disappeared by the age of 6 months. The 
presence of two different trisomic clones may be an evidence of the polyclonal
nature of TAM in this patient.

PMID: 24771229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Br J Haematol. 2014 Sep;166(6):949-51. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12919. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

Recurrent GATA1 mutations in Diamond-Blackfan anaemia.

Klar J(1), Khalfallah A, Arzoo PS, Gazda HT, Dahl N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, BMC, Uppsala, Sweden.

PMID: 24766296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Physiol Rep. 2014 Mar 20;2(3):e00261. doi: 10.1002/phy2.261. Print 2014.

Dextran induces differentiation of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.

Obi S(1), Masuda H, Akimaru H, Shizuno T, Yamamoto K, Ando J, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine Science, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Abstract Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, the
differentiation process from circulation to adhesion has not been clarified
because circulating EPCs rarely attached to dishes in EPC cultures previously.
Here we investigated whether immature circulating EPCs differentiate into mature 
adhesive EPCs in response to dextran. When floating-circulating EPCs derived from
ex vivo expanded human cord blood were cultured with 5% and 10% dextran, they
attached to fibronectin-coated dishes and grew exponentially. The bioactivities
of adhesion, proliferation, migration, tube formation, and differentiated type of
EPC colony formation increased in EPCs exposed to dextran. The surface protein
expression rate of the endothelial markers vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2, ICAM1, VCAM1, and integrin av/ß3 increased in
EPCs exposed to dextran. The mRNA levels of VEGF-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, MMP9, and VEGF increased in EPCs treated with 
dextran. Those of endothelium-related transcription factors ID1/2, FOXM1, HEY1,
SMAD1, FOSL1, NFkB1, NRF2, HIF1A, EPAS1 increased in dextran-treated EPCs;
however, those of hematopoietic- and antiangiogenic-related transcription factors
TAL1, RUNX1, c-MYB, GATA1/2, ERG, FOXH1, HHEX, SMAD2/3 decreased in
dextran-exposed EPCs. Inhibitor analysis showed that PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38 signal transduction pathways are involved in the differentiation in response 
to dextran. In conclusion, dextran induces differentiation of circulating EPCs in
terms of adhesion, migration, proliferation, and vasculogenesis. The
differentiation mechanism in response to dextran is regulated by multiple signal 
transductions including PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. These findings indicate
that dextran is an effective treatment for EPCs in regenerative medicines.

PMCID: PMC4002241
PMID: 24760515  [PubMed]


165. Biomed Rep. 2014 May;2(3):404-407. Epub 2014 Mar 14.

Genetic variant rs1058240 at the microRNA-binding site in the GATA3 gene may
regulate its mRNA expression.

Yang F(1), Chen F(1), Gu J(2), Zhang W(1), Luo J(1), Guan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
University, Nanjing 210002, P.R. China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Jinling
Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210002, P.R. China.

The GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a member of a family of 6 GATA dual zinc
finger transcription factors (GATA1-6), which are required for the development
and morphogenesis of the mammary gland. GATA3 is considered to play a dual role
in oncogenesis and cancer development, whereas somatic GATA3 mutations have been 
reported in breast cancer. Variants of the GATA3 genetic 3' untranslated region
(3'UTR) microRNA (miRNA) binding sites have been associated with breast cancer
risk. However, the roles of genetic variants in the GATA3 gene 3'UTR and its
post-transcriptional regulation have not been fully elucidated. We discovered
that rs1058240 in the GATA3 3'UTR displayed potential miRNA binding sites and
this variant was found to be significantly associated with GATA3 mRNA expression 
(P=2.36E-07), suggesting that rs1058240 may be a putative variant mediating the
post-transcriptional regulation of the GATA3 target gene. Further studies
investigating the regulatory mechanism of GATA3 transcriptional activity are
required to design novel strategies against breast cancer cell growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3990192
PMID: 24748983  [PubMed]


166. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):1003-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.014. Epub 2014 
Jan 17.

Morphologic and GATA1 sequencing analysis of hematopoiesis in fetuses with
trisomy 21.

Hoeller S(1), Bihl MP(2), Tzankov A(2), Chaffard R(2), Hirschmann P(2), Miny
P(3), Kühne T(4), Bruder E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital of the University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. Electronic address: hoellers@uhbs.ch. (2)Department of Pathology,
Hospital of the University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (3)University Children's
Hospital, Medical Genetics, Basel, Switzerland. (4)Department of Paediatrics,
Oncology/Hematology, University Children's Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.

Trisomy 21 alters fetal liver hematopoiesis and, in combination with somatic
globin transcription factor 1 (GATA1) mutations, leads to development of
transient myeloproliferative disease in newborns. However, little is known about 
the morphological hematopoietic changes caused by trisomy 21 in the fetus, and to
date, the exact onset of GATA1 mutations remains uncertain. Therefore, we
analyzed fetal liver hematopoiesis from second trimester pregnancies in trisomy
21 and screened for GATA1 mutations. We examined 57 formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded fetal liver specimens (49 harboring trisomy 21 and 8 controls) 
by immunohistochemistry for CD34, CD61, factor VIII, and glycophorin A. GATA1
exon 2 was sequenced in fetal livers and corresponding nonhematologic tissue.
Cell counts of megakaryocytes (P = .022), megakaryocytic precursors (P = .021),
and erythroid precursors were higher in trisomy 21 cases. CD34-positive
hematopoietic blasts showed no statistically significant differences. No mutation
was detected by GATA1 exon 2 sequencing in fetal livers from 12 to 25 weeks of
gestation. Our results suggest that GATA1 exon 2 mutations occur late in trisomy 
21 fetal hematopoiesis. However, trisomy 21 alone provides a proliferative
stimulus of fetal megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis. CD34-positive precursor
cells are not increased in trisomy 21 fetal livers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24746204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Stem Cells. 2014 Aug;32(8):2278-89. doi: 10.1002/stem.1723.

EDAG positively regulates erythroid differentiation and modifies GATA1
acetylation through recruiting p300.

Zheng WW(1), Dong XM, Yin RH, Xu FF, Ning HM, Zhang MJ, Xu CW, Yang Y, Ding YL,
Wang ZD, Zhao WB, Tang LJ, Chen H, Wang XH, Zhan YQ, Yu M, Ge CH, Li CY, Yang XM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Erythroid differentiation-associated gene (EDAG) has been considered to be a
transcriptional regulator that controls hematopoietic cell differentiation,
proliferation, and apoptosis. The role of EDAG in erythroid differentiation of
primary erythroid progenitor cells and in vivo remains unknown. In this study, we
found that EDAG is highly expressed in CMPs and MEPs and upregulated during the
erythroid differentiation of CD34(+) cells following erythropoietin (EPO)
treatment. Overexpression of EDAG induced erythroid differentiation of CD34(+)
cells in vitro and in vivo using immunodeficient mice. Conversely, EDAG knockdown
reduced erythroid differentiation in EPO-treated CD34(+) cells. Detailed
mechanistic analysis suggested that EDAG forms complex with GATA1 and p300 and
increases GATA1 acetylation and transcriptional activity by facilitating the
interaction between GATA1 and p300. EDAG deletion mutants lacking the binding
domain with GATA1 or p300 failed to enhance erythroid differentiation, suggesting
that EDAG regulates erythroid differentiation partly through forming
EDAG/GATA1/p300 complex. In the presence of the specific inhibitor of p300
acetyltransferase activity, C646, EDAG was unable to accelerate erythroid
differentiation, indicating an involvement of p300 acetyltransferase activity in 
EDAG-induced erythroid differentiation. ChIP-PCR experiments confirmed that GATA1
and EDAG co-occupy GATA1-targeted genes in primary erythroid cells and in vivo.
ChIP-seq was further performed to examine the global occupancy of EDAG during
erythroid differentiation and a total of 7,133 enrichment peaks corresponding to 
3,847 genes were identified. Merging EDAG ChIP-Seq and GATA1 ChIP-Seq datasets
revealed that 782 genes overlapped. Microarray analysis suggested that EDAG
knockdown selectively inhibits GATA1-activated target genes. These data provide
novel insights into EDAG in regulation of erythroid differentiation.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24740910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Blood. 2014 Jul 17;124(3):437-40. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-01-545830. Epub 2014
Apr 15.

Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome in patients suspected to have Diamond-Blackfan
anemia.

Gagne KE(1), Ghazvinian R(2), Yuan D(2), Zon RL(1), Storm K(3), Mazur-Popinska
M(4), Andolina L(5), Bubala H(6), Golebiowska S(7), Higman MA(5), Kalwak K(4),
Kurre P(3), Matysiak M(7), Niewiadomska E(7), Pels S(8), Petruzzi MJ(5),
Pobudejska-Pieniazek A(6), Szczepanski T(6), Fleming MD(9), Gazda HT(10), Agarwal
S(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Stem Cell Program, and. (2)Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA; (3)Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute,
Oregon Stem Cell Center, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR;
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantation, Wroclaw
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland; (5)Women and Children's Hospital of Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY; (6)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Medical University
of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland; (7)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Medical University of Warsaw, Poland; (8)Pediatrics, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT; (9)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, MA; (10)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan
Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA; Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA; Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA; and. (11)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Stem Cell Program, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA;
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Jul 17;124(3):312-3.

Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome (PS) is a multisystem disorder caused by
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions. Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a
congenital hypoproliferative anemia in which mutations in ribosomal protein genes
and GATA1 have been implicated. Both syndromes share several features including
early onset of severe anemia, variable nonhematologic manifestations, sporadic
genetic occurrence, and occasional spontaneous hematologic improvement. Because
of the overlapping features and relative rarity of PS, we hypothesized that some 
patients in whom the leading clinical diagnosis is DBA actually have PS. Here, we
evaluated patient DNA samples submitted for DBA genetic studies and found that 8 
(4.6%) of 173 genetically uncharacterized patients contained large mtDNA
deletions. Only 2 (25%) of the patients had been diagnosed with PS on clinical
grounds subsequent to sample submission. We conclude that PS can be overlooked,
and that mtDNA deletion testing should be performed in the diagnostic evaluation 
of patients with congenital anemia.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4102714
PMID: 24735966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Cell Sci. 2014 Jun 15;127(Pt 12):2761-70. doi: 10.1242/jcs.145367. Epub 2014
Apr 11.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN9 regulates erythroid cell development through
STAT3 dephosphorylation in zebrafish.

Bu Y(1), Su F(2), Wang X(1), Gao H(3), Lei L(1), Chang N(1), Wu Q(1), Hu K(4),
Zhu X(1), Chang Z(2), Meng K(5), Xiong JW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine and State Key
Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Peking University, Beijing, 100871 China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane 
and Membrane Biotechnology, School of Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084 China. (3)Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic
Molecular Medicine and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs,
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, 100871 China
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing, 100094 China. (4)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100094 China. (5)Beijing Shenogen
Biomedical Company Ltd, Beijing, 100085 China kun.meng@shenogen.com
jingwei_xiong@pku.edu.cn. (6)Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular 
Medicine and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, 100871 China
kun.meng@shenogen.com jingwei_xiong@pku.edu.cn.

Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are involved in hematopoiesis, but the
function of many PTPs is not well characterized in vivo. Here, we have identified
Ptpn9a, an ortholog of human PTPN9, as a crucial regulator of erythroid cell
development in zebrafish embryos. ptpn9a, but not ptpn9b, was expressed in the
posterior lateral plate mesoderm and intermediate cell mass - two primitive
hematopoietic sites during zebrafish embryogenesis. Morpholino-mediated knockdown
of ptpn9a caused erythrocytes to be depleted by inhibiting erythroid cell
maturation without affecting erythroid proliferation and apoptosis. Consistently,
both dominant-negative PTPN9 (with mutation C515S) and siRNA against PTPN9
inhibited erythroid differentiation in human K562 cells. Mechanistically,
depletion of ptpn9 in zebrafish embryos in vivo or in K562 cells in vitro
increased phosphorylated STAT3, and the hyper-phosphorylated STAT3 entrapped and 
prevented the transcription factors GATA1 and ZBP-89 (also known as ZNF148) from 
regulating erythroid gene expression. These findings imply that PTPN9 plays an
important role in erythropoiesis by disrupting an inhibitory complex of
phosphorylated STAT3, GATA1 and ZBP-89, providing new cellular and molecular
insights into the role of ptpn9a in developmental hematopoiesis.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24727614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 3;9(4):e93643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093643. eCollection 
2014.

Stem and progenitor cell subsets are affected by JAK2 signaling and can be
monitored by flow cytometry.

Iida R(1), Welner RS(2), Zhao W(3), Alberola-lla J(1), Medina KL(4), Zhao ZJ(3), 
Kincade PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America. (2)Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Department of
Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma, United States of America. (4)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America.

Although extremely rare, hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are divisible into
subsets that differ with respect to differentiation potential and cell surface
marker expression. For example, we recently found that CD86(-) CD150(+) CD48(-)
HSCs have limited potential for lymphocyte production. This could be an important
new tool for studying hematological abnormalities. Here, we analyzed HSC subsets 
with a series of stem cell markers in JAK2V617F transgenic (Tg) mice, where the
mutation is sufficient to cause myeloproliferative neoplasia with lymphocyte
deficiency. Total numbers of HSC were elevated 3 to 20 fold in bone marrow of
JAK2V617F mice. Careful analysis suggested the accumulation involved multiple HSC
subsets, but particularly those characterized as CD150(HI) CD86(-)
CD18(L)°CD41(+) and excluding Hoechst dye. Real-Time PCR analysis of their HSC
revealed that the erythropoiesis associated gene transcripts Gata1, Klf1 and Epor
were particularly high. Flow cytometry analyses based on two differentiation
schemes for multipotent progenitors (MPP) also suggested alteration by JAK2
signals. The low CD86 on HSC and multipotent progenitors paralleled the large
reductions we found in lymphoid progenitors, but the few that were produced
functioned normally when sorted and placed in culture. Either of two HSC subsets 
conferred disease when transplanted. Thus, flow cytometry can be used to observe 
the influence of abnormal JAK2 signaling on stem and progenitor subsets. Markers 
that similarly distinguish categories of human HSCs might be very valuable for
monitoring such conditions. They could also serve as indicators of HSC fitness
and suitability for transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3974768
PMID: 24699465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Expert Rev Hematol. 2014 Jun;7(3):359-72. doi: 10.1586/17474086.2014.897923. Epub
2014 Mar 26.

Diamond Blackfan anemia: a model for the translational approach to understanding 
human disease.

Vlachos A(1), Blanc L, Lipton JM.

Author information: 
(1)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, USA.

Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA) is an inherited bone marrow failure syndrome. As
with the other rare inherited bone marrow failure syndromes, the study of these
disorders provides important insights into basic biology and, in the case of DBA,
ribosome biology; the disruption of which characterizes the disorder. Thus DBA
serves as a paradigm for translational medicine in which the efforts of
clinicians to manage DBA have informed laboratory scientists who, in turn, have
stimulated clinical researchers to utilize scientific discovery to provide
improved care. In this review we describe the clinical syndrome Diamond Blackfan 
anemia and, in particular, we demonstrate how the study of DBA has allowed
scientific inquiry to create opportunities for progress in its understanding and 
treatment.

PMID: 24665981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Blood. 2014 May 15;123(20):3080-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-01-453167. Epub 2014
Mar 20.

Erythro-megakaryocytic transcription factors associated with hereditary anemia.

Crispino JD(1), Weiss MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; and.
(2)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.

Most heritable anemias are caused by mutations in genes encoding globins, red
blood cell (RBC) membrane proteins, or enzymes in the glycolytic and hexose
monophosphate shunt pathways. A less common class of genetic anemia is caused by 
mutations that alter the functions of erythroid transcription factors (TFs). Many
TF mutations associated with heritable anemia cause truncations or amino acid
substitutions, resulting in the production of functionally altered proteins.
Characterization of these mutant proteins has provided insights into mechanisms
of gene expression, hematopoietic development, and human disease. Mutations
within promoter or enhancer regions that disrupt TF binding to essential
erythroid genes also cause anemia and heritable variations in RBC traits, such as
fetal hemoglobin content. Defining the latter may have important clinical
implications for de-repressing fetal hemoglobin synthesis to treat sickle cell
anemia and ß thalassemia. Functionally important alterations in genes encoding
TFs or their cognate cis elements are likely to occur more frequently than
currently appreciated, a hypothesis that will soon be tested through ongoing
genome-wide association studies and the rapidly expanding use of global genome
sequencing for human diagnostics. Findings obtained through such studies of RBCs 
and associated diseases are likely generalizable to many human diseases and
quantitative traits.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4023417
PMID: 24652993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 15;192(8):3936-46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302366. Epub 2014
Mar 17.

Critical Roles for PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2 in the expression of human FceRI on
mast cells: PU.1 and GATA1 transactivate FCER1A, and GATA2 transactivates FCER1A 
and MS4A2.

Inage E(1), Kasakura K, Yashiro T, Suzuki R, Baba Y, Nakano N, Hara M, Tanabe A, 
Oboki K, Matsumoto K, Saito H, Niyonsaba F, Ohtsuka Y, Ogawa H, Okumura K,
Shimizu T, Nishiyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan;

The high-affinity IgE receptor, FceRI, which is composed of a-, ß-, and <U+03B3>-chains,
plays an important role in IgE-mediated allergic responses. In the current study,
involvement of the transcription factors, PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2, in the
expression of FceRI on human mast cells was investigated. Transfection of small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) against PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2 into the human mast cell
line, LAD2, caused significant downregulation of cell surface expression of
FceRI. Quantification of the mRNA levels revealed that PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2
siRNAs suppressed the a transcript, whereas the amount of ß mRNA was reduced in
only GATA2 siRNA transfectants. In contrast, <U+03B3> mRNA levels were not affected by
any of the knockdowns. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that
significant amounts of PU.1, GATA1, and GATA2 bind to the promoter region of
FCER1A (encoding FceRIa) and that GATA2 binds to the promoter of MS4A2 (encoding 
FceRIß). Luciferase assay and EMSA showed that GATA2 transactivates the MS4A2
promoter via direct binding. These knockdowns of transcription factors also
suppressed the IgE-mediated degranulation activity of LAD2. Similarly, all three 
knockdowns suppressed FceRI expression in primary mast cells, especially PU.1
siRNA and GATA2 siRNA, which target FceRIa and FceRIß, respectively. From these
results, we conclude that PU.1 and GATA1 are involved in FceRIa transcription
through recruitment to its promoter, whereas GATA2 positively regulates FceRIß
transcription. Suppression of these transcription factors leads to downregulation
of FceRI expression and IgE-mediated degranulation activity. Our findings will
contribute to the development of new therapeutic approaches for FceRI-mediated
allergic diseases.

PMID: 24639354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Hematol. 2014 Nov;100(5):417-24. doi: 10.1007/s12185-014-1568-0. Epub 2014 
Mar 18.

A regulatory network governing Gata1 and Gata2 gene transcription orchestrates
erythroid lineage differentiation.

Moriguchi T(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku
University, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.

GATA transcription factor family members GATA1 and GATA2 play crucial roles in
the regulation of lineage-restricted genes during erythroid differentiation.
GATA1 is indispensable for survival and terminal differentiation of erythroid,
megakaryocytic and eosinophilic progenitors, whereas GATA2 regulates
proliferation and maintenance of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
Expression levels of GATA1 and GATA2 are primarily regulated at the
transcriptional level through auto- and reciprocal regulatory networks formed by 
these GATA factors. The dynamic and strictly controlled change of expression from
GATA2 to GATA1 during erythropoiesis has been referred to as GATA factor
switching, which plays a crucial role in erythropoiesis. The regulatory network
comprising GATA1 and GATA2 gives rise to the stage-specific changes in Gata1 and 
Gata2 gene expression during erythroid differentiation, which ensures specific
expression of early and late erythroid genes at each stage. Recent studies have
also shed light on the genome-wide binding profiles of GATA1 and GATA2, and the
significance of epigenetic modification of Gata1 gene during erythroid
differentiation. This review summarizes the current understanding of network
regulation underlying stage-dependent Gata1 and Gata2 gene expressions and the
functional contribution of these GATA factors in erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 24638828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Genes Cells. 2014 May;19(5):432-40. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12143. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Herbal drug ninjin'yoeito accelerates myelopoiesis but not erythropoiesis in
vitro.

Inoue T(1), Kulkeaw K, Muennu K, Tanaka Y, Nakanishi Y, Sugiyama D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development of Next Generation Medicine, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-Ku, Fukuoka,
812-8582, Japan; Department of Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-Ku, Fukuoka,
812-8582, Japan.

Some Kampo medicines that are herbal and traditional in Japan have had beneficial
effects when given to patients with anemia. However, molecular mechanisms
underlying their effects are unclear. To address this question, four Kampo
medicines used to treat anemia-ninjin'yoeito (NYT), shimotsuto (SMT),
juzentaihoto (JTT), and daibofuto (DBT)-were tested separately using in vitro
cultures of mouse bone marrow mononuclear cells. Among them, NYT was most
effective in stimulating cell proliferation and up-regulating Myc expression.
Flow cytometry analysis indicated that, among hematopoietic components of those
cultures, myeloid cells expressing CD45/Mac-1/Gr-1/F4/80 increased in number, but
Ter119/CD71 erythroid cells did not. Accordingly, real-time PCR analysis showed
up-regulation of the myeloid gene Pu.1, whereas the erythroid genes Gata1 and
Klf1 were down-regulated. Overall, these findings provide molecular evidence that
NYT accelerates myelopoiesis but not erythropoiesis in vitro.

© 2014 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2014 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24636045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014 Jul;61(7):1154-5. doi: 10.1002/pbc.25014. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

Diamond Blackfan anemia: a Cheshire cat of hematology.

Farrar JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children's Hospital, Little Rock,
Arkansas.

Comment on
    Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014 Jul;61(7):1319-21.

PMCID: PMC4255456
PMID: 24634369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 May;34(10):1812-26. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01524-13. Epub 2014 Mar 
10.

Transcription factor GATA1 is dispensable for mast cell differentiation in adult 
mice.

Ohneda K(1), Moriguchi T, Ohmori S, Ishijima Y, Satoh H, Philipsen S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and
Welfare, Takasaki, Gunma, Japan.

Although previous studies have shown that GATA1 is required for mast cell
differentiation, the effects of the complete ablation of GATA1 in mast cells have
not been examined. Using conditional Gata1 knockout mice (Gata1(-/y)), we
demonstrate here that the complete ablation of GATA1 has a minimal effect on the 
number and distribution of peripheral tissue mast cells in adult mice. The
Gata1(-/y) bone marrow cells were capable of differentiating into mast cells ex
vivo. Microarray analyses showed that the repression of GATA1 in bone marrow mast
cells (BMMCs) has a small impact on the mast cell-specific gene expression in
most cases. Interestingly, however, the expression levels of mast cell tryptases 
in the mouse chromosome 17A3.3 were uniformly reduced in the GATA1 knockdown
cells, and GATA1 was found to bind to a 500-bp region at the 5' end of this
locus. Revealing a sharp contrast to that observed in the Gata1-null BMMCs, GATA2
deficiency resulted in a significant loss of the c-Kit(+) FceRIa(+) mast cell
fraction and a reduced expression of several mast cell-specific genes.
Collectively, GATA2 plays a more important role than GATA1 in the regulation of
most mast cell-specific genes, while GATA1 might play specific roles in mast cell
functions.

PMCID: PMC4019035
PMID: 24615013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cells. 2014 Mar;37(3):213-9. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2014.2288. Epub 2014 Mar 
6.

The up-regulation of miR-199b-5p in erythroid differentiation is associated with 
GATA-1 and NF-E2.

Li Y(1), Bai H, Zhang Z, Li W, Dong L, Wei X, Ma Y, Zhang J, Yu J, Sun G, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) and Peking Union Medical College (PUMC),
National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Beijing 100005, People's
Republic of China ; Institute of Molecular Medicine, Medical School, Henan
University, KaiFeng, 475000, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent a class of small non-coding regulatory RNAs that
play important roles in normal hematopoiesis, including erythropoiesis. Although 
studies have identified several miRNAs that regulate erythroid commitment and
differentiation, we do not understand the mechanism by which the crucial
erythroid transcription factors, GATA-1and NF-E2 directly regulate and control
differentiation via miRNA pathways. In this study, we identified miR-199b-5p as a
key regulator of human erythropoiesis, and its expression was up-regulated during
the erythroid differentiation of K562 cells. Furthermore, the increase of
miR-199b-5p in erythroid cells occurred in a GATA-1- and NF-E2-dependent manner
during erythrocyte maturation. Both GATA-1 and NF-E2 bound upstream of the
miR-199b gene locus and activated its transcription. Forced expression of
miRNA-199b-5p in K562 cells affected erythroid cell proliferation and maturation.
Moreover, we identified c-Kit as a direct target of miR-199b-5p in erythroid
cells. Taken together, our results establish a functional link among the
erythroid transcription factors GATA-1/NF-E2, miR-199b-5p and c-Kit, and provide 
new insights into the coupling of transcription and post-transcription regulation
in erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3969041
PMID: 24608802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Exp Hematol. 2014 Jun;42(6):464-76.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.03.001. Epub
2014 Mar 7.

Global analysis of induced transcription factors and cofactors identifies Tfdp2
as an essential coregulator during terminal erythropoiesis.

Chen C(1), Lodish HF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. (2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic address:
lodish@wi.mit.edu.

Key transcriptional regulators of terminal erythropoiesis, such as GATA-binding
factor 1 (GATA1) and T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia protein 1 (TAL1), have
been well characterized, but transcription factors and cofactors and their
expression modulations have not yet been explored on a global scale. Here, we use
global gene expression analysis to identify 28 transcription factors and 19
transcriptional cofactors induced during terminal erythroid differentiation whose
promoters are enriched for binding by GATA1 and TAL1. Utilizing protein-protein
interaction databases to identify cofactors for each transcription factor, we
pinpoint several co-induced pairs, of which E2f2 and its cofactor transcription
factor Dp-2 (Tfdp2) were the most highly induced. TFDP2 is a critical cofactor
required for proper cell cycle control and gene expression. GATA1 and TAL1 are
bound to the regulatory regions of Tfdp2 and upregulate its expression and
knockdown of Tfdp2 results in significantly reduced rates of proliferation as
well as reduced upregulation of many erythroid-important genes. Loss of Tfdp2
also globally inhibits the normal downregulation of many E2F2 target genes,
including those that regulate the cell cycle, causing cells to accumulate in S
phase and resulting in increased erythrocyte size. Our findings highlight the
importance of TFDP2 in coupling the erythroid cell cycle with terminal
differentiation and validate this study as a resource for future work on
elucidating the role of diverse transcription factors and coregulators in
erythropoiesis.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4071162
PMID: 24607859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 May;50:112-22. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.02.019.
Epub 2014 Mar 1.

Identification of NuRSERY, a new functional HDAC complex composed by HDAC5,
GATA1, EKLF and pERK present in human erythroid cells.

Varricchio L(1), Dell'Aversana C(2), Nebbioso A(3), Migliaccio G(4), Altucci
L(5), Mai A(6), Grazzini G(7), Bieker JJ(8), Migliaccio AR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy, New 
York, NY, USA. (2)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, "Adriano Buzzati
Traverso", IGB, P. Castellino 111, Italy. (3)Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, L. De Crecchio 7, 
Naples, Italy. (4)Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Istituto Superiore di Sanita',
Viale Regina Elena 299, Italy. (5)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, "Adriano 
Buzzati Traverso", IGB, P. Castellino 111, Italy; Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, L. De Crecchio 7, 
Naples, Italy. (6)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di
Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, Università "Sapienza", P.le A. Moro 5, Italy.
(7)Centro Nazionale Sangue, via Giano della Bella 27, Rome, Italy.
(8)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One
Gustave L. Levy, New York, NY, USA. (9)Hematology/Oncology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy, New York, NY, USA; Hematology, Oncology and
Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanita', Viale Regina Elena 299, Italy.
Electronic address: annarita.migliaccio@mssm.edu.

To clarify the role of HDACs in erythropoiesis, expression, activity and function
of class I (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3) and class IIa (HDAC4, HDAC5) HDACs during in
vitro maturation of human erythroblasts were compared. During erythroid
maturation, expression of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 remained constant and activity
and GATA1 association (its partner of the NuRD complex), of HDAC1 increased. By
contrast, HDAC4 content drastically decreased and HDAC5 remained constant in
content but decreased in activity. In erythroid cells, pull down experiments
identified the presence of a novel complex formed by HDAC5, GATA1, EKLF and pERK 
which was instead undetectable in cells of the megakaryocytic lineage. With
erythroid maturation, association among HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF persisted but
levels of pERK sharply decreased. Treatment of erythroleukemic cells with
inhibitors of ERK phosphorylation reduced by >90% the total and nuclear content
of HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF, suggesting that ERK phosphorylation is required for the
formation of this complex. Based on the function of class IIa HDACs as chaperones
of other proteins to the nucleus and the erythroid-specificity of HDAC5
localization, this novel HDAC complex was named nuclear remodeling shuttle
erythroid (NuRSERY). Exposure of erythroid cells to the class II-selective HDAC
inhibitor (HDACi) APHA9 increased <U+03B3>/(<U+03B3>+ß) globin expression ratios (Mai et al.,
2007), suggesting that NuRSERY may regulate globin gene expression. In agreement 
with this hypothesis, exposure of erythroid cells to APHA9 greatly reduced the
association among HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF. Since exposure to APHA9 did not affect
survival rates or p21 activation, NuRSERY may represent a novel, possibly less
toxic, target for epigenetic therapies of hemoglobinopaties and other disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4003889
PMID: 24594363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 31;8(7):e70022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070022. Print 2013.

Zinc finger protein 148 is dispensable for primitive and definitive hematopoiesis
in mice.

Nilton A(1), Sayin VI, Staffas A, Larsson E, Rolf J, Petit MM, Palmqvist L,
Swolin B, Cardell S, Lindahl P.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at the
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Hematopoiesis is regulated by transcription factors that induce cell fate and
differentiation in hematopoietic stem cells into fully differentiated
hematopoietic cell types. The transcription factor zinc finger protein 148
(Zfp148) interacts with the hematopoietic transcription factor Gata1 and has been
implicated to play an important role in primitive and definitive hematopoiesis in
zebra fish and mouse chimeras. We have recently created a gene-trap knockout
mouse model deficient for Zfp148, opening up for analyses of hematopoiesis in a
conventional loss-of-function model in vivo. Here, we show that Zfp148-deficient 
neonatal and adult mice have normal or slightly increased levels of hemoglobin,
hematocrit, platelets and white blood cells, compared to wild type controls.
Hematopoietic lineages in bone marrow, thymus and spleen from Zfp148 (gt/gt) mice
were further investigated by flow cytometry. There were no differences in T-cells
(CD4 and CD8 single positive cells, CD4 and CD8 double negative/positive cells)
in either organ. However, the fraction of CD69- and B220-positive cells among
lymphocytes in spleen was slightly lower at postnatal day 14 in Zfp148 (gt/gt)
mice compared to wild type mice. Our results demonstrate that Zfp148-deficient
mice generate normal mature hematopoietic populations thus challenging earlier
studies indicating that Zfp148 plays a critical role during hematopoietic
development.

PMCID: PMC3729454
PMID: 23936136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Haematologica. 2014 Feb;99(2):252-61. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.085449. Epub
2013 Aug 9.

Identification of a novel erythroid-specific enhancer for the ALAS2 gene and its 
loss-of-function mutation which is associated with congenital sideroblastic
anemia.

Kaneko K(1), Furuyama K, Fujiwara T, Kobayashi R, Ishida H, Harigae H, Shibahara 
S.

Author information: 
(1)furuyama@iwate-med.ac.jp.

Erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS2) is the rate-limiting enzyme
for heme biosynthesis in erythroid cells, and a missense mutation of the ALAS2
gene is associated with congenital sideroblastic anemia. However, the gene
responsible for this form of anemia remains unclear in about 40% of patients.
Here, we identify a novel erythroid-specific enhancer of 130 base pairs in the
first intron of the ALAS2 gene. The newly identified enhancer contains a
cis-acting element that is bound by the erythroid-specific transcription factor
GATA1, as confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis in vivo and by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay in vitro. A promoter activity assay in K562 
human erythroleukemia cells revealed that the presence of this 130-base pair
region increased the promoter activity of the ALAS2 gene by 10-15-fold.
Importantly, two mutations, each of which disrupts the GATA-binding site in the
enhancer, were identified in unrelated male patients with congenital
sideroblastic anemia, and the lower expression level of ALAS2 mRNA in bone marrow
erythroblasts was confirmed in one of these patients. Moreover, GATA1 failed to
bind to each mutant sequence at the GATA-binding site, and each mutation
abolished the enhancer function on ALAS2 promoter activity in K562 cells. Thus, a
mutation at the GATA-binding site in this enhancer may cause congenital
sideroblastic anemia. These results suggest that the newly identified intronic
enhancer is essential for the expression of the ALAS2 gene in erythroid cells. We
propose that the 130-base pair enhancer region located in the first intron of the
ALAS2 gene should be examined in patients with congenital sideroblastic anemia in
whom the gene responsible is unknown.

PMCID: PMC3912954
PMID: 23935018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2013 Dec;51(4):277-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2013.07.008. Epub
2013 Aug 7.

The impact of trisomy 21 on foetal haematopoiesis.

Roberts I(1), O'Connor D, Roy A, Cowan G, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haematology, Imperial College London, UK. Electronic address:
irene.roberts@imperial.ac.uk.

The high frequency of a unique neonatal preleukaemic syndrome, transient abnormal
myelopoiesis (TAM), and subsequent acute myeloid leukaemia in early childhood in 
patients with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) points to a specific role for trisomy 21
in transforming foetal haematopoietic cells. N-terminal truncating mutations in
the key haematopoietic transcription factor GATA1 are acquired during foetal life
in virtually every case. These mutations are not leukaemogenic in the absence of 
trisomy 21. In mouse models, deregulated expression of chromosome 21-encoded
genes is implicated in leukaemic transformation, but does not recapitulate the
effects of trisomy 21 in a human context. Recent work using primary human foetal 
liver and bone marrow cells, human embryonic stem cells and iPS cells shows that 
prior to acquisition of GATA1 mutations, trisomy 21 itself alters human foetal
haematopoietic stem cell and progenitor cell biology causing multiple
abnormalities in myelopoiesis and B-lymphopoiesis. The molecular basis by which
trisomy 21 exerts these effects is likely to be extremely complex, to be
tissue-specific and lineage-specific and to be dependent on ontogeny-related
characteristics of the foetal microenvironment.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC4727253
PMID: 23932236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Transplant. 2013 Oct;13(10):2696-702. doi: 10.1111/ajt.12404. Epub 2013 Aug 
6.

Eosinophils are not required for the induction and maintenance of an alloantibody
response.

Cravedi P(1), Lessman DA, Heeger PS.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY.

Comment in
    Am J Transplant. 2014 Feb;14(2):492-3.
    Am J Transplant. 2013 Oct;13(10):2522-3.

Eosinophil-produced cytokines have been shown to participate in the maintenance
of antigen-specific plasma cells (PC) in bone marrow (BM), suggesting that
eosinophils are required in the development and/or maintenance of alloantibody
responses posttransplant. To test this hypothesis, we sensitized
eosinophil-deficient <U+0394>dblGATA1 mice and wild-type (WT) control mice with
allogeneic splenocytes or with allogeneic heart grafts and compared the kinetics 
and titers of serum donor-specific antibodies (DSA), as well as BM and spleen
CD130 + B220 low PC populations between groups. Spleen cells from naïve <U+0394>dblGATA1
BALB/c mice contained higher percentages of PC than WT without detectable
differences in BM PCs. After sensitization with allogeneic splenocytes, BALB/c
<U+0394>dblGATA1 mice contained fewer BM PCs but more splenic PCs compared to controls. 
These differences were associated with modestly lower titers of serum DSA 4 and
12 weeks after sensitization but secondary immunizations induced similar
increases in both groups. Moreover, the kinetics and strength of DSA did not
differ in WT and <U+0394>dblGATA1 BALB/c mice transplanted with B6 cardiac allografts,
nor did they differ in transplanted <U+0394>dblGATA1 and WT mice on a B6 background.
Therefore, eosinophils are not required for alloantibody formation or maintenance
in mice and are thus unlikely to be effective targets for antibody
desensitization.

© Copyright 2013 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

PMCID: PMC3805706
PMID: 23919628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Am J Transplant. 2013 Oct;13(10):2522-3. doi: 10.1111/ajt.12402. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

Eosinophil-targeted therapy: not the panacea for antibody-mediated rejection?

Kers J(1), Florquin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment on
    Am J Transplant. 2013 Oct;13(10):2696-702.

PMID: 23919601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Genes Cells. 2013 Nov;18(11):921-33. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12086. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

GATA factor switching from GATA2 to GATA1 contributes to erythroid
differentiation.

Suzuki M(1), Kobayashi-Osaki M, Tsutsumi S, Pan X, Ohmori S, Takai J, Moriguchi
T, Ohneda O, Ohneda K, Shimizu R, Kanki Y, Kodama T, Aburatani H, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan; Center for Radioisotope Sciences, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan; Department of
Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
980-8575, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA2 is highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and
progenitors, whereas its expression declines after erythroid commitment of
progenitors. In contrast, the start of GATA1 expression coincides with the
erythroid commitment and increases along with the erythroid differentiation. We
refer this dynamic transition of GATA factor expression to as the 'GATA factor
switching'. Here, we examined contribution of the GATA factor switching to the
erythroid differentiation. In Gata1-knockdown embryos that concomitantly express 
Gata2-GFP reporter, high-level expression of GFP reporter was detected in
accumulated immature hematopoietic cells with impaired differentiation,
demonstrating that GATA1 represses Gata2 gene expression in hematopoietic
progenitors in vivo. We have conducted chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on
microarray analyses of GATA2 and GATA1, and results indicate that the
GATA1-binding sites widely overlap with the sites pre-occupied by GATA2 before
the GATA1 expression. Importantly, erythroid genes harboring GATA boxes bound by 
both GATA1 and GATA2 tend to be expressed in immature erythroid cells, whereas
those harboring GATA boxes to which GATA1 binds highly but GATA2 binds only
weakly are important for the mature erythroid cell function. Our results thus
support the contention that preceding binding of GATA2 helps the following
binding of GATA1 and thereby secures smooth expression of the transient-phase
genes.

© 2013 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2013 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23911012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Genes Cells. 2013 Oct;18(10):886-98. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12084. Epub 2013 Jul 25.

Establishment of erythroleukemic GAK14 cells and characterization of GATA1
N-terminal domain.

Mukai HY(1), Suzuki M, Nagano M, Ohmori S, Otsuki A, Tsuchida K, Moriguchi T,
Ohneda K, Shimizu R, Ohneda O, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, Center for Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 305-8577, Japan; Department of
Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
980-8575, Japan.

GATA1 is a transcription factor essential for erythropoiesis and
megakaryopoiesis. It has been found that Gata1 gene knockdown heterozygous female
(Gata1(G1.05/+)) mice spontaneously develop erythroblastic leukemias. In this
study, we have generated a novel Gata1 knockdown erythroblastic cell line,
designated GAK14, from the leukemia cells in the Gata1(G1.05/+) mice. Although
GAK14 cells maintain immature phenotype on OP9 stromal cells in the presence of
erythropoietin and stem cell factor, the cells produce Gr-1-, Mac1-, B220-, CD3e-
or CD49b-positive hematopoietic cells when co-cultured with DAS104-8 feeder
cells. However, GAK14 cells did not produce erythroid and megakaryocytic
lineages, perhaps due to the absence of GATA1. Indeed, GAK14 cells became capable
of differentiating into mature erythroid cells when complemented with full-length
GATA1 and co-cultured with fetal liver-derived FLS5 stromal cells. This
differentiation potential was impaired when GATA1 lacking the N-terminal domain
was complemented. The N-terminal domain is known to contribute to the
pathogenesis of transient abnormal myelopoiesis and acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia related to Down syndrome. These results thus showed that GAK14 cells
will serve as a powerful tool for dissecting domain function of GATA1 and that
the GATA1 N-terminal domain is essential for the erythroid differentiation of
GAK14 cells.

© 2013 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2013 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23890289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 10;8(7):e68601. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068601. Print 2013.

Overexpression of GATA1 confers resistance to chemotherapy in acute
megakaryocytic Leukemia.

Caldwell JT(1), Edwards H, Dombkowski AA, Buck SA, Matherly LH, Ge Y, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of
America.

It has been previously shown that acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients with
higher levels of GATA1 expression have poorer outcomes. Furthermore, pediatric
Down syndrome (DS) patients with acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL), whose
blast cells almost universally harbor somatic mutations in exon 2 of the
transcription factor gene GATA1, demonstrate increased overall survival relative 
to non-DS pediatric patients, suggesting a potential role for GATA1 in
chemotherapy response. In this study, we confirmed that amongst non-DS patients, 
GATA1 transcripts were significantly higher in AMKL blasts compared to blasts
from other AML subgroups. Further, GATA1 transcript levels significantly
correlated with transcript levels for the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL in our
patient cohort. ShRNA knockdown of GATA1 in the megakaryocytic cell line Meg-01
resulted in significantly increased cytarabine (ara-C) and daunorubicin
anti-proliferative sensitivities and decreased Bcl-xL transcript and protein
levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and reporter gene assays
demonstrated that the Bcl-x gene (which transcribes the Bcl-xL transcripts) is a 
bona fide GATA1 target gene in AMKL cells. Treatment of the Meg-01 cells with the
histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic acid resulted in down-regulation of both
GATA1 and Bcl-xL and significantly enhanced ara-C sensitivity. Furthermore,
additional GATA1 target genes were identified by oligonucleotide microarray and
ChIP-on-Chip analyses. Our findings demonstrate a role for GATA1 in chemotherapy 
resistance in non-DS AMKL cells, and identified additional GATA1 target genes for
future studies.

PMCID: PMC3707876
PMID: 23874683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul 1. pii: 40609. doi: 10.1172/JCI40609. [Epub ahead of
print]

Developmental differences in IFN signaling affect GATA1s-induced megakaryocyte
hyperproliferation.

Woo AJ, Wieland K, Huang H, Akie TE, Piers T, Kim J, Cantor AB.

About 10% of Down syndrome (DS) infants are born with a transient
myeloproliferative disorder (DS-TMD) that spontaneously resolves within the first
few months of life. About 20%-30% of these infants subsequently develop acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL). Somatic mutations leading to the exclusive
production of a short GATA1 isoform (GATA1s) occur in all cases of DS-TMD and
DS-AMKL. Mice engineered to exclusively produce GATA1s have marked megakaryocytic
progenitor (MkP) hyperproliferation during early fetal liver (FL) hematopoiesis, 
but not during postnatal BM hematopoiesis, mirroring the spontaneous resolution
of DS-TMD. The mechanisms that underlie these developmental stage-specific
effects are incompletely understood. Here, we report a striking upregulation of
type I IFN-responsive gene expression in prospectively isolated mouse BM- versus 
FL-derived MkPs. Exogenous IFN-a markedly reduced the hyperproliferation
FL-derived MkPs of GATA1s mice in vitro. Conversely, deletion of the a/ß IFN
receptor 1 (Ifnar1) gene or injection of neutralizing IFN-a/ß antibodies
increased the proliferation of BM-derived MkPs of GATA1s mice beyond the initial 
postnatal period. We also found that these differences existed in human FL versus
BM megakaryocytes and that primary DS-TMD cells expressed type I IFN-responsive
genes. We propose that increased type I IFN signaling contributes to the
developmental stage-specific effects of GATA1s and possibly the spontaneous
resolution of DS-TMD.

PMCID: PMC3726146
PMID: 23863621  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


250. Genome Biol. 2013 Apr 29;14(4):R38. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-4-r38.

jMOSAiCS: joint analysis of multiple ChIP-seq datasets.

Zeng X, Sanalkumar R, Bresnick EH, Li H, Chang Q, Keles S.

The ChIP-seq technique enables genome-wide mapping of in vivo protein-DNA
interactions and chromatin states. Current analytical approaches for ChIP-seq
analysis are largely geared towards single-sample investigations, and have
limited applicability in comparative settings that aim to identify combinatorial 
patterns of enrichment across multiple datasets. We describe a novel
probabilistic method, jMOSAiCS, for jointly analyzing multiple ChIP-seq datasets.
We demonstrate its usefulness with a wide range of data-driven computational
experiments and with a case study of histone modifications on GATA1-occupied
segments during erythroid differentiation. jMOSAiCS is open source software and
can be downloaded from Bioconductor 1.

PMCID: PMC4053760
PMID: 23844871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2013 Sep 1;3(9):a015412. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a015412.

Transcriptional mechanisms underlying hemoglobin synthesis.

Katsumura KR(1), DeVilbiss AW, Pope NJ, Johnson KD, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, UW-Madison Blood Research
Program, Wisconsin Institute for Medical Research, Carbone Cancer Center,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 
53705.

The physiological switch in expression of the embryonic, fetal, and adult ß-like 
globin genes has garnered enormous attention from investigators interested in
transcriptional mechanisms and the molecular basis of hemoglobinopathies. These
efforts have led to the discovery of cell type-specific transcription factors,
unprecedented mechanisms of transcriptional coregulator function, genome biology 
principles, unique contributions of nuclear organization to transcription and
cell function, and promising therapeutic targets. Given the vast literature
accrued on this topic, this article will focus on the master regulator of
erythroid cell development and function GATA-1, its associated proteins, and its 
frontline role in controlling hemoglobin synthesis. GATA-1 is a crucial regulator
of genes encoding hemoglobin subunits and heme biosynthetic enzymes.
GATA-1-dependent mechanisms constitute an essential regulatory core that
nucleates additional mechanisms to achieve the physiological control of
hemoglobin synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3753722
PMID: 23838521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Bioinformatics. 2013 Jul 1;29(13):i80-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt243.

Hard-wired heterogeneity in blood stem cells revealed using a dynamic regulatory 
network model.

Bonzanni N(1), Garg A, Feenstra KA, Schütte J, Kinston S, Miranda-Saavedra D,
Heringa J, Xenarios I, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)IBIVU Centre for Integrative Bioinformatics, VU University Amsterdam, AIMMS
Amsterdam Institute for Molecules Medicines and Systems, VU University Amsterdam,
De Boelelaan 1081, NKI-AVL The Netherlands.

MOTIVATION: Combinatorial interactions of transcription factors with
cis-regulatory elements control the dynamic progression through successive
cellular states and thus underpin all metazoan development. The construction of
network models of cis-regulatory elements, therefore, has the potential to
generate fundamental insights into cellular fate and differentiation.
Haematopoiesis has long served as a model system to study mammalian
differentiation, yet modelling based on experimentally informed cis-regulatory
interactions has so far been restricted to pairs of interacting factors. Here, we
have generated a Boolean network model based on detailed cis-regulatory
functional data connecting 11 haematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HSPC)
regulator genes.
RESULTS: Despite its apparent simplicity, the model exhibits surprisingly complex
behaviour that we charted using strongly connected components and shortest-path
analysis in its Boolean state space. This analysis of our model predicts that
HSPCs display heterogeneous expression patterns and possess many intermediate
states that can act as 'stepping stones' for the HSPC to achieve a final
differentiated state. Importantly, an external perturbation or 'trigger' is
required to exit the stem cell state, with distinct triggers characterizing
maturation into the various different lineages. By focusing on intermediate
states occurring during erythrocyte differentiation, from our model we predicted 
a novel negative regulation of Fli1 by Gata1, which we confirmed experimentally
thus validating our model. In conclusion, we demonstrate that an advanced
mammalian regulatory network model based on experimentally validated
cis-regulatory interactions has allowed us to make novel, experimentally testable
hypotheses about transcriptional mechanisms that control differentiation of
mammalian stem cells.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC3694641
PMID: 23813012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hum Genet. 2013 Nov;132(11):1265-74. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1326-z. Epub 2013
Jun 30.

Novel deletion of RPL15 identified by array-comparative genomic hybridization in 
Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

Landowski M(1), O'Donohue MF, Buros C, Ghazvinian R, Montel-Lehry N, Vlachos A,
Sieff CA, Newburger PE, Niewiadomska E, Matysiak M, Glader B, Atsidaftos E,
Lipton JM, Beggs AH, Gleizes PE, Gazda HT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Program in Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan
Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is an inherited red blood cell aplasia that usually
presents during the first year of life. The main features of the disease are
normochromic and macrocytic anemia, reticulocytopenia, and nearly absent
erythroid progenitors in the bone marrow. The patients also present with growth
retardation and craniofacial, upper limb, heart and urinary system congenital
malformations in ~30-50 % of cases. The disease has been associated with point
mutations and large deletions in ten ribosomal protein (RP) genes RPS19, RPS24,
RPS17, RPL35A, RPL5, RPL11, RPS7, RPS10, RPS26, and RPL26 and GATA1 in about
60-65 % of patients. Here, we report a novel large deletion in RPL15, a gene not 
previously implicated to be causative in DBA. Like RPL26, RPL15 presents the
distinctive feature of being required both for 60S subunit formation and for
efficient cleavage of the internal transcribed spacer 1. In addition, we detected
five deletions in RP genes in which mutations have been previously shown to cause
DBA: one each in RPS19, RPS24, and RPS26, and two in RPS17. Pre-ribosomal RNA
processing was affected in cells established from the patients bearing these
deletions, suggesting a possible molecular basis for their pathological effect.
These data identify RPL15 as a new gene involved in DBA and further support the
presence of large deletions in RP genes in DBA patients.

PMCID: PMC3797874
PMID: 23812780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Oct;41(2):230-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Expressions of transcription factors in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.)
macrophages and their progenitors.

Katzenback BA(1), Foroutanpay BV, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The development of macrophages is a highly regulated process requiring
coordination amongst transcription factors. The presence/absence, relative
levels, antagonism, or synergy of all transcription factors involved is critical 
to directing lineage cell fate and differentiation. While relative levels of many
key myeloid transcription factors have been determined in mammalian macrophage
differentiation, a similar set of studies have yet to be conducted in a teleost
system. In this study, we report on the mRNA levels of transcription factors
(cebpa, cjun, cmyb, egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1) 
in sorted goldfish progenitor cells, monocytes, and macrophages from primary
kidney macrophage cultures. The mRNA levels of runx1 and pu.1 were significantly 
higher, gata3 and pax5 mRNA levels were lower, in monocytes compared to
progenitors, and the mRNA levels of cjun, egr1, gata2, gata3, mafb and pax5 were 
significantly decreased in macrophages compared to progenitor cells. The relative
mRNA levels of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors, 
irf1, irf2, irf5, irf7, irf8 and irf9 in sorted progenitors, monocytes and
macrophages were also measured. In contrast to other irf family transcription
factors examined, irf8 mRNA levels were increased in monocytes compared to
progenitors by greater than three-fold, suggesting that irf8 is important for
monopoiesis. Lastly, we show the differential regulation of myeloid transcription
factor mRNA levels in sorted progenitor cells from 1, 2, or 3-day old cultures in
response to the recombinant goldfish growth factors, rgCSF-1 and rgKITLA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e65614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065614. Print 2013.

Latent transforming growth factor ß-binding protein 4 is downregulated in
esophageal cancer via promoter methylation.

Bultmann I(1), Conradi A, Kretschmer C, Sterner-Kock A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany.

Latent transforming growth factor ß-binding protein 4 (LTBP4) is an extracellular
matrix molecule that is a member of important connective tissue networks and is
needed for the correct folding and the secretion of TGF-ß1. LTBP4 is
downregulated in carcinomas of various tissues. Here we show that LTBP4 is also
downregulated in adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus in
vitro and in vivo. Re-expression of LTBP4 in esophageal cancer cell lines reduced
cell migration ability, whereas cell viability and cell proliferation remained
unchanged. Hypermethylation of the promoter regions of the two main human LTBP4
transcriptional forms, LTBP4L and LTBP4S, was found to be involved in LTBP4
silencing. Detailed investigations of the methylation patterns of the promoter
regions of LTBP4L and LTBP4S identified GATA1, SP1, E2F4 and SMAD3 as potential
transcription factors involved in LTBP4 expression. In in vitro transcription
factor activity studies we discovered E2F4 as novel powerful regulator for LTBP4S
expression.

PMCID: PMC3669142
PMID: 23741501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Blood. 2013 Jul 25;122(4):554-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-491936. Epub 2013
Jun 3.

Exome sequencing identifies putative drivers of progression of transient
myeloproliferative disorder to AMKL in infants with Down syndrome.

Nikolaev SI(1), Santoni F, Vannier A, Falconnet E, Giarin E, Basso G, Hoischen A,
Veltman JA, Groet J, Nizetic D, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland.

Some neonates with Down syndrome (DS) are diagnosed with self-regressing
transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD), and 20% to 30% of those progress to 
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). We performed exome sequencing in 7
TMD/AMKL cases and copy-number analysis in these and 10 additional cases. All
TMD/AMKL samples contained GATA1 mutations. No exome-sequenced TMD/AMKL sample
had other recurrently mutated genes. However, 2 of 5 TMD cases, and all AMKL
cases, showed mutations/deletions other than GATA1, in genes proven as
transformation drivers in non-DS leukemia (EZH2, APC, FLT3, JAK1, PARK2-PACRG,
EXT1, DLEC1, and SMC3). One patient at the TMD stage revealed 2 clonal expansions
with different GATA1 mutations, of which 1 clone had an additional driver
mutation. Interestingly, it was the other clone that gave rise to AMKL after
accumulating mutations in 7 other genes. Data suggest that GATA1 mutations alone 
are sufficient for clonal expansions, and additional driver mutations at the TMD 
stage do not necessarily predict AMKL progression. Later in infancy, leukemic
progression requires "third-hit driver" mutations/somatic copy-number alterations
found in non-DS leukemias. Putative driver mutations affecting WNT
(wingless-related integration site), JAK-STAT (Janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription), or MAPK/PI3K (mitogen-activated
kinase/phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase) pathways were found in all cases, aberrant 
activation of which converges on overexpression of MYC.

PMID: 23733339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3064-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00296-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
3.

Direct protein interactions are responsible for Ikaros-GATA and Ikaros-Cdk9
cooperativeness in hematopoietic cells.

Bottardi S(1), Mavoungou L, Bourgoin V, Mashtalir N, Affar el B, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, 
and Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Ikaros (Ik) is a critical regulator of hematopoietic gene expression. Here, we
established that the Ik interactions with GATA transcription factors and
cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), a component of the positive transcription
elongation factor b (P-TEFb), are required for transcriptional activation of Ik
target genes. A detailed dissection of Ik-GATA and Ik-Cdk9 protein interactions
indicated that the C-terminal zinc finger domain of Ik interacts directly with
the C-terminal zinc fingers of GATA1, GATA2, and GATA3, whereas the N-terminal
zinc finger domain of Ik is required for interaction with the kinase and T-loop
domains of Cdk9. The relevance of these interactions was demonstrated in vivo in 
COS-7 and primary hematopoietic cells, in which Ik facilitated Cdk9 and GATA
protein recruitment to gene promoters and transcriptional activation. Moreover,
the oncogenic isoform Ik6 did not efficiently interact with Cdk9 or GATA proteins
in vivo and perturbed Cdk9/P-TEFb recruitment to Ik target genes, thereby
affecting transcription elongation. Finally, characterization of a novel nuclear 
Ik isoform revealed that Ik exon 6 is dispensable for interactions with Mi2 and
GATA proteins but is essential for the Cdk9 interaction. Thus, Ik is central to
the Ik-GATA-Cdk9 regulatory network, which is broadly utilized for gene
regulation in hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC3753914
PMID: 23732910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Am J Hematol. 2013 Sep;88(9):723-9. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23487. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Transcriptomic and phospho-proteomic analyzes of erythroblasts expanded in vitro 
from normal donors and from patients with polycythemia vera.

Hricik T(1), Federici G, Zeuner A, Alimena G, Tafuri A, Tirelli V, Varricchio L, 
Masiello F, Ciaffoni F, Vaglio S, Petricoin EF, Girelli G, Levine RL, Migliaccio 
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Erythropoiesis is a tightly regulated process which becomes decoupled from its
normal differentiation program in patients with polycythemia vera (PV). Somatic
mutations in JAK2 are commonly associated with this myeloid proliferative
disorder. To gain insight into the molecular events that are required for
abnormally developing erythroid cells to escape dependence on normal growth
signals, we performed in vitro expansion of mature erythroblasts (ERY) from seven
normal healthy donors and from seven polycythemic patients in the presence of
IL3, EPO, SCF for 10, 11, or 13 days. Normal ERYs required exposure to the
glucocorticoid dexamethasone (Dex) for expansion, while PV-derived ERYs expanded 
in the absence of dexamethasone. RNA expression profiling revealed enrichment of 
two known oncogenes, GPR56 and RAB4a, in PV-derived ERYs along with reduced
expression levels of transcription factor TAL1 (ANOVA FDR < 0.05). While both
normal and polycythemic-derived ERYs integrated signaling cascades for growth,
they did so via different signaling pathways which are represented by their
differential phospho-profiles. Our results show that normal ERYs displayed
greater levels of phosphorylation of EGFR, PDGFRß, TGFß, and cKit, while
PV-derived ERYs were characterized by increased phosphorylation of cytoplasmic
kinases in the JAK/STAT, PI3K, and GATA1 pathways. Together these data suggest
that PV erythroblast expansion and maturation may be maintained and enriched in
the absence of dexamethasone through reduced TAL1 expression and by accessing
additional signaling cascades. Members of this acquired repertoire may provide
important insight into the pathogenesis of aberrant erythropoiesis in
myeloproliferative neoplasms such as polycythemia vera.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3771389
PMID: 23720412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Blood. 2013 Aug 8;122(6):988-98. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-10-460998. Epub 2013 May
29.

Perturbation of fetal hematopoiesis in a mouse model of Down syndrome's transient
myeloproliferative disorder.

Birger Y(1), Goldberg L, Chlon TM, Goldenson B, Muler I, Schiby G, Jacob-Hirsch
J, Rechavi G, Crispino JD, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.

Children with Down syndrome develop a unique congenital clonal megakaryocytic
proliferation disorder (transient myeloproliferative disorder [TMD]). It is
caused by an expansion of fetal megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors (MEPs)
triggered by trisomy of chromosome 21 and is further enhanced by the somatic
acquisition of a mutation in GATA1. These mutations result in the expression of a
short-isoform GATA1s lacking the N-terminal domain. To examine the hypothesis
that the Hsa21 ETS transcription factor ERG cooperates with GATA1s in this
process, we generated double-transgenic mice expressing hERG and Gata1s. We show 
that increased expression of ERG by itself is sufficient to induce expansion of
MEPs in fetal livers. Gata1s expression synergizes with ERG in enhancing the
expansion of fetal MEPs and megakaryocytic precursors, resulting in hepatic
fibrosis, transient postnatal thrombocytosis, anemia, a gene expression profile
that is similar to that of human TMD and progression to progenitor myeloid
leukemia by 3 months of age. This ERG/Gata1s transgenic mouse model also uncovers
an essential role for the N terminus of Gata1 in erythropoiesis and the
antagonistic role of ERG in fetal erythroid differentiation and survival. The
human relevance of this finding is underscored by the recent discovery of similar
mutations in GATA1 in patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

PMCID: PMC3739041
PMID: 23719302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. PLoS One. 2013 May 22;8(5):e64269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064269. Print 2013.

Constitutive phosphorylation of GATA-1 at serine²6 attenuates the colony-forming 
activity of erythrocyte-committed progenitors.

Lin KR(1), Li CL, Yen JJ, Yang-Yen HF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

We previously reported that IL-3 signaling induces phosphorylation of GATA-1 at
the serine²6 position, which contributes to IL-3-mediated anti-apoptotic
response. Here, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of GATA-1 at serine²6 is also
transiently induced in cells of the erythroid lineage (primary erythroblasts and 
erythrocyte-committed progenitors [EPs]) by erythropoietin (EPO), the principal
cytokine regulating erythropoiesis. To examine whether phosphorylation of GATA-1 
at serine²6 would have any impact on erythropoiesis, mutant mice carrying either 
a glutamic acid (GATA-1(S26E)) or alanine (GATA-1(S26A)) substitution at serine²6
were generated. Neither GATA-1(S26E) nor GATA-1(S26A) mice showed any significant
difference from control mice in peripheral blood cell composition under either
steady state or stress conditions. The erythroblast differentiation in both
mutant mice also appeared to be normal. However, a moderate reduction in the
CFU-E progenitor population was consistently observed in the bone marrow of
GATA-1(S26E), but not GATA-1(S26A) mice, suggesting that such defect was
compensated for within the bone marrow. Surprisingly, reduced CFU-E progenitor
population in GATA-1(S26E) mice was mainly due to EPO-induced growth suppression 
of GATA-1(S26E) EPs, albeit in the absence of EPO these cells manifested a
survival advantage. Further analyses revealed that EPO-induced growth suppression
of GATA-1(S26E) EPs was largely due to the proliferation block resulted from
GATA-1(S26E)-mediated transcriptional activation of the gene encoding the cell
cycle inhibitor p21(Waf1/Cip1). Taken together, these results suggest that
EPO-induced transient phosphorylation of GATA-1 at serine²6 is dispensable for
erythropoiesis. However, failure to dephosphorylate this residue following its
transient phosphorylation significantly attenuates the colony-forming activity of
EPs.

PMCID: PMC3661471
PMID: 23717580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Development. 2013 Jun;140(12):2463-7. doi: 10.1242/dev.083147.

Hematopoiesis.

Jagannathan-Bogdan M(1), Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)HHMI/Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hematopoiesis - the process by which blood cells are formed - has been studied
intensely for over a century using a variety of model systems. There is
conservation of the overall hematopoietic process between vertebrates, although
some differences do exist. Over the last decade, the zebrafish has come to the
forefront as a new model in hematopoiesis research, as it allows the use of
large-scale genetics, chemical screens and transgenics. This comparative approach
to understanding hematopoiesis has led to fundamental knowledge about the process
and to the development of new therapies for disease. Here, we provide a broad
overview of vertebrate hematopoiesis. We also highlight the benefits of using
zebrafish as a model.

PMCID: PMC3666375
PMID: 23715539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Blood. 2013 Jun 27;121(26):5218-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-488080. Epub 2013 
May 23.

Analysis of disease-causing GATA1 mutations in murine gene complementation
systems.

Campbell AE(1), Wilkinson-White L, Mackay JP, Matthews JM, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104-4318, USA.

Missense mutations in transcription factor GATA1 underlie a spectrum of
congenital red blood cell and platelet disorders. We investigated how these
alterations cause distinct clinical phenotypes by combining structural,
biochemical, and genomic approaches with gene complementation systems that
examine GATA1 function in biologically relevant cellular contexts. Substitutions 
that disrupt FOG1 cofactor binding impair both gene activation and repression and
are associated with pronounced clinical phenotypes. Moreover, clinical severity
correlates with the degree of FOG1 disruption. Surprisingly, 2 mutations shown to
impair DNA binding of GATA1 in vitro did not measurably affect in vivo target
gene occupancy. Rather, one of these disrupted binding to the TAL1 complex,
implicating it in diseases caused by GATA1 mutations. Diminished TAL1 complex
recruitment mainly impairs transcriptional activation and is linked to relatively
mild disease. Notably, different substitutions at the same amino acid can
selectively inhibit TAL1 complex or FOG1 binding, producing distinct cellular and
clinical phenotypes. The structure-function relationships elucidated here were
not predicted by prior in vitro or computational studies. Thus, our findings
uncover novel disease mechanisms underlying GATA1 mutations and highlight the
power of gene complementation assays for elucidating the molecular basis of
genetic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3695365
PMID: 23704091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Transfus Clin Biol. 2013 May;20(2):144-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tracli.2013.03.005. Epub
2013 May 2.

[HSP70, an erythropoiesis regulator that determines the fate of erythroblasts
between death and differentiation].

[Article in French]

Hermine O(1), Arlet JB, Ribeil JA, Guillerm F, Vandekerkhove J, Courtois G.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8143, labex des globules rouges GR-ex, hôpital Necker, institut
Imagine, université Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
ohermine@gmail.com

Erythropoiesis is finely regulated by two major cytokines, stem cell factor (SCF)
and erythropoietin (Epo). Decrease levels of Epo result in caspase activation and
erythroid progenitors apoptosis. However, normal erythroid cell maturation
requests caspase activation and cleavage of various caspase substrates, except
the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1, that is protected by interaction with 
the chaperone HSP70 in the nucleus. Therefore, molecular abnormalities associated
with decrease of HSP70 expression in the nucleus may result in ineffective
erythropoiesis characterized by apoptosis and impaired maturation of erythroid
precursors. These findings open new potential targeted therapies for erythroid
disorders.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier SAS.

PMID: 23643330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2013 Apr;35(2):177-84. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2013.02.010.

[Effect of LMO2 overexpression in hemangioblast on its proliferation and
hematopoietic differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou HS(1), Li C, Zha XJ, Chen B, Liu DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate function of the Lim-only protein(LMO2) in hemangioblast
generated from murine embryonic stem cells differentiation to hematopoietic
cells.
METHODS: The hemangioblast-specific expression vector with lmo2 or green
fluorescence protein gene was constructed, respectively. The murine embryonic
stem cells were transfected by the hemangioblast-specific expression vectors. The
neomycin-resistance ES cell clones were obtained after having been screened by
G418. The cell clones were spontaneously differentiated into embryo bodies(EB)
containing hemangioblast.Expression of the hematopoietic genes was investigated
by real-time reverse transcription-ploymerase chain reaction during EB
differentiation.For the EB cells, blast-cloning forming cells analysis and
blood-colony forming unit analysis were then performed, respectively. The numbers
of the blasts were counted during hematopoietic differentiation.
RESULTS: The hemangioblast-specific expression vector with lmo2 or green
fluorescence protein was transfected into ES cells.The neomycin-resistance ES
cells generated EBs from 2.5 days to 10 days.Real time reverse
transcription-ploymerase chain reaction analysis indicated that overexpression of
lmo2 increased the expression of hematopoietic genes(gata1, tal1, <U+0392>-h1, and
<U+0392>-major globin) during EB formation.Blast-cloning forming cells analysis showed
that the numbers of the blasts generated by ES/lmo2 was 2-or 3-fold than those in
the controls.The total numbers of the blood-colony forming unit or the numbers of
the erythrocyte colony-forming unit generated by ES/lmo2 were 2.5 times or 3
times, respectively, when compared with the controls.
CONCLUSION: LMO2 enhances the proliferation and differentiation of
hemangioblasts.

PMID: 23643007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Sep 15;22(18):2532-42. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0623. Epub 2013
Jun 8.

Ddx46 is required for multi-lineage differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells
in zebrafish.

Hirabayashi R(1), Hozumi S, Higashijima S, Kikuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Balanced and precisely controlled processes between self-renewal and
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) into all blood lineages are
critical for vertebrate definitive hematopoiesis. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the maintenance and differentiation of HSCs have not been
fully elucidated. Here, we show that zebrafish Ddx46, encoding a DEAD-box RNA
helicase, is expressed in HSCs of the caudal hematopoietic tissue (CHT). The
number of HSCs expressing the molecular markers cmyb or T-cell acute lymphocytic 
leukemia 1 (tal1) was markedly reduced in Ddx46 mutants. However, massive cell
death of HSCs was not detected, and proliferation of HSCs was normal in the CHT
of the mutants at 48<U+2009>h postfertilization. We found that myelopoiesis occurred,
but erythropoiesis and lymphopoiesis were suppressed, in Ddx46 mutants.
Consistent with these results, the expression of spi1, encoding a regulator of
myeloid development, was maintained, but the expression of gata1a, encoding a
regulator of erythrocyte development, was downregulated in the mutants. Taken
together, our results provide the first genetic evidence that zebrafish Ddx46 is 
required for the multilineage differentiation of HSCs during development, through
the regulation of specific gene expressions.

PMCID: PMC3760052
PMID: 23635340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 25;8(4):e62314. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062314. Print 2013.

Tzfp represses the androgen receptor in mouse testis.

Furu K(1), Klungland A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Neuroscience, Department of Microbiology,
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

The testis zinc finger protein (Tzfp), also known as Repressor of GATA, belongs
to the BTB/POZ zinc finger family of transcription factors and is thought to play
a role in spermatogenesis due to its remarkably high expression in testis.
Despite many attempts to find the in vivo role of the protein, the molecular
function is still largely unknown. Here, we address this issue using a novel
mouse model with a disrupted Tzfp gene. Homozygous Tzfp null mice are born at
reduced frequency but appear viable and fertile. Sertoli cells in testes lacking 
Tzfp display an increase in Androgen Receptor (AR) signaling, and several genes
in the testis, including Gata1, Aie1 and Fanc, show increased expression. Our
results indicate that Tzfp function as a transcriptional regulator and that loss 
of the protein leads to alterations in AR signaling and reduced number of
apoptotic cells in the testicular tubules.

PMCID: PMC3636255
PMID: 23634227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Blood. 2013 May 30;121(22):4575-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-479451. Epub 2013 
Apr 22.

Ldb1-nucleated transcription complexes function as primary mediators of global
erythroid gene activation.

Li L(1), Freudenberg J, Cui K, Dale R, Song SH, Dean A, Zhao K, Jothi R, Love PE.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Cellular and Developmental Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erythropoiesis is dependent on the lineage-specific transcription factors Gata1, 
Tal1, and Klf1. Several erythroid genes have been shown to require all 3 factors 
for their expression, suggesting that they function synergistically; however,
there is little direct evidence for widespread cooperation. Gata1 and Tal1 can
assemble within higher-order protein complexes (Ldb1 complexes) that include the 
adapter molecules Lmo2 and Ldb1. Ldb1 proteins are capable of coassociation, and 
long-range Ldb1-mediated oligomerization of enhancer- and promoter-bound Ldb1
complexes has been shown to be required for ß-globin gene expression. In this
study, we generated a genomewide map of Ldb1 complex binding sites that revealed 
widespread binding at erythroid genes and at known erythroid enhancer elements.
Ldb1 complex binding sites frequently colocalized with Klf1 binding sites and
with consensus binding motifs for other erythroid transcription factors.
Transcriptomic analysis demonstrated a strong correlation between Ldb1 complex
binding and Ldb1 dependency for gene expression and identified a large cohort of 
genes coregulated by Ldb1 complexes and Klf1. Together, these results provide a
foundation for defining the mechanism and scope of Ldb1 complex activity during
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3668490
PMID: 23610375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060326. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Changes in the Expression of Transcription Factors Involved in Modulating the
Expression of EPO-R in Activated Human CD4-Positive Lymphocytes.

Lisowska KA(1), Frackowiak JE, Mikosik A, Witkowski JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
katlis@gumed.edu.pl

We have recently described the presence of the erythropoietin receptor (EPO-R) on
CD4(+) lymphocytes and demonstrated that its expression increases during their
activation, reaching a level reported to be typical for erythroid progenitors.
This observation suggests that EPO-R expression is modulated during lymphocyte
activation, which may be important for the cells' function. Here we investigated 
whether the expression of GATA1, GATA3 and Sp1 transcription factors is
correlated with the expression of EPO-R in human CD4(+) lymphocytes stimulated
with monoclonal anti-CD3 antibody. The expression of GATA1, GATA3 and Sp1
transcription factors in CD4(+) cells was estimated before and after stimulation 
with anti-CD3 antibody by Western Blot and flow cytometry. The expression of
EPO-R was measured using real-time PCR and flow cytometry. There was no change in
the expression of GATA1 and GATA3 in CD4(+) lymphocytes after stimulation with
anti-CD3 antibody. However, stimulation resulted in the significantly increased
expression of the Sp1 factor. CD4(+) lymphocytes stimulated with anti-CD3
antibody exhibited an increase in both the expression level of EPOR gene and the 
number of EPO-R molecules on the cells' surface, the latter being significantly
correlated with the increased expression of Sp1. Sp1 is noted to be the single
transcription factor among the ones studied whose level changes as a result of
CD4(+) lymphocyte stimulation. It seems that Sp1 may significantly affect the
number of EPO-R molecules present on the surface of activated CD4(+) lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC3618423
PMID: 23577103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Blood. 2013 May 30;121(22):4463-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-09-457929. Epub 2013 
Apr 5.

CD41 expression marks myeloid-biased adult hematopoietic stem cells and increases
with age.

Gekas C(1), Graf T.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation, Stem Cells and Cancer Program, Centre for Genomic Regulation,
Barcelona, Spain. christos.gekas@gmail.com.

The hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) compartment is heterogeneous, yet our
understanding of the identities of different HSC subtypes is limited. Here we
show that platelet integrin CD41 (aIIb), currently thought to only transiently
mark fetal HSCs, is expressed on an adult HSC subtype that accumulates with age. 
CD41+ HSCs were largely quiescent and exhibited myeloerythroid and megakaryocyte 
gene priming, governed by Gata1, whereas CD41- HSCs were more proliferative and
exhibited lymphoid gene priming. When isolated without the use of blocking
antibodies, CD41+ HSCs possessed long-term repopulation capacity on serial
transplantations and showed a marked myeloid bias compared with CD41- HSCs, which
yielded a more lymphoid-biased progeny. CD41-knockout (KO) mice displayed
multilineage hematopoietic defects coupled with decreased quiescence and survival
of HSCs, suggesting that CD41 is functionally relevant for HSC maintenance and
hematopoietic homeostasis. Transplantation experiments indicated that
CD41-KO-associated defects are long-term transplantable, HSC-derived and, in
part, mediated through the loss of platelet mass leading to decreases in HSC
exposure to important platelet released cytokines, such as transforming growth
factor ß1. In summary, our data provide a novel marker to identify a
myeloid-biased HSC subtype that becomes prevalent with age and highlights the
dogma of HSC regulation by their progeny.

PMID: 23564910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Transfusion. 2013 Nov;53(11 Suppl 2):2917-27. doi: 10.1111/trf.12181. Epub 2013
Apr 8.

Mutation of the GATA site in the erythroid cell-specific regulatory element of
the ABO gene in a Bm subgroup individual.

Nakajima T(1), Sano R, Takahashi Y, Kubo R, Takahashi K, Kominato Y, Tsukada J,
Takeshita H, Yasuda T, Uchikawa M, Isa K, Ogasawara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan; Cancer Chemotherapy Center and Hematology, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Fukuoka, Japan; Department of Legal
Medicine, Shimane University School of Medicine, Shimane, Japan; Division of
Medical Genetics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Fukui,
Fukui, Japan; Japanese Red Cross Tokyo Blood Center, Tokyo, Japan; Japanese Red
Cross Central Blood Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The ABO blood group is important in blood transfusion. Recently, an
erythroid cell-specific regulatory element has been identified in the first
intron of ABO using luciferase reporter assays with K562 cells. The erythroid
cell-specific regulatory activity of the element was dependent upon GATA-1
binding. In addition, partial deletion of Intron 1 including the element was
observed in genomic DNAs obtained from 111 Bm and ABm individuals, except for
one, whereas the deletion was never found among 1005 individuals with the common 
phenotypes.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: In this study, further investigation was performed to
reveal the underlying mechanism responsible for reduction of B antigen expression
in the exceptional Bm individual. Peptide nucleic acid-clamping polymerase chain 
reaction was carried out to amplify the B-related allele, followed by sequence
determination. Electrophoretic mobility assays and promoter assays were performed
to examine whether a nucleotide substitution reduced the binding of a
transcription factor and induced loss of function of the element.
RESULTS: Sequence determination revealed one point mutation of the GATA motif in 
the element. The electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that the mutation
abolished the binding of GATA transcription factors, and the promoter assays
demonstrated complete loss of enhancer activity of the element.
CONCLUSION: These observations suggest that the mutation in the GATA motif of the
erythroid-specific regulatory element may diminish the binding of GATA
transcription factors and down regulate transcriptional activity of the element
on the B allele, leading to reduction of B antigen expression in erythroid
lineage cells of the Bm individual.

© 2013 American Association of Blood Banks.

PMID: 23560502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059070. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

MYCN transgenic zebrafish model with the characterization of acute myeloid
leukemia and altered hematopoiesis.

Shen LJ(1), Chen FY, Zhang Y, Cao LF, Kuang Y, Zhong M, Wang T, Zhong H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Amplification of MYCN (N-Myc) oncogene has been reported as a
frequent event and a poor prognostic marker in human acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). The molecular mechanisms and transcriptional networks by which MYCN exerts
its influence in AML are largely unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We introduced murine MYCN gene into embryonic
zebrafish through a heat-shock promoter and established the stable germline
Tg(MYCN:HSE:EGFP) zebrafish. N-Myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1),
negatively controlled by MYCN in human and functionally involved in neutrophil
maturation, was significantly under-expressed in this model. Using peripheral
blood smear detection, histological section and flow cytometric analysis of
single cell suspension from kidney and spleen, we found that MYCN overexpression 
promoted cell proliferation, enhanced the repopulating activity of myeloid cells 
and the accumulation of immature hematopoietic blast cells. MYCN enhanced
primitive hematopoiesis by upregulating scl and lmo2 expression and promoted
myelopoiesis by inhibiting gata1 expression and inducing pu.1, mpo expression.
Microarray analysis identified that cell cycle, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis,
MAPK/Ras, and p53-mediated apoptosis pathways were upregulated. In addition,
mismatch repair, transforming and growth factor ß (TGFß) were downregulated in
MYCN-overexpressing blood cells (p<0.01). All of these signaling pathways are
critical in the proliferation and malignant transformation of blood cells.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The above results induced by overexpression of MYCN
closely resemble the main aspects of human AML, suggesting that MYCN plays a role
in the etiology of AML. MYCN reprograms hematopoietic cell fate by regulating
NDRG1 and several lineage-specific hematopoietic transcription factors.
Therefore, this MYCN transgenic zebrafish model facilitates dissection of
MYCN-mediated signaling in vivo, and enables high-throughput scale screens to
identify the potential therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3598662
PMID: 23554972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Blood. 2013 Mar 28;121(13):2376-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-480442.

Ikaros, Notch, and GATA1 cross paths during megakaryopoiesis.

Maillard I(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Mar 28;121(13):2440-51.

PMID: 23538229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Allergy. 2013;68(5):621-8. doi: 10.1111/all.12145. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

TLR2 down-regulates FceRI and its transcription factor PU.1 in human Langerhans
cells.

Herrmann N(1), Koch S, Leib N, Bedorf J, Wilms H, Schnautz S, Fimmers R, Bieber
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University of Bonn, D-53105 Bonn,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal Langerhans cells (LC) expressing the high-affinity receptor
for IgE (FceRI) play a key role in atopic dermatitis (AD). AD skin is highly
colonized with Staphylococcus aureus (S.a.), which are sensed by Toll-like
receptor 2 (TLR2). We hypothesized that TLR2 may impact on the expression of
FceRI on LC.
OBJECTIVES: To study a putative impact of TLR2 signaling on FceRI, we analyzed
FceRI and known transcription factors of the receptor after ligand binding to
TLR2.
METHODS: We generated LC from CD34(+) progenitors in vitro (CD34LC) expressing
FceRI and TLR2 as well as its partners TLR1 and TLR6. The expression of FceRI and
known transcription factors of the receptor was analyzed on the protein and RNA
level by flow cytometry, Western blotting, and real-time PCR.
RESULTS: For CD34LC from 123 donors, we observed a high heterogeneity in FceRI
surface expression correlating with mRNA level of its a-chain. Stimulation of
TLR1/2 or TLR2/6 dramatically down-regulated FceRI on protein and mRNA level of
both a- and <U+03B3>-chain. Further analysis of putative transcription factors for
FCER1A revealed the lack of GATA1 in CD34LC, weak expression of ELF1 and YY1, and
high expression of PU.1. While ELF1 and YY1 appeared to be little affected by
TLR2 engagement, PU.1 was significantly down-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our findings show that in human, LC ligation of TLR2
by S.a.-derived products down-regulates FceRI and its transcription factor PU.1, 
thus suggesting that FceRI is controlled by PU.1 in these cells.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23534406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059509. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Leishmania donovani infection induces anemia in hamsters by differentially
altering erythropoiesis in bone marrow and spleen.

Lafuse WP(1), Story R, Mahylis J, Gupta G, Varikuti S, Steinkamp H, Oghumu S,
Satoskar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, Wexner Medical Center at the
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Leishmania donovani is a parasite that causes visceral leishmaniasis by infecting
and replicating in macrophages of the bone marrow, spleen, and liver. Severe
anemia and leucopenia is associated with the disease. Although immune defense
mechanisms against the parasite have been studied, we have a limited
understanding of how L. donovani alters hematopoiesis. In this study, we used
Syrian golden hamsters to investigate effects of L. donovani infection on
erythropoiesis. Infection resulted in severe anemia and leucopenia by 8 weeks
post-infection. Anemia was associated with increased levels of serum
erythropoietin, which indicates the hamsters respond to the anemia by producing
erythropoietin. We found that infection also increased numbers of BFU-E and CFU-E
progenitor populations in the spleen and bone marrow and differentially altered
erythroid gene expression in these organs. In the bone marrow, the mRNA
expression of erythroid differentiation genes (a-globin, ß-globin, ALAS2) were
inhibited by 50%, but mRNA levels of erythroid receptor (c-kit, EpoR) and
transcription factors (GATA1, GATA2, FOG1) were not affected by the infection.
This suggests that infection has a negative effect on differentiation of
erythroblasts. In the spleen, erythroid gene expression was enhanced by
infection, indicating that the anemia activates a stress erythropoiesis response 
in the spleen. Analysis of cytokine mRNA levels in spleen and bone marrow found
that IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA is highly increased by L. donovani infection. Expression of the
IFN-<U+03B3> inducible cytokine, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), was also
up-regulated. Since TRAIL induces erythroblasts apoptosis, apoptosis of bone
marrow erythroblasts from infected hamsters was examined by flow cytometry.
Percentage of erythroblasts that were apoptotic was significantly increased by L.
donovani infection. Together, our results suggest that L. donovani infection
inhibits erythropoiesis in the bone marrow by cytokine-mediated apoptosis of
erythroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3606219
PMID: 23533629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May;41(9):4938-48. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt167. Epub 2013 Mar
21.

GATA-1 genome-wide occupancy associates with distinct epigenetic profiles in
mouse fetal liver erythropoiesis.

Papadopoulos GL(1), Karkoulia E, Tsamardinos I, Porcher C, Ragoussis J, Bungert
J, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander
Fleming", Vari GR16672, Greece.

We report the genomic occupancy profiles of the key hematopoietic transcription
factor GATA-1 in pro-erythroblasts and mature erythroid cells fractionated from
day E12.5 mouse fetal liver cells. Integration of GATA-1 occupancy profiles with 
available genome-wide transcription factor and epigenetic profiles assayed in
fetal liver cells enabled as to evaluate GATA-1 involvement in modulating local
chromatin structure of target genes during erythroid differentiation. Our results
suggest that GATA-1 associates preferentially with changes of specific epigenetic
modifications, such as H4K16, H3K27 acetylation and H3K4 di-methylation.
Furthermore, we used random forest (RF) non-linear regression to predict changes 
in the expression levels of GATA-1 target genes based on the genomic features
available for pro-erythroblasts and mature fetal liver-derived erythroid cells.
Remarkably, our prediction model explained a high proportion of 62% of variation 
in gene expression. Hierarchical clustering of the proximity values calculated by
the RF model produced a clear separation of upregulated versus downregulated
genes and a further separation of downregulated genes in two distinct groups.
Thus, our study of GATA-1 genome-wide occupancy profiles in mouse primary
erythroid cells and their integration with global epigenetic marks reveals three 
clusters of GATA-1 gene targets that are associated with specific epigenetic
signatures and functional characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3643580
PMID: 23519611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Stem Cells. 2013 Jun;31(6):1202-12. doi: 10.1002/stem.1369.

Pim1 serine/threonine kinase regulates the number and functions of murine
hematopoietic stem cells.

An N(1), Lin YW, Mahajan S, Kellner JN, Wang Y, Li Z, Kraft AS, Kang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

The genes and pathways that govern the functions and expansion of hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) are not completely understood. In this study, we investigated
the roles of serine/threonine Pim kinases in hematopoiesis in mice. We generated 
PIM1 transgenic mice (Pim1-Tx) overexpressing human PIM1 driven by vav
hematopoietic promoter/regulatory elements. Compared to wild-type littermates,
Pim1-Tx mice showed enhanced hematopoiesis as demonstrated by increased numbers
of Lin(-) Sca-1 (+) c-Kit (+) (LSK) hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells and
cobblestone area forming cells, higher BrdU incorporation in long-term HSC
population, and a better ability to reconstitute lethally irradiated mice. We
then extended our study using Pim1(-/-), Pim2(-/-), Pim3(-/-) single knockout
(KO) mice. HSCs from Pim1(-/-) KO mice showed impaired long-term hematopoietic
repopulating capacity in secondary and competitive transplantations.
Interestingly, these defects were not observed in HSCs from Pim2(-/-) or
Pim3(-/-) KO mice. Limiting dilution competitive transplantation assay estimated 
that the frequency of LSKCD34(-) HSCs was reduced by approximately 28-fold in
Pim1(-/-) KO mice compared to wild-type littermates. Mechanistic studies
demonstrated an important role of Pim1 kinase in regulating HSC cell
proliferation and survival. Finally, our polymerase chain reaction (PCR) array
and confirmatory real-time PCR (RT-PCR) studies identified several genes
including Lef-1, Pax5, and Gata1 in HSCs that were affected by Pim1 deletion. Our
data provide the first direct evidence for the important role of Pim1 kinase in
the regulation of HSCs. Our study also dissects out the relative role of
individual Pim kinase in HSC functions and regulation.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3664117
PMID: 23495171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e56715. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056715. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 interacts with and activates p38a to
facilitate erythroid differentiation.

Hua WK(1), Chang YI, Yao CL, Hwang SM, Chang CY, Lin WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Protein arginine methylation is emerging as a pivotal posttranslational
modification involved in regulating various cellular processes; however, its role
in erythropoiesis is still elusive. Erythropoiesis generates circulating red
blood cells which are vital for body activity. Deficiency in erythroid
differentiation causes anemia which compromises the quality of life. Despite
extensive studies, the molecular events regulating erythropoiesis are not fully
understood. This study showed that the increase in protein arginine
methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) levels, via transfection or protein transduction,
significantly promoted erythroid differentiation in the bipotent human K562 cell 
line as well as in human primary hematopoietic progenitor CD34(+) cells. PRMT1
expression enhanced the production of hemoglobin and the erythroid surface marker
glycophorin A, and also up-regulated several key transcription factors, GATA1,
NF-E2 and EKLF, which are critical for lineage-specific differentiation. The
shRNA-mediated knockdown of PRMT1 suppressed erythroid differentiation. The
methyltransferase activity-deficient PRMT1G80R mutant failed to stimulate
differentiation, indicating the requirement of arginine methylation of target
proteins. Our results further showed that a specific isoform of p38 MAPK, p38a,
promoted erythroid differentiation, whereas p38ß did not play a role. The
stimulation of erythroid differentiation by PRMT1 was diminished in p38a- but not
p38ß-knockdown cells. PRMT1 appeared to act upstream of p38a, since expression of
p38a still promoted erythroid differentiation in PRMT1-knockdown cells, and
expression of PRMT1 enhanced the activation of p38 MAPK. Importantly, we showed
for the first time that PRMT1 was associated with p38a in cells by
co-immunoprecipitation and that PRMT1 directly methylated p38a in in vitro
methylation assays. Taken together, our findings unveil a link between PRMT1 and 
p38a in regulating the erythroid differentiation program and provide evidence
suggesting a novel regulatory mechanism for p38a through arginine methylation.

PMCID: PMC3590204
PMID: 23483889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Blood. 2013 May 23;121(21):4377-87. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-474387. Epub 2013 
Mar 12.

Clonal selection in xenografted TAM recapitulates the evolutionary process of
myeloid leukemia in Down syndrome.

Saida S(1), Watanabe K, Sato-Otsubo A, Terui K, Yoshida K, Okuno Y, Toki T, Wang 
R, Shiraishi Y, Miyano S, Kato I, Morishima T, Fujino H, Umeda K, Hiramatsu H,
Adachi S, Ito E, Ogawa S, Ito M, Nakahata T, Heike T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) is a clonal preleukemic disorder that
progresses to myeloid leukemia of Down syndrome (ML-DS) through the accumulation 
of genetic alterations. To investigate the mechanism of leukemogenesis in this
disorder, a xenograft model of TAM was established using NOD/Shi-scid,
interleukin (IL)-2R<U+03B3>(null) mice. Serial engraftment after transplantation of
cells from a TAM patient who developed ML-DS a year later demonstrated their
self-renewal capacity. A GATA1 mutation and no copy number alterations (CNAs)
were detected in the primary patient sample by conventional genomic sequencing
and CNA profiling. However, in serial transplantations, engrafted TAM-derived
cells showed the emergence of divergent subclones with another GATA1 mutation and
various CNAs, including a 16q deletion and 1q gain, which are clinically
associated with ML-DS. Detailed genomic analysis identified minor subclones with 
a 16q deletion or this distinct GATA1 mutation in the primary patient sample.
These results suggest that genetically heterogeneous subclones with varying
leukemia-initiating potential already exist in the neonatal TAM phase, and ML-DS 
may develop from a pool of such minor clones through clonal selection. Our
xenograft model of TAM may provide unique insight into the evolutionary process
of leukemia.

PMID: 23482930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Jun;40(2):148-57. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.02.007. Epub
2013 Mar 5.

Molecular and functional characterization of erythropoietin of the goldfish
(Carassius auratus L.).

Katakura F(1), Katzenback BA, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

Erythropoietin is the principal regulator of erythropoiesis and promotes the
survival, proliferation and differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells in
mammals. In this study we report on the molecular and functional characterization
of erythropoietin from the goldfish. Quantitative expression analysis of goldfish
epo revealed the highest mRNA levels in heart, followed by brain, liver, spleen
and kidney tissues. There was no marked change of epo expression in goldfish
primary kidney macrophage cultures, as progenitor cell to macrophage development 
progressed, indicating that erythropoietin is not involved in monopoiesis.
Recombinant goldfish erythropoietin induced proliferation of progenitor cells in 
a dose-dependent manner, and up-regulated the expression of erythroid
transcription factors gata1 and lmo2 in progenitor cells. Furthermore,
recombinant goldfish erythropoietin stimulated erythroid colony formation in a
dose-dependent manner and promoted survival of erythroid progenitor cells as
colony-forming cells. Our results demonstrate that the function of erythropoietin
in the goldfish is similar to that of mammals and suggest a highly conserved
mechanism of early erythrocyte development in lower and higher vertebrates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23474427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3345-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-439661. Epub 2013 
Mar 5.

Characterization of the TGF-ß1 signaling abnormalities in the Gata1low mouse
model of myelofibrosis.

Zingariello M(1), Martelli F, Ciaffoni F, Masiello F, Ghinassi B, D'Amore E,
Massa M, Barosi G, Sancillo L, Li X, Goldberg JD, Rana RA, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Campus Biomedico, Istituto Superiore di Sanitá, Rome, 
Italy.

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is characterized by fibrosis, ineffective
hematopoiesis in marrow, and hematopoiesis in extramedullary sites and is
associated with abnormal megakaryocyte (MK) development and increased
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1 release. To clarify the role of TGF-ß1 in the
pathogenesis of this disease, the TGF-ß1 signaling pathway of marrow and spleen
of the Gata1(low) mouse model of myelofibrosis (MF) was profiled and the
consequences of inhibition of TGF-ß1 signaling on disease manifestations
determined. The expression of 20 genes in marrow and 36 genes in spleen of
Gata1(low) mice was altered. David-pathway analyses identified alterations of
TGF-ß1, Hedgehog, and p53 signaling in marrow and spleen and of mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR) in spleen only and predicted that these alterations would
induce consequences consistent with the Gata1(low) phenotype (increased apoptosis
and G1 arrest both in marrow and spleen and increased osteoblast differentiation 
and reduced ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis in marrow only). Inhibition of TGF-ß1 
signaling normalized the expression of p53-related genes, restoring hematopoiesis
and MK development and reducing fibrosis, neovascularization, and osteogenesis in
marrow. It also normalized p53/mTOR/Hedgehog-related genes in spleen, reducing
extramedullary hematopoiesis. These data identify altered expression signatures
of TGF-ß1 signaling that may be responsible for MF in Gata1(low) mice and may
represent additional targets for therapeutic intervention in PMF.

PMCID: PMC3637011
PMID: 23462118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;33(10):1938-55. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00141-13. Epub 2013 Mar 
4.

Establishment of a cell-type-specific genetic network by the mediator complex
component Med1.

Pope NJ(1), Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.

The intense physiologic demand to generate vast numbers of red blood cells
requires the establishment of a complex genetic network by the master regulatory 
transcription factor GATA-1 and its coregulators. This network dictates the
genesis of enucleated erythrocytes by orchestrating the survival, proliferation, 
and differentiation of progenitor cells. In addition to the crucial GATA-1
coregulator Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1), a component of the Mediator complex, Med1, 
facilitates GATA-1-dependent transcription at select target genes and controls
erythropoiesis. It is not known to what extent Med1 contributes to GATA-1
function or whether Med1 controls a large or restricted cohort of genes that are 
not regulated by GATA-1. Using a genetic complementation assay in GATA-1-null
erythroid cells, we demonstrate that Med1 and another Mediator component, Med25, 
regulate a restricted cohort of genes that are predominantly not controlled by
GATA-1. Most of these genes were not regulated by Med1 in fibroblasts.
Loss-of-function analyses with GATA-1-independent Med1 target genes indicate that
Rrad, which encodes a small GTPase induced during human erythropoiesis, conferred
erythroid cell survival. Thus, while Med1 is a context-dependent GATA-1
coregulator, it also exerts specialized functions in erythroid cells to control
GATA-1-independent, cell-type-specific genes, which include candidate regulators 
of erythroid cell development and function.

PMCID: PMC3647965
PMID: 23459945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Blood. 2013 Apr 18;121(16):3181-4. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-405746. Epub 2013
Feb 25.

Naturally occurring oncogenic GATA1 mutants with internal deletions in transient 
abnormal myelopoiesis in Down syndrome.

Toki T(1), Kanezaki R, Kobayashi E, Kaneko H, Suzuki M, Wang R, Terui K, Kanegane
H, Maeda M, Endo M, Mizuochi T, Adachi S, Hayashi Y, Yamamoto M, Shimizu R, Ito
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.

Children with Down syndrome have an increased incidence of transient abnormal
myelopoiesis (TAM) and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. The majority of these
cases harbor somatic mutations in the GATA1 gene, which results in the loss of
full-length GATA1. Only a truncated isoform of GATA1 that lacks the N-terminal 83
amino acids (GATA1-S) remains. We found through genetic studies of 106 patients
with TAM that internally deleted GATA1 proteins (GATA1-IDs) lacking amino acid
residues 77-119 or 74-88 (created by splicing mutations) contributed to the
genesis of TAM in 6 patients. Analyses of GATA1-deficient embryonic
megakaryocytic progenitors revealed that the GATA1 function in growth restriction
was disrupted in GATA1-IDs. In contrast, GATA1-S promoted megakaryocyte
proliferation more profoundly than that induced by GATA1 deficiency. These
results indicate that the internally deleted regions play important roles in
megakaryocyte proliferation and that perturbation of this mechanism is involved
in the pathogenesis of TAM.

PMID: 23440243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Biochem J. 2013 May 15;452(1):67-78. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121006.

Nuclear export factor 3 is involved in regulating the expression of TGF-ß3 in an 
mRNA export activity-independent manner in mouse Sertoli cells.

Yin Y(1), Wang G, Liang N, Zhang H, Liu Z, Li W, Sun F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China.

The NXF (nuclear export factor) family members are implicated in the transport of
mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Recently, some members of the NXF family 
have been reported to play divergent functional roles, such as
post-transcriptional regulation, translational control, regulation of mRNA
stability and trafficking. However, little is known about the roles of NXF3 in
spermatogenesis. In the present study, we found that mouse NXF3, specifically
expressed in principal cells in segment II of the caput epididymis, as well as
Sertoli cells in the mouse testis, was required to mediate TGF-ß (transforming
growth factor ß)-induced down-regulation of Tgfb3/TGF-ß3 mRNA expression and
protein secretion in Sertoli cells. In addition, NXF3 was also involved in
TGF-ß-induced transcriptional regulation of other genes associated with Sertoli
cell maturation and the restructuring of the Sertoli cell BTB (blood-testis
barrier), such as Gata1 (GATA-binding protein 1), Wt1 (Wilms's tumour homologue
1), Cldn11 (claudin11) and Cdkn1a (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A or
p21(Cip1)). The transcriptional regulation of NXF3 was mediated through physical 
interaction with STRAP (serine/threonine kinase receptor-associated protein),
where NXF3 inhibited the complex formation among Smad7, STRAP and activated type 
I TGF-ß receptor. Taken together, our data provide mechanistic insights into the 
roles of NXF3 in TGF-ß-mediated expression of Tgfb3 and other genes. NXF3 may be 
implicated in Sertoli cell maturation and the extensive restructuring of the
Sertoli cell BTB.

PMID: 23438076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Int J Oncol. 2013 Apr;42(4):1317-24. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1831. Epub 2013 Feb
19.

Overexpression of DICER1 induced by the upregulation of GATA1 contributes to the 
proliferation and apoptosis of leukemia cells.

Bai Y(1), Qiu GR, Zhou F, Gong LY, Gao F, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, P.R.
China. baiying3939@126.com

Dicer, a member of the RNase III family, is the key enzyme required for the
biogenesis of microRNAs and small interfering RNAs. Recent evidence indicates
that DICER1 expression levels vary among different solid tumors and decreased or 
increased DICER1 expression has been associated with aggressive cancers. In this 
study, we assessed DICER1 expression levels in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
investigated its biological effects and transcriptional regulation in leukemia
cell lines. We demonstrated that DICER1 was overexpressed in AML patients and
leukemia cell lines by real-time quantitative PCR and western blot analysis. A
functional assay demonstrated that the silencing of DICER1 inhibited cell
proliferation and promoted apoptosis in leukemia cell lines. We also demonstrated
that DICER1 was upregulated by the hematopoietic transcription factor, GATA1,
through luciferase, electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. These data suggest that DICER1 plays an important
role in AML and the finding that the upregulation of DICER1 is induced by GATA1
may provide a framework for the understanding of differential DICER1 expression
levels in multiple types of cancer.

PMID: 23426981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55530. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055530. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Generation of megakaryocytic progenitors from human embryonic stem cells in a
feeder- and serum-free medium.

Pick M(1), Azzola L, Osborne E, Stanley EG, Elefanty AG.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. Marjorie@cc.huji.ac.il

BACKGROUND: The production of human platelets from embryonic stem cells in a
defined culture system is a prerequisite for the generation of platelets for
therapeutic use. As an important step towards this goal, we report the
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) towards the megakaryocyte
(Mk) lineage using a 'spin embryoid body' method in serum-free differentiation
medium.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Immunophenotypic analyses of differentiating 
hESC identified a subpopulation of cells expressing high levels of CD41a that
expressed other markers associated with the Mk lineage, including CD110, CD42b
and CD61. Differentiated cells were sorted on the basis of their expression of
CD41a, CD34 and CD45 and assessed for Mk colony formation, expression of myeloid 
and Mk genes and ability to endoreplicate DNA. In a collagen-based colony assay, 
the CD41a<U+207A> cells sorted from these differentiation cultures produced 100-800 Mk
progenitors at day 13 and 25-160 Mk progenitors at day 20 of differentiation per 
100,000 cells assayed. Differentiated Mk cells produced platelet-like particles
which expressed CD42b and were activated by ADP, similar to platelets generated
from precursors in cord blood. These studies were complemented by real time PCR
analyses showing that subsets of cells enriched for CD41a<U+207A> Mk precursors
expressed high levels of Mk associated genes such as PF4 and MPL. Conversely,
high levels of myeloid and erythroid related transcripts, such as GATA1, TAL1/SCL
and PU.1, were detected in sorted fractions containing CD34<U+207A> and CD45<U+207A> cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a serum- and feeder-free culture system that enabled the
generation of Mk progenitors from human embryonic stem cells. These cells formed 
colonies that included differentiated Mks that fragmented to form platelet-like
particles. This protocol represents an important step towards the generation of
human platelets for therapeutic use.

PMCID: PMC3570533
PMID: 23424635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Apr;41(7):4129-43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt093. Epub 2013 Feb
17.

A comprehensive analysis of GATA-1-regulated miRNAs reveals miR-23a to be a
positive modulator of erythropoiesis.

Zhu Y(1), Wang D, Wang F, Li T, Dong L, Liu H, Ma Y, Jiang F, Yin H, Yan W, Luo
M, Tang Z, Zhang G, Wang Q, Zhang J, Zhou J, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry, 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) &
Peking Union Medical College (PUMC), Beijing 100005, PR China.

miRNAs play important roles in many biological processes, including
erythropoiesis. Although several miRNAs regulate erythroid differentiation, how
the key erythroid regulator, GATA-1, directly orchestrates differentiation
through miRNA pathways remains unclear. In this study, we identified miR-23a as a
key regulator of erythropoiesis, which was upregulated both during erythroid
differentiation and in GATA-1 gain-of-function experiments, as determined by
miRNA expression profile analysis. In primary human CD34+ hematopoietic
progenitor cells, miR-23a increased in a GATA-1-dependent manner during erythroid
differentiation. Gain- or loss-of-function analysis of miR-23a in mice or
zebrafish demonstrated that it was essential for normal morphology in terminally 
differentiated erythroid cells. Furthermore, a protein tyrosine phosphatase,
SHP2, was identified as a downstream target of miR-23a that mediated its
regulation of erythropoiesis. Taken together, our data identify a key
GATA-1-miRNA axis in erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3627585
PMID: 23420868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 5;288(14):10061-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.421156. Epub 2013
Feb 15.

Regulated transcription of human matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13) and
interleukin-1ß (IL1B) genes in chondrocytes depends on methylation of specific
proximal promoter CpG sites.

Hashimoto K(1), Otero M, Imagawa K, de Andrés MC, Coico JM, Roach HI, Oreffo RO, 
Marcu KB, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Hospital for Special Surgery and Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The role of DNA methylation in the regulation of catabolic genes such as MMP13
and IL1B, which have sparse CpG islands, is poorly understood in the context of
musculoskeletal diseases. We report that demethylation of specific CpG sites at
-110 bp and -299 bp of the proximal MMP13 and IL1B promoters, respectively,
detected by in situ methylation analysis of chondrocytes obtained directly from
human cartilage, strongly correlated with higher levels of gene expression. The
methylation status of these sites had a significant impact on promoter activities
in chondrocytes, as revealed in transfection experiments with site-directed CpG
mutants in a CpG-free luciferase reporter. Methylation of the -110 and -299 CpG
sites, which reside within a hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) consensus motif in
the respective MMP13 and IL1B promoters, produced the most marked suppression of 
their transcriptional activities. Methylation of the -110 bp CpG site in the
MMP13 promoter inhibited its HIF-2a-driven transactivation and decreased HIF-2a
binding to the MMP13 proximal promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
In contrast to HIF-2a, MMP13 transcriptional regulation by other positive (RUNX2,
AP-1, ELF3) and negative (Sp1, GATA1, and USF1) factors was not affected by
methylation status. However, unlike the MMP13 promoter, IL1B was not susceptible 
to HIF-2a transactivation, indicating that the -299 CpG site in the IL1B promoter
must interact with other transcription factors to modulate IL1B transcriptional
activity. Taken together, our data reveal that the methylation of different CpG
sites in the proximal promoters of the human MMP13 and IL1B genes modulates their
transcription by distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3617244
PMID: 23417678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1339-47. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.33. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

AKT collaborates with ERG and Gata1s to dysregulate megakaryopoiesis and promote 
AMKL.

Stankiewicz MJ(1), Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The requirement that leukemic Gata1 mutations be present in cells harboring
trisomy 21 led to the discovery that overexpression of ERG drives aberrant
megakaryopoiesis. Given that constitutive PI3K/AKT signaling is a frequent
component of hematologic malignancies and the relationship between AKT and Notch 
in this lineage, we studied the crosstalk between AKT signaling and ERG in
megakaryopoiesis. We discovered that constitutive AKT signaling is associated
with a dramatic increase in apoptosis of WT megakaryocytes (MKs), but that
overexpression of ERG blocks AKT-induced death. We further found that Gata1
mutations protect MKs from activated AKT-induced apoptosis. As a consequence,
however, the enhanced signaling inhibits differentiation of Gata1 mutant, but not
WT, MKs. Gata1 mutant cells that overexpress ERG with hyperactive AKT are
characterized by diminished FOXO1/3a expression and an increased dependency on
the c-Jun pathway similar to that seen in acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) 
cell lines, acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with knockdown of FOXO3a, or AML with
expression of myristoylated Akt. Additionally, we found that the AKT allosteric
inhibitor MK2206 caused reduced cell viability and proliferation of AMKL cell
lines. The contribution of aberrant AKT signaling during the ontogeny of Down
syndrome-transient myeloproliferative disorder/AMKL indicates that AKT is a
therapeutic target in this form of AML.

PMCID: PMC3915509
PMID: 23380710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Jul;228(7):1594-600. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24322.

The effects of GATA-1 and NF-E2 deficiency on bone biomechanical, biochemical,
and mineral properties.

Kacena MA(1), Gundberg CM, Kacena WJ 3rd, Landis WJ, Boskey AL, Bouxsein ML,
Horowitz MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. mkacena@iupui.edu

Mice deficient in GATA-1 or NF-E2, transcription factors required for normal
megakaryocyte (MK) development, have increased numbers of MKs, reduced numbers of
platelets, and a striking high bone mass phenotype. Here, we show the bone
geometry, microarchitecture, biomechanical, biochemical, and mineral properties
from these mutant mice. We found that the outer geometry of the mutant bones was 
similar to controls, but that both mutants had a striking increase in total bone 
area (up to a 35% increase) and trabecular bone area (up to a 19% increase).
Interestingly, only the NF-E2 deficient mice had a significant increase in
cortical bone area (21%) and cortical thickness (27%), which is consistent with
the increase in bone mineral density (BMD) seen only in the NF-E2 deficient
femurs. Both mutant femurs exhibited significant increases in several
biomechanical properties including peak load (up to a 32% increase) and stiffness
(up to a 13% increase). Importantly, the data also demonstrate differences
between the two mutant mice. GATA-1 deficient femurs break in a ductile manner,
whereas NF-E2 deficient femurs are brittle in nature. To better understand these 
differences, we examined the mineral properties of these bones. Although none of 
the parameters measured were different between the NF-E2 deficient and control
mice, an increase in calcium (21%) and an increase in the mineral/matrix ratio
(32%) was observed in GATA-1 deficient mice. These findings appear to contradict 
biomechanical findings, suggesting the need for further research into the
mechanisms by which GATA-1 and NF-E2 deficiency alter the material properties of 
bone.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4128339
PMID: 23359245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 15;12(4):533-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.23667. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

The impact of trisomy 21 on early human hematopoiesis.

Roy A, Cowan G, Vyas P, Roberts I.

PMCID: PMC3594246
PMID: 23343767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8433-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413260. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

Identification of biologically relevant enhancers in human erythroid cells.

Su MY(1), Steiner LA, Bogardus H, Mishra T, Schulz VP, Hardison RC, Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

Identification of cell type-specific enhancers is important for understanding the
regulation of programs controlling cellular development and differentiation.
Enhancers are typically marked by the co-transcriptional activator protein p300
or by groups of cell-expressed transcription factors. We hypothesized that a
unique set of enhancers regulates gene expression in human erythroid cells, a
highly specialized cell type evolved to provide adequate amounts of oxygen
throughout the body. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively
parallel sequencing, genome-wide maps of candidate enhancers were constructed for
p300 and four transcription factors, GATA1, NF-E2, KLF1, and SCL, using primary
human erythroid cells. These data were combined with gene expression analyses,
and candidate enhancers were identified. Consistent with their predicted function
as candidate enhancers, there was statistically significant enrichment of p300
and combinations of co-localizing erythroid transcription factors within 1-50 kb 
of the transcriptional start site (TSS) of genes highly expressed in erythroid
cells. Candidate enhancers were also enriched near genes with known erythroid
cell function or phenotype. Candidate enhancers exhibited moderate conservation
with mouse and minimal conservation with nonplacental vertebrates. Candidate
enhancers were mapped to a set of erythroid-associated, biologically relevant,
SNPs from the genome-wide association studies (GWAS) catalogue of NHGRI, National
Institutes of Health. Fourteen candidate enhancers, representing 10 genetic loci,
mapped to sites associated with biologically relevant erythroid traits. Fragments
from these loci directed statistically significant expression in reporter gene
assays. Identification of enhancers in human erythroid cells will allow a better 
understanding of erythroid cell development, differentiation, structure, and
function and provide insights into inherited and acquired hematologic disease.

PMCID: PMC3605659
PMID: 23341446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Blood. 2013 Mar 28;121(13):2440-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-450627. Epub 2013 
Jan 18.

Ikaros inhibits megakaryopoiesis through functional interaction with GATA-1 and
NOTCH signaling.

Malinge S(1), Thiollier C, Chlon TM, Doré LC, Diebold L, Bluteau O, Mabialah V,
Vainchenker W, Dessen P, Winandy S, Mercher T, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Mar 28;121(13):2376-7.

The transcription factor Ikaros regulates the development of hematopoietic cells.
Ikaros-deficient animals fail to develop B cells and display a T-cell malignancy,
which is correlated with altered Notch signaling. Recently, loss of Ikaros was
associated with progression of myeloproliferative neoplasms to acute myeloid
leukemia and increasing evidence shows that Ikaros is also critical for the
regulation of myeloid development. Previous studies showed that Ikaros-deficient 
mice have increased megakaryopoiesis, but the molecular mechanism of this
phenomenon remains unknown. Here, we show that Ikaros overexpression decreases
NOTCH-induced megakaryocytic specification, and represses expression of several
megakaryocytic genes including GATA-1 to block differentiation and terminal
maturation. We also demonstrate that Ikaros expression is differentially
regulated by GATA-2 and GATA-1 during megakaryocytic differentiation and reveal
that the combined loss of Ikzf1 and Gata1 leads to synthetic lethality in vivo
associated with prominent defects in erythroid cells and an expansion of
megakaryocyte progenitors. Taken together, our observations demonstrate an
important functional interplay between Ikaros, GATA factors, and the NOTCH
signaling pathway in specification and homeostasis of the megakaryocyte lineage.

PMCID: PMC3612856
PMID: 23335373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Apr;11(4):593-604. doi: 10.1111/jth.12131.

Transcription factors in late megakaryopoiesis and related platelet disorders.

Tijssen MR(1), Ghevaert C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, UK.

Cell type-specific transcription factors regulate the repertoire of genes
expressed in a cell and thereby determine its phenotype. The differentiation of
megakaryocytes, the platelet progenitors, from hematopoietic stem cells is a
well-known process that can be mimicked in culture. However, the efficient
formation of platelets in culture remains a challenge. Platelet formation is a
complicated process including megakaryocyte maturation, platelet assembly and
platelet shedding. We hypothesize that a better understanding of the
transcriptional regulation of this process will allow us to influence it such
that sufficient numbers of platelets can be produced for clinical applications.
After an introduction to gene regulation and platelet formation, this review
summarizes the current knowledge of the regulation of platelet formation by the
transcription factors EVI1, GATA1, FLI1, NFE2, RUNX1, SRF and its co-factor MKL1,
and TAL1. Also covered is how some platelet disorders including
myeloproliferative neoplasms, result from disturbances of the transcriptional
regulation. These disorders give us invaluable insights into the crucial role
these transcription factors play in platelet formation. Finally, there is
discussion of how a better understanding of these processes will be needed to
allow for efficient production of platelets in vitro.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMCID: PMC3824237
PMID: 23311859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):8805-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.423756. Epub 2013
Jan 10.

High resolution methylome analysis reveals widespread functional hypomethylation 
during adult human erythropoiesis.

Yu Y(1), Mo Y, Ebenezer D, Bhattacharyya S, Liu H, Sundaravel S, Giricz O,
Wontakal S, Cartier J, Caces B, Artz A, Nischal S, Bhagat T, Bathon K, Maqbool S,
Gligich O, Suzuki M, Steidl U, Godley L, Skoultchi A, Greally J, Wickrema A,
Verma A.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10467, USA.

Differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells to red cells requires coordinated
expression of numerous erythroid genes and is characterized by nuclear
condensation and extrusion during terminal development. To understand the
regulatory mechanisms governing these widespread phenotypic changes, we conducted
a high resolution methylomic and transcriptomic analysis of six major stages of
human erythroid differentiation. We observed widespread epigenetic differences
between early and late stages of erythropoiesis with progressive loss of
methylation being the dominant change during differentiation. Gene bodies,
intergenic regions, and CpG shores were preferentially demethylated during
erythropoiesis. Epigenetic changes at transcription factor binding sites
correlated significantly with changes in gene expression and were enriched for
binding motifs for SCL, MYB, GATA, and other factors not previously implicated in
erythropoiesis. Demethylation at gene promoters was associated with increased
expression of genes, whereas epigenetic changes at gene bodies correlated
inversely with gene expression. Important gene networks encoding erythrocyte
membrane proteins, surface receptors, and heme synthesis proteins were found to
be regulated by DNA methylation. Furthermore, integrative analysis enabled us to 
identify novel, potential regulatory areas of the genome as evident by epigenetic
changes in a predicted PU.1 binding site in intron 1 of the GATA1 gene. This
intronic site was found to be conserved across species and was validated to be a 
novel PU.1 binding site by quantitative ChIP in erythroid cells. Altogether, our 
study provides a comprehensive analysis of methylomic and transcriptomic changes 
during erythroid differentiation and demonstrates that human terminal
erythropoiesis is surprisingly associated with hypomethylation of the genome.

PMCID: PMC3610956
PMID: 23306203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(12):e1003155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003155. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Mi2ß is required for <U+03B3>-globin gene silencing: temporal assembly of a
GATA-1-FOG-1-Mi2 repressor complex in ß-YAC transgenic mice.

Costa FC(1), Fedosyuk H, Chazelle AM, Neades RY, Peterson KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

Activation of <U+03B3>-globin gene expression in adults is known to be therapeutic for
sickle cell disease. Thus, it follows that the converse, alleviation of
repression, would be equally effective, since the net result would be the same:
an increase in fetal hemoglobin. A GATA-1-FOG-1-Mi2 repressor complex was
recently demonstrated to be recruited to the -566 GATA motif of the (A)<U+03B3>-globin
gene. We show that Mi2ß is essential for <U+03B3>-globin gene silencing using Mi2ß
conditional knockout ß-YAC transgenic mice. In addition, increased expression of 
(A)<U+03B3>-globin was detected in adult blood from ß-YAC transgenic mice containing a
T>G HPFH point mutation at the -566 GATA silencer site. ChIP experiments
demonstrated that GATA-1 is recruited to this silencer at day E16, followed by
recruitment of FOG-1 and Mi2 at day E17 in wild-type ß-YAC transgenic mice.
Recruitment of the GATA-1-mediated repressor complex was disrupted by the -566
HPFH mutation at developmental stages when it normally binds. Our data suggest
that a temporal repression mechanism is operative in the silencing of <U+03B3>-globin
gene expression and that either a trans-acting Mi2ß knockout deletion mutation or
the cis-acting -566 (A)<U+03B3>-globin HPFH point mutation disrupts establishment of
repression, resulting in continued <U+03B3>-globin gene transcription during adult
definitive erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3527334
PMID: 23284307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Br J Haematol. 2013 Apr;161(1):139-42. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12184. Epub 2012 Dec 24.

A novel GATA1 mutation (Stop414Arg) in a family with the rare X-linked blood
group Lu(a-b-) phenotype and mild macrothrombocytic thrombocytopenia.

Singleton BK, Roxby DJ, Stirling JW, Spring FA, Wilson C, Poole J, Anstee DJ.

PMID: 23278136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Sultan Qaboos Univ Med J. 2012 Nov;12(4):498-502. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Transient Myeloproliferative Disorder and Down Syndrome: Is there a link?

Reyes ZS(1), Bashir W, Pathare A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Child Health and.

An extremely premature male neonate presented with an unusual multisystem
dysfunction within the first 24 to 48 hours of life. The unfolding of clinical
events and investigations revealed a transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD).
TMD was the main indication for karyotyping of this premature infant without
clinical symptoms of Down syndrome. The awareness of TMD in a newborn warrants
karyotype analysis to look for trisomy 21 and a close surveillance because of its
potential progression to true leukaemia.

PMCID: PMC3524001
PMID: 23275848  [PubMed]


298. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 15;288(7):5017-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.375196. Epub 2012 
Dec 27.

Zebrafish scube1 (signal peptide-CUB (complement protein C1r/C1s, Uegf, and
Bmp1)-EGF (epidermal growth factor) domain-containing protein 1) is involved in
primitive hematopoiesis.

Tsao KC(1), Tu CF, Lee SJ, Yang RB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Taiwan International Graduate Program,
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

scube1 (signal peptide-CUB (complement protein C1r/C1s, Uegf, and Bmp1)-EGF
domain-containing protein 1), the founding member of a novel secreted and cell
surface SCUBE protein family, is expressed predominantly in various developing
tissues in mice. However, its function in primitive hematopoiesis remains
unknown. In this study, we identified and characterized zebrafish scube1 and
analyzed its function by injecting antisense morpholino-oligonucleotide into
embryos. Whole-mount in situ hybridization revealed that zebrafish scube1 mRNA is
maternally expressed and widely distributed during early embryonic development.
Knockdown of scube1 by morpholino-oligonucleotide down-regulated the expression
of marker genes associated with early primitive hematopoietic precursors (scl)
and erythroid (gata1 and hbbe1), as well as early (pu.1) and late (mpo and
l-plastin) myelomonocytic lineages. However, the expression of an early
endothelial marker fli1a and vascular morphogenesis appeared normal in scube1
morphants. Overexpression of bone morphogenetic protein (bmp) rescued the
expression of scl in the posterior lateral mesoderm during early primitive
hematopoiesis in scube1 morphants. Biochemical and molecular analysis revealed
that Scube1 could be a BMP co-receptor to augment BMP signaling. Our results
suggest that scube1 is critical for and functions at the top of the regulatory
hierarchy of primitive hematopoiesis by modulating BMP activity during zebrafish 
embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3576148
PMID: 23271740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 2;33(1):44-54. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.557. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

BCR-ABL/GATA1/miR-138 mini circuitry contributes to the leukemogenesis of chronic
myeloid leukemia.

Xu C(1), Fu H(2), Gao L(1), Wang L(1), Wang W(1), Li J(1), Li Y(1), Dou L(1), Gao
X(1), Luo X(1), Jing Y(1), Chim CS(3), Zheng X(2), Yu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary
Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Abnormal expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) has been implicated in carcinogenesis. 
Here we report a novel BCR (breakpoint cluster region)-ABL (c-abl oncogene 1,
non-receptor tyrosine kinase)/GATA1/microRNA-138 (miR-138) circuitry in chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML). miR-138 expression is downregulated in K562 cells and
primary CML samples, which is restored after imatinib treatment. The tumor
suppressor activity of miR-138 is demonstrated by the induction of cell cycle
arrest at G0/G1, inhibition of cell proliferation and colony forming unit
granulocyte-macrophage colony formation and enhanced imatinib-induced apoptosis
in K562 and Ku812 cells overexpressing miR-138. Moreover, overexpression of
miR-138 led to the downregulation of BCR-ABL. Based on luciferase assay, ABL and 
BCR-ABL are shown to be the target genes regulated by miR-138. Furthermore,
miR-138 binding to ABL was shown to localize to the coding region instead of
3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTR) of ABL mRNA. In addition, CCND3 is another
target of miR-138, which represses CCND3 expression by binding to its 3'-UTR.
Finally, upregulation of miR-138 upon imatinib treatment is associated with the
enhancement of GATA1 activity, which binds to the miR-138 promoter. In
conclusion, miR-138 is a tumor suppressor miRNA underexpressed in CML. miR-138
represses expression of both BCR-ABL and CCND3 via binding to the coding region
and 3'-UTR, respectively. miR-138 expression is activated by GATA1, which in turn
is repressed by BCR-ABL. Therefore, miR-138, by virtue of a BCR-ABL/GATA1/miR-138
circuitry, is a tumor suppressor miRNA implicated in the pathogenesis of CML and 
its clinical response to imatinib.

PMID: 23208504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Dev Dyn. 2013 Feb;242(2):108-21. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23906.

Regulation of primitive hematopoiesis by class I histone deacetylases.

Shah RR(1), Koniski A, Shinde M, Blythe SA, Fass DM, Haggarty SJ, Palis J, Klein 
PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate multiple developmental
processes and cellular functions. However, their roles in blood development have 
not been determined, and in Xenopus laevis a specific function for HDACs has yet 
to be identified. Here, we employed the class I selective HDAC inhibitor,
valproic acid (VPA), to show that HDAC activity is required for primitive
hematopoiesis.
RESULTS: VPA treatment during gastrulation resulted in a complete absence of red 
blood cells (RBCs) in Xenopus tadpoles, but did not affect development of other
mesodermal tissues, including myeloid and endothelial lineages. These effects of 
VPA were mimicked by Trichostatin A (TSA), a well-established pan-HDAC inhibitor,
but not by valpromide, which is structurally similar to VPA but does not inhibit 
HDACs. VPA also caused a marked, dose-dependent loss of primitive erythroid
progenitors in mouse yolk sac explants at clinically relevant concentrations. In 
addition, VPA treatment inhibited erythropoietic development downstream of bmp4
and gata1 in Xenopus ectodermal explants.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest an important role for class I HDACs in
primitive hematopoiesis. Our work also demonstrates that specific developmental
defects associated with exposure to VPA, a significant teratogen in humans, arise
through inhibition of class I HDACs.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3553261
PMID: 23184530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Exp Hematol. 2013 Mar;41(3):303-15.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.10.015. Epub
2012 Nov 2.

Role of transcriptional corepressor ETO2 in erythroid cells.

Fujiwara T(1), Alqadi YW, Okitsu Y, Fukuhara N, Onishi Y, Ishizawa K, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. fujiwara-to@apple.email.ne.jp

Transcriptional corepressor ETO2 is a component of a protein complex containing
master regulators of hematopoiesis, including GATA-1, SCL/TAL1, LMO2, and LDB1.
To elucidate the role of ETO2 during erythroid differentiation, including the
effects of ETO2 on GATA-1 targets, we performed gene expression profiling using
K562 cells overexpressed with ETO2. The analysis demonstrated that 667 and 598
genes were upregulated and downregulated (more than twofold), respectively, in
ETO2-overexpressing cells. ETO2-repressed genes included those encoding
prototypical erythroid proteins. To test what percentages of ETO2-repressed genes
could be direct target genes of GATA-1 in K562 cells, we merged the microarray
results with ChIP-seq profile (n = 5,749), demonstrating that 23.1% of
ETO2-repressed genes contained significant GATA-1 in their loci. However, there
was no significant enrichment of PU.1 target genes among ETO2-repressed genes.
Gene ontology analysis among ETO2-repressed genes revealed significant enrichment
of genes related to "oxygen transporter," corresponding to globin genes.
Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation and ETO2 knockdown analyses confirmed 
that ETO2 directly regulates globin genes in K562 cells. Next, we evaluated the
role of ETO2 in human primary erythroblasts, derived from cord blood
CD34-positive cells. In an ex vivo model of erythroid differentiation from
CD34-positive cells, ETO2 protein level peaked at day 2-4 and almost diminished
at the later stage of differentiation. Furthermore, short hairpin RNA-mediated
knockdown and retroviral vector-mediated overexpression of ETO2 in primary
erythroblasts suggested that ETO2 significantly represses HBB, HBA, and ALAS2
expression. In summary, ETO2 regulates GATA-1 target genes critical for erythroid
differentiation, and the decrease of ETO2 levels during erythroid differentiation
would contribute to the activation of these targets.

Copyright © 2013 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23127762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47862. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047862. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Sp1 transcription factor and GATA1 cis-acting elements modulate testis-specific
expression of mouse cyclin A1.

Panigrahi SK(1), Vasileva A, Wolgemuth DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Cyclin A1 is a male germ cell-specific cell cycle regulator that is essential for
spermatogenesis. It is unique among the cyclins by virtue of its highly
restricted expression in vivo, being present in pachytene and diplotene
spermatocytes and not in earlier or later stages of spermatogenesis. To begin to 
understand the molecular mechanisms responsible for this narrow window of
expression of the mouse cyclin A1 (Ccna1) gene, we carried out a detailed
analysis of its promoter. We defined a 170-bp region within the promoter and
showed that it is involved in repression of Ccna1 in cultured cells. Within this 
region we identified known cis-acting transcription factor binding sequences,
including an Sp1-binding site and two GATA1-binding sites. Neither Sp1 nor GATA1 
is expressed in pachytene spermatocytes and later stages of germ cell
differentiation. Sp1 is readily detected at earlier stages of spermatogenesis.
Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that neither factor alone was sufficient
to significantly repress expression driven by the Ccna1 promoter, while
concurrent binding of Sp1, and most likely GATA1 and possibly additional factors 
was inhibitory. Occupancy of Sp1 on the Ccna1 promoter and influence of
GATA1-dependent cis-acting elements was confirmed by ChIP analysis in cell lines 
and most importantly, in spermatogonia. In contrast with many other
testis-specific genes, the CpG island methylation status of the Ccna1 promoter
was similar among various tissues examined, irrespective of whether Ccna1 was
transcriptionally active, suggesting that this regulatory mechanism is not
involved in the restricted expression of Ccna1.

PMCID: PMC3480434
PMID: 23112860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Gene. 2013 Jan 15;513(1):219-24. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.10.047. Epub 2012 Oct
26.

Protein-protein interaction and SNP analysis in intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm.

Jiang P(1), Zang W, Wang L, Xu Y, Liu Y, Deng SX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, College of Basic Medicine, Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400016, China.

Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) is a type of tumor that grows
within the pancreatic ducts. It is a progress from hyperplasia to intraductal
adenoma (IPMA), to noninvasive carcinoma, and ultimately to invasive carcinoma
(IPMC). The objective of this study was to explore the molecular mechanism of the
progression from IPMA to IPMC. By using the GSE19650 affymetrix microarray data
accessible from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, we first identified the
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between IPMA and IPMC, followed by the
protein-protein interaction and single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis of 
the DEGs. Our study identified thousands of DEGs which involved regulation of
cell cycle and apoptosis in this progression from IPMA to IPMC. Protein-protein
interaction network construction found that MYC, IL6ST, NR3C1, CREBBP, GATA1 and 
LRP1 might play an important role in the progression. Furthermore, the SNP
analysis confirmed the association between BRAC1 and pancreas cancer. In
conclusion, our data provide a comprehensive bioinformatics analysis of genes and
pathways which may be involved in the progression of IPMN from IPMA to IPMC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23107772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cancer Microenviron. 2013 Apr;6(1):91-107. doi: 10.1007/s12307-012-0121-z. Epub
2012 Oct 23.

Transcription factor networks in invasion-promoting breast carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts.

Siletz A(1), Kniazeva E, Jeruss JS, Shea LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, McCormick School of
Engineering, Northwestern University, Technological Institute E-136, 2145
Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA.

Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) contribute to both tumor growth and
cancer progression. In this report, we applied an emerging transcription factor
(TF) activity array to fibroblasts to capture the activity of the intracellular
signaling network and to define a signature that distinguishes mammary CAFs from 
normal mammary fibroblasts. Normal fibroblasts that restrained cancer cell
invasion developed into an invasion-promoting CAF phenotype through exposure to
conditioned medium from MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. A myofibroblast-like CAF 
cell line expressing high levels of smooth muscle actin was compared to normal
mammary fibroblasts before and after induction. Comparison of TF activity
profiles for all three fibroblast types identified a TF activity signature common
to CAFs which included activation of reporters for TFs ELK1, GATA1, retinoic acid
receptor (RAR), serum response factor (SRF), and vitamin D receptor (VDR).
Additionally, CAFs resembling myofibroblasts, relative to normal fibroblasts, had
elevated activation corresponding to NF-kappaB, RUNX2, and YY1, and distinct
activity patterns for several differentiation-related TF reporters. Induction of 
CAFs by exposure of normal fibroblasts to conditioned medium from MDA-MB-231
cells resulted in increased activation of reporters for HIF1, several STAT TFs,
and proliferation-related TFs such as AP1. Myofibroblast-like CAFs and induced
normal mammary fibroblasts promoted invasion of breast cancer cells by distinct
mechanisms, consistent with their distinct patterns of TF activation. The TF
activity profiles of CAF subtypes provide an overview of intracellular signaling 
associated with the induction of a pro-invasive stroma, and provide a mechanistic
link between the microenvironmental stimuli and phenotypic response.

PMCID: PMC3601213
PMID: 23090154  [PubMed]


305. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047175. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

NF-Y recruits both transcription activator and repressor to modulate tissue- and 
developmental stage-specific expression of human <U+03B3>-globin gene.

Zhu X(1), Wang Y, Pi W, Liu H, Wickrema A, Tuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia
and College of Graduate Studies, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA,
USA.

The human embryonic, fetal and adult ß-like globin genes provide a paradigm for
tissue- and developmental stage-specific gene regulation. The fetal <U+03B3>-globin gene
is expressed in fetal erythroid cells but is repressed in adult erythroid cells. 
The molecular mechanism underlying this transcriptional switch during erythroid
development is not completely understood. Here, we used a combination of in vitro
and in vivo assays to dissect the molecular assemblies of the active and the
repressed proximal <U+03B3>-globin promoter complexes in K562 human erythroleukemia cell
line and primary human fetal and adult erythroid cells. We found that the
proximal <U+03B3>-globin promoter complex is assembled by a developmentally regulated,
general transcription activator NF-Y bound strongly at the tandem CCAAT motifs
near the TATA box. NF-Y recruits to neighboring DNA motifs the developmentally
regulated, erythroid transcription activator GATA-2 and general repressor BCL11A,
which in turn recruit erythroid repressor GATA-1 and general repressor COUP-TFII 
to form respectively the NF-Y/GATA-2 transcription activator hub and the
BCL11A/COUP-TFII/GATA-1 transcription repressor hub. Both the activator and the
repressor hubs are present in both the active and the repressed <U+03B3>-globin promoter
complexes in fetal and adult erythroid cells. Through changes in their levels and
respective interactions with the co-activators and co-repressors during erythroid
development, the activator and the repressor hubs modulate erythroid- and
developmental stage-specific transcription of <U+03B3>-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC3468502
PMID: 23071749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 1;73(3):1076-85. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0735. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Methylome profiling reveals distinct alterations in phenotypic and mutational
subgroups of myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Nischal S(1), Bhattacharyya S, Christopeit M, Yu Y, Zhou L, Bhagat TD, Sohal D,
Will B, Mo Y, Suzuki M, Pardanani A, McDevitt M, Maciejewski JP, Melnick AM,
Greally JM, Steidl U, Moliterno A, Verma A.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, USA.

Even though mutations in epigenetic regulators frequently occur in
myeloproliferative neoplasms, their effects on the epigenome have not been well
studied. Furthermore, even though primary myelofibrosis (PMF) has a markedly
worse prognosis than essential thrombocytosis or polycythemia vera, the molecular
distinctions between these subgroups are not well elucidated. We conducted the
HELP (HpaII tiny fragment enriched by LM-PCR) assay to study genome-wide
methylation in polycythemia vera, essential thrombocytosis, and PMF samples
compared with healthy controls. We determined that polycythemia vera and
essential thrombocytosis are characterized by aberrant promoter hypermethylation,
whereas PMF is an epigenetically distinct subgroup characterized by both aberrant
hyper- and hypomethylation. Aberrant hypomethylation in PMF was seen to occur in 
non-CpG island loci, showing further qualitative differences between the disease 
subgroups. The differentially methylated genes in polycythemia vera and essential
thrombocytosis were involved predominantly in cell signaling pathways and were
enriched for binding sites of GATA1 and other transcription factors. In contrast,
aberrantly methylated genes in PMF were involved in inflammatory pathways and
were enriched for NF1, LEF1, and other transcription factors. Within the PMF
subgroup, cases with ASXL1 disruptions formed an epigenetically distinct subgroup
with relatively increased methylation. Cases of myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPN) with TET2 mutations showed decreased levels of hydroxymethylation and
distinct set of hypermethylated genes. In contrast, the JAK2V617F mutation did
not drive epigenetic clustering within MPNs. Finally, the significance of
aberrant methylation was shown by sensitivity of MPN-derived cell lines to
decitabine. These results show epigenetic differences between PMF and
polycythemia vera/essential thrombocytosis and reveal methylomic signatures of
ASXL1 and TET2 mutations.

PMID: 23066032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46482. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046482. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Regulation of delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase by krüppel-like factor 1.

Desgardin AD(1), Abramova T, Rosanwo TO, Kartha S, Shim EH, Jane SM, Cunningham
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. adesgard@gmail.com

Krüppel-like factor 1(KLF1) is a hematopoietic-specific zinc finger transcription
factor essential for erythroid gene expression. In concert with the transacting
factor GATA1, KLF1 modulates the coordinate expression of the genes encoding the 
multi-enzyme heme biosynthetic pathway during erythroid differentiation. To
explore the mechanisms underpinning KLF1 action at the gene loci regulating the
first 3 steps in this process, we have exploited the K1-ERp erythroid cell line, 
in which KLF1 translocates rapidly to the nucleus in response to treatment with
4-OH-Tamoxifen (4-OHT). KLF1 acts as a differentiation-independent
transcriptional co-regulator of delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (Alad), but
not 5-aminolevulinate synthase gene (Alas2) or porphobilinogen deaminase (Pbgd). 
Similar to its role at the ß-globin promoter, KLF1 induces factor recruitment and
chromatin changes at the Alad1b promoter in a temporally-specific manner. In
contrast to these changes, we observed a distinct mechanism of histone eviction
at the Alad1b promoter. Furthermore, KLF1-dependent events were not modulated by 
GATA1 factor promoter co-occupancy alone. These results not only enhance our
understanding of erythroid-specific modulation of heme biosynthetic regulation by
KLF1, but provide a model that will facilitate the elucidation of novel
KLF1-dependent events at erythroid gene loci that are independent of GATA1
activity.

PMCID: PMC3463598
PMID: 23056320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 23;109(43):17579-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1211405109. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Perturbation of fetal liver hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell development by
trisomy 21.

Roy A(1), Cowan G, Mead AJ, Filippi S, Bohn G, Chaidos A, Tunstall O, Chan JK,
Choolani M, Bennett P, Kumar S, Atkinson D, Wyatt-Ashmead J, Hu M, Stumpf MP,
Goudevenou K, O'Connor D, Chou ST, Weiss MJ, Karadimitris A, Jacobsen SE, Vyas P,
Roberts I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haematology, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United
Kingdom.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Dec;12(12):799.

The 40-fold increase in childhood megakaryocyte-erythroid and B-cell leukemia in 
Down syndrome implicates trisomy 21 (T21) in perturbing fetal hematopoiesis.
Here, we show that compared with primary disomic controls, primary T21 fetal
liver (FL) hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors
are markedly increased, whereas granulocyte-macrophage progenitors are reduced.
Commensurately, HSC and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors show higher
clonogenicity, with increased megakaryocyte, megakaryocyte-erythroid, and
replatable blast colonies. Biased megakaryocyte-erythroid-primed gene expression 
was detected as early as the HSC compartment. In lymphopoiesis, T21 FL
lymphoid-primed multipotential progenitors and early lymphoid progenitor numbers 
are maintained, but there was a 10-fold reduction in committed PreproB-lymphoid
progenitors and the functional B-cell potential of HSC and early lymphoid
progenitor is severely impaired, in tandem with reduced early lymphoid gene
expression. The same pattern was seen in all T21 FL samples and no samples had
GATA1 mutations. Therefore, T21 itself causes multiple distinct defects in FL
myelo- and lymphopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3491522
PMID: 23045701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Exp Med. 2012 Oct 22;209(11):2017-31. doi: 10.1084/jem.20121343. Epub 2012 Oct 
8.

Characterization of novel genomic alterations and therapeutic approaches using
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia xenograft models.

Thiollier C(1), Lopez CK, Gerby B, Ignacimouttou C, Poglio S, Duffourd Y, Guégan 
J, Rivera-Munoz P, Bluteau O, Mabialah V, Diop M, Wen Q, Petit A, Bauchet AL,
Reinhardt D, Bornhauser B, Gautheret D, Lecluse Y, Landman-Parker J, Radford I,
Vainchenker W, Dastugue N, de Botton S, Dessen P, Bourquin JP, Crispino JD,
Ballerini P, Bernard OA, Pflumio F, Mercher T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 985, 
94805 Villejuif, France.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) is a heterogeneous disease generally
associated with poor prognosis. Gene expression profiles indicate the existence
of distinct molecular subgroups, and several genetic alterations have been
characterized in the past years, including the t(1;22)(p13;q13) and the trisomy
21 associated with GATA1 mutations. However, the majority of patients do not
present with known mutations, and the limited access to primary patient leukemic 
cells impedes the efficient development of novel therapeutic strategies. In this 
study, using a xenotransplantation approach, we have modeled human pediatric AMKL
in immunodeficient mice. Analysis of high-throughput RNA sequencing identified
recurrent fusion genes defining new molecular subgroups. One subgroup of patients
presented with MLL or NUP98 fusion genes leading to up-regulation of the HOX A
cluster genes. A novel CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion gene resulting from a cryptic
inversion of chromosome 16 was identified in another subgroup of 31% of non-Down 
syndrome AMKL and strongly associated with a gene expression signature of
Hedgehog pathway activation. These molecular data provide useful markers for the 
diagnosis and follow up of patients. Finally, we show that AMKL xenograft models 
constitute a relevant in vivo preclinical screening platform to validate the
efficacy of novel therapies such as Aurora A kinase inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3478932
PMID: 23045605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Dev Cell. 2012 Oct 16;23(4):796-811. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.09.003. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

Combinatorial assembly of developmental stage-specific enhancers controls gene
expression programs during human erythropoiesis.

Xu J(1), Shao Z, Glass K, Bauer DE, Pinello L, Van Handel B, Hou S,
Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Mikkola HK, Yuan GC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Gene-distal enhancers are critical for tissue-specific gene expression, but their
genomic determinants within a specific lineage at different stages of development
are unknown. Here we profile chromatin state maps, transcription factor
occupancy, and gene expression profiles during human erythroid development at
fetal and adult stages. Comparative analyses of human erythropoiesis identify
developmental stage-specific enhancers as primary determinants of stage-specific 
gene expression programs. We find that erythroid master regulators GATA1 and TAL1
act cooperatively within active enhancers but confer little predictive value for 
stage specificity. Instead, a set of stage-specific coregulators collaborates
with master regulators and contributes to differential gene expression. We
further identify and validate IRF2, IRF6, and MYB as effectors of an adult-stage 
expression program. Thus, the combinatorial assembly of lineage-specific master
regulators and transcriptional coregulators within developmental stage-specific
enhancers determines gene expression programs and temporal regulation of
transcriptional networks in a mammalian genome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477283
PMID: 23041383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Cell Cycle. 2012 Nov 1;11(21):3911-2. doi: 10.4161/cc.22237. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

"Remembering" tissue-specific transcription patterns through mitosis.

Kadauke S, Blobel GA.

PMCID: PMC3507480
PMID: 23032269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. BMC Neurosci. 2012 Oct 3;13:118. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-118.

A genome-wide signature of glucocorticoid receptor binding in neuronal PC12
cells.

Polman JA(1), Welten JE, Bosch DS, de Jonge RT, Balog J, van der Maarel SM, de
Kloet ER, Datson NA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Pharmacology, Leiden/Amsterdam Center for Drug Research,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 2333 CC, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoids, secreted by the adrenals in response to stress,
profoundly affect structure and plasticity of neurons. Glucocorticoid action in
neurons is mediated by glucocorticoid receptors (GR) that operate as
transcription factors in the regulation of gene expression and either bind
directly to genomic glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) or indirectly to the 
genome via interactions with bound transcription factors. These two modes of
action, respectively called transactivation and transrepression, result in the
regulation of a wide variety of genes important for neuronal function. The
objective of the present study was to identify genome-wide glucocorticoid
receptor binding sites in neuronal PC12 cells using Chromatin ImmunoPrecipitation
combined with next generation sequencing (ChIP-Seq).
RESULTS: In total we identified 1183 genomic binding sites of GR, the majority of
which were novel and not identified in other ChIP-Seq studies on GR binding. More
than half (58%) of the binding sites contained a GRE. The remaining 42% of the
GBS did not harbour a GRE and therefore likely bind GR via an intermediate
transcription factor tethering GR to the DNA. While the GRE-containing binding
sites were more often located nearby genes involved in general cell functions and
processes such as apoptosis, cell motion, protein dimerization activity and
vasculature development, the binding sites without a GRE were located nearby
genes with a clear role in neuronal processes such as neuron projection
morphogenesis, neuron projection regeneration, synaptic transmission and
catecholamine biosynthetic process. A closer look at the sequence of the GR
binding sites revealed the presence of several motifs for transcription factors
that are highly divergent from those previously linked to GR-signaling, including
Gabpa, Prrx2, Zfp281, Gata1 and Zbtb3. These transcription factors may represent 
novel crosstalk partners of GR in a neuronal context.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we present the first genome-wide inventory of GR-binding sites 
in a neuronal context. These results provide an exciting first global view into
neuronal GR targets and the neuron-specific modes of GR action and potentially
contributes to our understanding of glucocorticoid action in the brain.

PMCID: PMC3519639
PMID: 23031785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Genet Genomics. 2012 Sep 20;39(9):463-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2012.08.003. Epub 
2012 Sep 5.

Kzp regulates the transcription of gata2 and pu.1 during primitive hematopoiesis 
in zebrafish embryos.

Liu F(1), Yao S, Zhang T, Xiao C, Shang Y, Liu J, Mo X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Kaiso zinc finger-containing protein (Kzp), a maternally-derived transcription
factor, controls dorsoventral patterning during zebrafish gastrulation. Here, we 
uncovered a new function for Kzp in zebrafish embryonic primitive hematopoiesis. 
The depletion of kzp led to defects in primitive hematopoiesis including the
development of the erythroid and myeloid lineages. On the other hand,
overexpression of kzp caused the ectopic expression of gata1, gata2, and pu.1.
Chromosome immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Kzp protein directly binds to
gata1, gata2, and pu.1 promoters. Interestingly, the ectopic expression of gata2 
was able to rescue the erythroid, but not the myeloid lineage in kzp-depleted
zebrafish embryos. gata1 expression controlled by Kzp was dependent on gata2
during primitive erythropoiesis. Our results indicate that Kzp is a critical
transcriptional factor for the expression of gata2 and pu.1 to modulate primitive
hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23021546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 23;287(48):40279-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.349704. Epub
2012 Sep 25.

Acetylation of histone deacetylase 1 regulates NuRD corepressor complex activity.

Yang T(1), Jian W, Luo Y, Fu X, Noguchi C, Bungert J, Huang S, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

BACKGROUND: HDAC1-containing NuRD complex is required for GATA-1-mediated
repression and activation.
RESULTS: GATA-1 associated with acetylated HDAC1-containing NuRD complex, which
has no deacetylase activity, for gene activation.
CONCLUSION: Acetylated HDAC1 converts NuRD complex from a repressor to an
activator during GATA-1-directed erythroid differentiation program.
SIGNIFICANCE: HDAC1 acetylation may function as a master regulator for the
activity of HDAC1 containing complexes. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play
important roles in regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. The
HDAC1-containing NuRD complex is generally considered as a corepressor complex
and is required for GATA-1-mediated repression. However, recent studies also show
that the NuRD complex is involved in GATA-1-mediated gene activation. We tested
whether the GATA-1-associated NuRD complex loses its deacetylase activity and
commits the GATA-1 complex to become an activator during erythropoiesis. We found
that GATA-1-associated deacetylase activity gradually decreased upon induction of
erythroid differentiation. GATA-1-associated HDAC1 is increasingly acetylated
after differentiation. It has been demonstrated earlier that acetylated HDAC1 has
no deacetylase activity. Indeed, overexpression of an HDAC1 mutant, which mimics 
acetylated HDAC1, promotes GATA-1-mediated transcription and erythroid
differentiation. Furthermore, during erythroid differentiation, acetylated HDAC1 
recruitment is increased at GATA-1-activated genes, whereas it is significantly
decreased at GATA-1-repressed genes. Interestingly, deacetylase activity is not
required for Mi2 remodeling activity, suggesting that remodeling activity may be 
required for both activation and repression. Thus, our data suggest that NuRD can
function as a coactivator or repressor and that acetylated HDAC1 converts the
NuRD complex from a repressor to an activator during GATA-1-directed erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3504744
PMID: 23014989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2012 Nov;34(8):640. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e31826e7dba.

Prominent megakaryocytic dysplasia after regression of transient abnormal
myelopoiesis associated with GATA-1 mutation.

Anoop P(1), Atra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Royal Marsden Hospital, Surrey, UK.
aparan@doctors.org.uk

About a quarter of children with Down syndrome and transient abnormal
myelopoiesis (TAM) progress to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). We
describe isolated dysmegakaryopoiesis despite complete resolution of TAM in an
18-month-old girl, who developed AMKL 6 months later.

PMID: 23007419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Lakartidningen. 2012 Aug 22-Sep 4;109(34-35):1474-7.

[X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia in two families in Sweden. Consider
hereditary causes of thrombocytopenia and bone marrow fibrosis].

[Article in Swedish]

Danielsson S(1), Merup M, Olsson L, Palmblad J, Aström M.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinska kliniken, Universitetssjukhuset, Orebro.
signe.danielsson@orebroll.se

PMID: 22993897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;32(23):4742-55. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00718-12. Epub 2012 Sep 
17.

Regulation of GATA factor expression is distinct between erythroid and mast cell 
lineages.

Ohmori S(1), Takai J, Ishijima Y, Suzuki M, Moriguchi T, Philipsen S, Yamamoto M,
Ohneda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and Welfare, Gunma,
Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 participate in mast cell
development. Although the expression of these factors is regulated in a cell
lineage-specific and differentiation stage-specific manner, their regulation
during mast cell development has not been clarified. Here, we show that the GATA2
mRNA level was significantly increased while GATA1 was maintained at low levels
during the differentiation of mast cells derived from mouse bone marrow (BMMCs). 
Unlike in erythroid cells, forced expression or small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated knockdown of GATA1 rarely affected GATA2 expression, and vice
versa, in mast cells, indicating the absence of cross-regulation between Gata1
and Gata2 genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that both GATA
factors bound to most of the conserved GATA sites of Gata1 and Gata2 loci in
BMMCs. However, the GATA1 hematopoietic enhancer (G1HE) of the Gata1 gene, which 
is essential for GATA1 expression in erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages, was
bound only weakly by both GATA factors in BMMCs. Furthermore, transgenic-mouse
reporter assays revealed that the G1HE is not essential for reporter expression
in BMMCs and peritoneal mast cells. Collectively, these results demonstrate that 
the expression of GATA factors in mast cells is regulated in a manner quite
distinct from that in erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3497604
PMID: 22988301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Blood. 2012 Nov 15;120(20):4219-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-387050. Epub 2012 
Sep 14.

Protein kinase D-HDAC5 signaling regulates erythropoiesis and contributes to
erythropoietin cross-talk with GATA1.

Delehanty LL(1), Bullock GC, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. ang3x@virginia.edu

In red cell development, the differentiation program directed by the
transcriptional regulator GATA1 requires signaling by the cytokine
erythropoietin, but the mechanistic basis for this signaling requirement has
remained unknown. Here we show that erythropoietin regulates GATA1 through
protein kinase D activation, promoting histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5) dissociation
from GATA1, and subsequent GATA1 acetylation. Mice deficient for HDAC5 show
resistance to anemic challenge and altered marrow responsiveness to
erythropoietin injections. In ex vivo studies, HDAC5(-/-) progenitors display
enhanced entry into and passage through the erythroid lineage, as well as
evidence of erythropoietin-independent differentiation. These results reveal a
molecular pathway that contributes to cytokine regulation of hematopoietic
differentiation and offer a potential mechanism for fine tuning of
lineage-restricted transcription factors by lineage-specific cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3501719
PMID: 22983445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):36720-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378398. Epub
2012 Sep 16.

T-cell acute leukemia 1 (TAL1) regulation of erythropoietin receptor and
association with excessive erythrocytosis.

Rogers H(1), Wang L, Yu X, Alnaeeli M, Cui K, Zhao K, Bieker JJ, Prchal J, Huang 
S, Weksler B, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1822, USA.

During erythropoiesis, erythropoietin stimulates induction of erythroid
transcription factors that activate expression of erythroid genes including the
erythropoietin receptor (EPO-R) that results in increased sensitivity to
erythropoietin. DNA binding of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
TAL1/SCL, is required for normal erythropoiesis. A link between elevated TAL1 and
excessive erythrocytosis is suggested by erythroid progenitor cells from a
patient that exhibits unusually high sensitivity to erythropoietin with
concomitantly elevated TAL1 and EPO-R expression. We found that TAL1 regulates
EPO-R expression mediated via three conserved E-box binding motifs (CAGCTG) in
the EPO-R 5' untranslated transcribed region. TAL1 increases association of the
GATA-1·TAL1·LMO2·LDB1 transcription activation complex to the region that
includes the transcription start site and the 5' GATA and 3' E-box motifs
flanking the EPO-R transcription start site suggesting that TAL1 promotes
accessibility of this region. Nucleosome shifting has been demonstrated to
facilitate TAL1 but not GATA-1 binding to regulate target gene expression.
Accordingly, we observed that with induced expression of EPO-R in hemotopoietic
progenitor cells, nucleosome phasing shifts to increase the linker region
containing the EPO-R transcription start site and TAL1 binds to the flanking 5'
GATA and 3' E-box regions of the promoter. These data suggest that TAL1 binds to 
the EPO-R promoter to activate EPO-R expression and provides a potential link to 
elevated EPO-R expression leading to hypersensitivity to erythropoietin and the
resultant excessive erythrocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3481276
PMID: 22982397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Br J Haematol. 2012 Nov;159(3):277-87. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12041. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder in children with Down syndrome: clarity to 
this enigmatic disorder.

Gamis AS(1), Smith FO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Mercy Hospitals & Clinics, Kansas 
City, MO 64108, USA. agamis@cmh.edu

Children with trisomy 21 have a unique predisposition to develop a
megakaryoblastic proliferative disease of varying severity during their first
3 months of life. This disorder exists in no other children or adults without the
presence of trisomy 21 and only occurs in the fetal or neonatal period of life.
Its spontaneous resolution in most cases further delineates it from otherwise
indistinguishable neonatal leukaemias. The identification that GATA1 mutations
are the leukaemogenic source along with three recently reported prospective
clinical trials now provide a clearer understanding of this haematopoietic
disorder. These recent advances in this enigmatic disorder, now known as
Transient Myeloproliferative Disorder, are reviewed here in order to bring
clarity to the breadth of organ involvement, the range of severity, the risk
factors for mortality, the therapeutic options for severe manifestations, the
natural course of spontaneous resolution regardless of therapy, and the
elucidation of the subsequent risk for myeloid leukaemia.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22966823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Nat Immunol. 2012 Oct;13(10):972-80. doi: 10.1038/ni.2420. Epub 2012 Sep 9.

A multiply redundant genetic switch 'locks in' the transcriptional signature of
regulatory T cells.

Fu W(1), Ergun A, Lu T, Hill JA, Haxhinasto S, Fassett MS, Gazit R, Adoro S,
Glimcher L, Chan S, Kastner P, Rossi D, Collins JJ, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Oct;13(10):943-5.

The transcription factor Foxp3 participates dominantly in the specification and
function of Foxp3(+)CD4(+) regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells) but is neither
strictly necessary nor sufficient to determine the characteristic T(reg) cell
signature. Here we used computational network inference and experimental testing 
to assess the contribution of other transcription factors to this. Enforced
expression of Helios or Xbp1 elicited distinct signatures, but Eos, IRF4, Satb1, 
Lef1 and GATA-1 elicited exactly the same outcome, acting in synergy with Foxp3
to activate expression of most of the T(reg) cell signature, including key
transcription factors, and enhancing occupancy by Foxp3 at its genomic targets.
Conversely, the T(reg) cell signature was robust after inactivation of any single
cofactor. A redundant genetic switch thus 'locked in' the T(reg) cell phenotype, 
a model that would account for several aspects of T(reg) cell physiology,
differentiation and stability.

PMCID: PMC3698954
PMID: 22961053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):431-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.015. Epub 2012 
Aug 29.

Teleost growth factor independence (gfi) genes differentially regulate successive
waves of hematopoiesis.

Cooney JD(1), Hildick-Smith GJ, Shafizadeh E, McBride PF, Carroll KJ, Anderson H,
Shaw GC, Tamplin OJ, Branco DS, Dalton AJ, Shah DI, Wong C, Gallagher PG, Zon LI,
North TE, Paw BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Growth Factor Independence (Gfi) transcription factors play essential roles in
hematopoiesis, differentially activating and repressing transcriptional programs 
required for hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HSPC) development and lineage
specification. In mammals, Gfi1a regulates hematopoietic stem cells (HSC),
myeloid and lymphoid populations, while its paralog, Gfi1b, regulates HSC,
megakaryocyte and erythroid development. In zebrafish, gfi1aa is essential for
primitive hematopoiesis; however, little is known about the role of gfi1aa in
definitive hematopoiesis or about additional gfi factors in zebrafish. Here, we
report the isolation and characterization of an additional hematopoietic gfi
factor, gfi1b. We show that gfi1aa and gfi1b are expressed in the primitive and
definitive sites of hematopoiesis in zebrafish. Our functional analyses
demonstrate that gfi1aa and gfi1b have distinct roles in regulating primitive and
definitive hematopoietic progenitors, respectively. Loss of gfi1aa silences
markers of early primitive progenitors, scl and gata1. Conversely, loss of gfi1b 
silences runx-1, c-myb, ikaros and cd41, indicating that gfi1b is required for
definitive hematopoiesis. We determine the epistatic relationships between the
gfi factors and key hematopoietic transcription factors, demonstrating that
gfi1aa and gfi1b join lmo2, scl, runx-1 and c-myb as critical regulators of
teleost HSPC. Our studies establish a comparative paradigm for the regulation of 
hematopoietic lineages by gfi transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3532562
PMID: 22960038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nature. 2012 Sep 6;489(7414):91-100. doi: 10.1038/nature11245.

Architecture of the human regulatory network derived from ENCODE data.

Gerstein MB(1), Kundaje A, Hariharan M, Landt SG, Yan KK, Cheng C, Mu XJ, Khurana
E, Rozowsky J, Alexander R, Min R, Alves P, Abyzov A, Addleman N, Bhardwaj N,
Boyle AP, Cayting P, Charos A, Chen DZ, Cheng Y, Clarke D, Eastman C, Euskirchen 
G, Frietze S, Fu Y, Gertz J, Grubert F, Harmanci A, Jain P, Kasowski M, Lacroute 
P, Leng J, Lian J, Monahan H, O'Geen H, Ouyang Z, Partridge EC, Patacsil D, Pauli
F, Raha D, Ramirez L, Reddy TE, Reed B, Shi M, Slifer T, Wang J, Wu L, Yang X,
Yip KY, Zilberman-Schapira G, Batzoglou S, Sidow A, Farnham PJ, Myers RM,
Weissman SM, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. mark.gerstein@yale.edu

Transcription factors bind in a combinatorial fashion to specify the on-and-off
states of genes; the ensemble of these binding events forms a regulatory network,
constituting the wiring diagram for a cell. To examine the principles of the
human transcriptional regulatory network, we determined the genomic binding
information of 119 transcription-related factors in over 450 distinct
experiments. We found the combinatorial, co-association of transcription factors 
to be highly context specific: distinct combinations of factors bind at specific 
genomic locations. In particular, there are significant differences in the
binding proximal and distal to genes. We organized all the transcription factor
binding into a hierarchy and integrated it with other genomic information (for
example, microRNA regulation), forming a dense meta-network. Factors at different
levels have different properties; for instance, top-level transcription factors
more strongly influence expression and middle-level ones co-regulate targets to
mitigate information-flow bottlenecks. Moreover, these co-regulations give rise
to many enriched network motifs (for example, noise-buffering feed-forward
loops). Finally, more connected network components are under stronger selection
and exhibit a greater degree of allele-specific activity (that is, differential
binding to the two parental alleles). The regulatory information obtained in this
study will be crucial for interpreting personal genome sequences and
understanding basic principles of human biology and disease.

PMCID: PMC4154057
PMID: 22955619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Curr Opin Hematol. 2012 Nov;19(6):486-93. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328358f92e.

Blood group phenotypes resulting from mutations in erythroid transcription
factors.

Singleton BK(1), Frayne J, Anstee DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Institute for Transfusion Sciences, NHSBT, Bristol, UK.
belinda.singleton@nhsbt.nhs.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review describes the genetics of unusual blood group
phenotypes, particularly those with altered expression of Lutheran antigens, and 
how this area of study has informed our understanding of erythropoiesis in
general and haemoglobin switching in particular.
RECENT FINDINGS: Mutations in erythroid transcription factors GATA1 (GATA1
binding protein 1) and KLF1 (Kruppel-like factor 1) cause benign and disease
phenotypes in humans [X-linked Lu(a-b-) phenotype, In(Lu) blood group phenotype, 
hereditary persistence of foetal haemoglobin, borderline HbA(2), and congenital
dyserythropoietic anaemia (CDA)]. These studies explain the occurrence of rare
blood group phenotypes with simultaneous altered expression of antigens from
several blood group systems and illuminate the role of KLF1 in gamma and delta
globin gene regulation.
SUMMARY: The study of rare blood group phenotypes is a potent tool for discovery 
of mutations in human genes. Elucidation of the molecular basis of the rare
In(Lu) phenotype revealed the first mutations in human KLF1. Subsequently,
numerous additional mutations have been described, one of which causes a rare
form of CDA. Analysis of the X-linked Lu(a-b-) phenotype revealed a mutation in
the C-terminal domain of human GATA1. The apparent sensitivity of the Lutheran
glycoprotein to alterations in GATA1 and KLF1 activity suggest that it could be a
useful biomarker of erythroid transcription factor mutation.

PMID: 22954727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Cancer Sci. 2012 Dec;103(12):2039-44. doi: 10.1111/cas.12007. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

Contribution of GATA1 dysfunction to multi-step leukemogenesis.

Shimizu R(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

In mammals, hematopoietic homeostasis is maintained by a fine-tuned balance among
the self-renewal, proliferation, differentiation and survival of hematopoietic
stem cells and their progenies. Each process is also supported by the delicate
balance of the expression of multiple genes specific to each process. GATA1 is a 
transcription factor that comprehensively regulates the genes that are important 
for the development of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells. Accumulating evidence 
supports the notion that defects in GATA1 function are intimately linked to
hematopoietic disorders. In particular, the somatic mutation of the GATA1 gene,
which leads to the production of N-terminally truncated GATA1, contributes to the
genesis of transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia in infants with Down syndrome. Similarly, a mutation in the GATA1
regulatory region that reduces GATA1 expression is involved in the onset of
erythroid leukemia in mice. In both cases, the accumulation of immature
progenitor cells caused by GATA1 dysregulation underlies the pathogenesis of the 
leukemia. This review provides a summary of multi-step leukemogenesis with a
focus on GATA1 dysfunction.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22937757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biochem. 2012 Dec;152(6):509-19. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvs097. Epub 2012 Aug 25.

Depletion of glutamine enhances sodium butyrate-induced erythroid differentiation
of K562 cells.

Canh Hiep N(1), Kinohira S, Furuyama K, Taketani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Kyoto 606-8585,
Japan.

Human erytholeukemia K562 cells are induced to differentiate along the erythroid 
lineage by a variety of chemical compounds, including hemin, sodium butyrate and 
1-ß-d-arabinofuranosylcytosine. We have investigated the induction of erythroid
differentiation of K562 cells by glutamine depletion. When K562 cells were
cultured in glutamine-minus medium, the induction of hemoglobin synthesis,
accompanied by those of heme-biosynthetic enzymes and erythroid transcriptional
factors, was observed. This induction was dependent on the temporally marked
decrease of intracellular level of glutathione, followed by the marked activation
of p38MAPK and SAPK/JNK, but not ERK. Under glutamine-deficient conditions, the
treatment of K562 cells with sodium butyrate resulted in the marked enhancement
of the induction of heme biosynthesis. Glutamine depletion also accelerated the
expressions of erythroid-related factors including a-globin and heme-biosynthetic
enzymes, GATA-1 and NF-E2, in sodium butyrate-induced K562 cells. The
transcriptional activity of ß-globin gene promoter-reporter was markedly enhanced
by these treatments, indicating that glutamine deficiency in combination with
sodium butyrate treatment gives high efficiency of chemical-induced
differentiation in the hematopoiesis process.

PMID: 22923740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Klin Padiatr. 2012 Oct;224(6):382-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1321875. Epub 2012 Aug
22.

Surgery of a cyanotic heart defect in an 11-year-old boy with thrombocytopenic
thrombocytopathy and severe anemia due to a GATA-1 defect: hemostatic therapy.

Hoefer J(1), Streif W, Kilo J, Grimm M, Berger G, Velik-Salchner C.

Author information: 
(1)Innsbruck Medical University, Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine,
Innsbruck, Austria.

A child was admitted to our hospital for repair of a ventricular septal defect
(VSD) characterized by a predominantly right-to-left shunt and a severe stenosis 
of the right ventricular outflow tract (Tetralogy of Fallot). Severe congenital
anemia (hemoglobin 72<U+2009>g/L), thrombocytopenia (42×G/L) and profound platelet
dysfunction led a stem cell defect to be suspected. X-linked thrombocytopenia
(GATA-1 mutation) was diagnosed. GATA-1 defect may complicate medical
interventions due to excessive bleeding and partial or complete bone marrow
failure. Maintaining a platelet count of 100<U+2009>G/L and a maximal clot firmness
(EXTEM-MCF) >50<U+2009>mm allowed repair of the congenital heart defect without bleeding
or hematological complications. Anemia and thrombocytopenia persisted after
cardiac surgery, while the spontaneous bleeding tendency improved.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22915449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 28;426(3):299-305. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.048. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Regulation of HOXA9 activity by predominant expression of DACH1 against C/EBPa
and GATA-1 in myeloid leukemia with MLL-AF9.

Lee JW(1), Kim HS, Hwang J, Kim YH, Lim GY, Sohn WJ, Yoon SR, Kim JY, Park TS, Oh
SH, Park KM, Choi SU, Ryoo ZY, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-701, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 5;426(4):664.

Although MLL-AF9 caused by the chromosomal translocation t(9;11) has a critical
role in acute myeloid leukemia, the molecular pathogenesis is poorly understood. 
Here, we identified that the cell fate determination factor DACH1 is directly
up-regulated by MLL-AF9. Recently we showed that the forced expression of DACH1
in myeloid cells induced p27(Kip1) and repressed p21(Cip1), which is a pivotal
characteristic of the myeloid progenitor. Consistent with our previous study,
ectopic expression of DACH1 contributed to the maintenance of colonogenic
activity and blocked the differentiation of myeloid progenitors. Moreover, we
here identified an endogenous HOXA9-DACH1 complex mediated by the carboxyl
terminus of DACH1 in t(9;11) leukemia cells. qRT-PCR revealed that DACH1 has a
stronger transcription-promoting activity with HOXA9 than does PBX2 with HOXA9.
Furthermore, C/EBPa and GATA-1 can directly bind to the promoter of DACH1 and act
as a transcriptional suppressor. Expression of DACH1 is down-regulated during
myeloid differentiation and shows an inverse pattern compared to C/EBPa and
GATA-1 expression. However, ectopic expression of C/EBPa and/or GATA-1 could not 
abrogate the over-expression of DACH1 induced by MLL-AF9. Therefore, we postulate
that the inability of C/EBPa and GATA-1 to down-regulate DACH1 expression induced
by MLL-AF9 during myeloid differentiation may contribute to t(9;11)
leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22902925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 May;24(5):868-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.05.007. Epub
2012 Aug 16.

Omega-3 fatty acids suppress Th2-associated cytokine gene expressions and GATA
transcription factors in mast cells.

Park BK(1), Park S, Park JB, Park MC, Min TS, Jin M.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Pathology, College of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon University, Daejeon,
300-716, Korea.

Because the interaction between omega-3 fatty acids and mast cells has remained
largely unknown in allergies, we investigated whether omega-3 fatty acids affect 
the activation of mast cells by examining Th2-associated cytokine production and 
possible molecular mechanisms. Alpha-linolenic acid and its metabolites including
eicosapentaenoic acid and decosahexaenoic acid induced a dramatic decrease in the
production of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5 and IL-13 in a dose-dependent manner, as
well as mRNA expression of their genes, in activated MC/9 mast cells and bone
marrow-derived mast cells. The effects were comparable to those of cyclosporin A 
(1 µM), a well-known immunosuppressive agent. Nuclear expression of GATA binding 
protein-1 (GATA-1) and GATA binding protein-2 (GATA-2), essential transcription
factors for mast cell activation, was also greatly suppressed. However, their
mRNA expressions were not affected. In P815 mast cells, which do not express
GATA-1, the suppressive effects on cytokines were abolished. On the contrary,
omega-3 fatty acids had less significant effects on IL-4 and IL-5 and resulted in
a slight decrease in IL-13 production in EL-4 T cells. Finally, oral
administration of fish oil containing high level of omega-3 fatty acids
significantly reduced the severity of dermatitis and the thickening of
epidermis/dermis in a NC/Nga murine atopic model. The number of cells expressing 
CD117(+) and FceRIa(+) was greatly decreased and GATA-1 expression in the cells
was also diminished. Taken together, omega-3 fatty acids might target mast cells 
to a greater extent than T cells to suppress Th2 cytokine expression by
inhibiting GATAs for alleviation of allergic disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cell. 2012 Aug 17;150(4):725-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.038.

Tissue-specific mitotic bookmarking by hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1.

Kadauke S(1), Udugama MI, Pawlicki JM, Achtman JC, Jain DP, Cheng Y, Hardison RC,
Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

Tissue-specific transcription patterns are preserved throughout cell divisions to
maintain lineage fidelity. We investigated whether transcription factor GATA1
plays a role in transmitting hematopoietic gene expression programs through
mitosis when transcription is transiently silenced. Live-cell imaging revealed
that a fraction of GATA1 is retained focally within mitotic chromatin. ChIP-seq
of highly purified mitotic cells uncovered that key hematopoietic regulatory
genes are occupied by GATA1 in mitosis. The GATA1 coregulators FOG1 and TAL1
dissociate from mitotic chromatin, suggesting that GATA1 functions as platform
for their postmitotic recruitment. Mitotic GATA1 target genes tend to reactivate 
more rapidly upon entry into G1 than genes from which GATA1 dissociates.
Mitosis-specific destruction of GATA1 delays reactivation selectively of genes
that retain GATA1 during mitosis. These studies suggest a requirement of mitotic 
"bookmarking" by GATA1 for the faithful propagation of cell-type-specific
transcription programs through cell division.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3425057
PMID: 22901805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Hum Genet. 2012 Dec;131(12):1821-32. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1215-x. Epub 2012
Aug 11.

Genetics of familial forms of thrombocytopenia.

Balduini CL(1), Savoia A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pavia-IRCCS Policlinico San
Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy. c.balduini@smatteo.pv.it

The joint application of clinical and genetic investigation to patients with
inherited thrombocytopenias, as well as the availability of new methods for
studying megakaryopoiesis, has greatly expanded the knowledge of these disorders 
in the last few years with regard to their etiology, pathogenesis and clinical
aspects. In particular, new diseases have been described, as deriving from
mutations in the genes FLNA, TUBB1, ITGA2/ITGB3, ANKRD26, CYCS, and ABCG5 or
ABCG8. Moreover, forms previously considered separate entities were found to be
different clinical aspects of a single disease. For instance, identification of
MYH9 as the gene whose mutations cause the May-Hegglin anomaly led to the
recognition that Sebastian platelet syndrome, Epstein syndrome, and Fechtner
syndrome derive from mutations of the same gene and describe overlapping
disorders. Despite these advances, knowledge of hereditary thrombocytopenias is
still far from satisfactory because for approximately half of the patients it is 
not possible to formulate a definite diagnosis in that their illnesses has not
yet been described. In this review, we provide a systematic description of
hereditary thrombocytopenias as we know them today, giving special attention to
genetic aspects.

PMID: 22886561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nat Med. 2012 Sep;18(9):1413-7.

Decreased expression of synapse-related genes and loss of synapses in major
depressive disorder.

Kang HJ(1), Voleti B, Hajszan T, Rajkowska G, Stockmeier CA, Licznerski P, Lepack
A, Majik MS, Jeong LS, Banasr M, Son H, Duman RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Previous imaging and postmortem studies have reported a lower brain volume and a 
smaller size and density of neurons in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC)
of subjects with major depressive disorder (MDD). These findings suggest that
synapse number and function are decreased in the dlPFC of patients with MDD.
However, there has been no direct evidence reported for synapse loss in MDD, and 
the gene expression alterations underlying these effects have not been
identified. Here we use microarray gene profiling and electron microscopic
stereology to reveal lower expression of synaptic-functionrelated genes (CALM2, 
SYN1, RAB3A, RAB4B and TUBB4) in the dlPFC of subjects with MDD and a
corresponding lower number of synapses. We also identify a transcriptional
repressor, GATA1, expression of which is higher in MDD and that, when expressed
in PFC neurons, is sufficient to decrease the expression of synapse-related
genes, cause loss of dendritic spines and dendrites, and produce depressive
behavior in rat models of depression.

PMCID: PMC3491115
PMID: 22885997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cell Cycle. 2012 Aug 15;11(16):3055-66. doi: 10.4161/cc.21471. Epub 2012 Aug 8.

CDC6 expression is regulated by lineage-specific transcription factor GATA1.

Fernández-Morales B(1), Pavón L, Calés C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto 
Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid-IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.

GATA1 is a hematopoietic transcription factor essential for expression of most
genes encoding erythro-megakaryocytic proteins, i.e., globins and platelet
glycoproteins. A role for GATA1 as a cell proliferation regulator has been
proposed, as some of its bona fide targets comprise global regulators, such as
c-KIT or c-MYC, or cell cycle factors, i.e., CYCLIN D or p21CIP1. In this study, 
we describe that GATA1 directly regulates the expression of replication licensing
factor CDC6. Using reporter transactivation, electrophoretic mobility shift and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show that GATA1 stimulates CDC6
transcription by binding to a canonical binding site located within a 166bp
enhancer region upstream CDC6 promoter. This evolutionary conserved GATA binding 
site conforms to recently described chromatin occupancy rules, i.e., preferred
bases within core WGATAR (TGATAA), 5' and 3' flanking bases (GGTGATAAGG) and
distance to the transcription initiation site. We also found adjacent conserved
binding sites for ubiquitously expressed transcription factor CP2, needed for
GATA activity on CDC6 enhancer. Our results add to the growing evidence for GATA1
acting as a direct transcriptional regulator of the cell cycle machinery, thus
linking cell proliferation control and specific gene expression programs during
lineage differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3442916
PMID: 22871742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Burn Care Res. 2012 Nov-Dec;33(6):747-58. doi: 10.1097/BCR.0b013e318250457f.

Dendritic cell depletion in burn patients is regulated by MafB expression.

Williams KN(1), Szilagyi A, He LK, Conrad P, Halerz M, Gamelli RL, Shankar R,
Muthumalaiappan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, Illinois,
USA.

Studies have shown that monocytes are hyporesponsive and that dendritic cells
(DCs) are depleted in burn patients. We have recently shown in a mouse model that
burn injury alters the transcriptional regulation in bone marrow progenitors and 
inhibits myeloid-derived DC (mDC) production. In the present study, using human
burn patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells, we have shown an overexpression 
of MafB with a corresponding reduction in peripheral blood mononuclear
cell-derived mDCs. We isolated mononuclear cells from burn patient (2368% TBSA) 
and control volunteer peripheral blood samples by Ficoll gradient centrifugation 
and cultured mDCs by using a standard ex vivo culture system.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis was used to select myeloid cells
based on the cell surface expression of CD45+. The mDC fraction was identified by
the expression of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR+CD11c+, and we found a
significant reduction in HLA-DR+ leukocytes for up to 4 weeks postburn. MafB
expression was then examined in HLA-DR+CD14+ monocytes. Burn injury alters the
phenotype of CD14+ monocytes augmenting MafB expression and reducing their
differentiation into mDCs. MafB was then silenced in ex vivo culture prior to DC 
differentiation by using small interfering RNA technique. MafB gene silencing
improved the differentiation potential of CD14+ cells into mDCs, increasing the
percentage of mDCs by >75%. Furthermore, GATA-1+ and HLA-DR+ mDCs were increased 
following MafB silencing. Although burn injury augments the number of peripheral 
blood monocytes, the frequency of mDC is reduced. This impairment is likely
secondary to the down-regulation of mDC differentiation by high MafB-expressing
monocytes following burn injury.

PMID: 22868453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32689-96. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

GATA2 is a critical transactivator for the human IL1RL1/ST2 promoter in mast
cells/basophils: opposing roles for GATA2 and GATA1 in human IL1RL1/ST2 gene
expression.

Baba Y(1), Maeda K, Yashiro T, Inage E, Kasakura K, Suzuki R, Niyonsaba F, Hara
M, Tanabe A, Ogawa H, Okumura K, Ohtsuka Y, Shimizu T, Nishiyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

The IL1RL1/ST2 gene encodes a receptor for IL-33. Signaling from IL1RL1/ST2
induced by IL-33 binding was recently identified as a modulator of the Th2
response. The target cells for IL-33 are restricted in some hematopoietic
lineages, including mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, Th2 cells, natural killer
cells, and dendritic cells. To clarify the molecular mechanisms of cell
type-specific IL1RL1/ST2 expression in mast cells and basophils, transcriptional 
regulation of the human IL1RL1/ST2 promoter was investigated using the mast cell 
line LAD2 and the basophilic cell line KU812. Reporter assays suggested that two 
GATA motifs just upstream of the transcription start site in the ST2 promoter are
critical for transcriptional activity. These two GATA motifs possess the capacity
to bind GATA1 and GATA2 in EMSA. ChIP assay showed that GATA2, but not GATA1,
bound to the ST2 promoter in LAD2 cells and that histone H3 at the ST2 promoter
was acetylated in LAD2 cells, whereas binding of GATA1 and GATA2 to the ST2
promoter was detected in KU812 cells. Knockdown of GATA2 mRNA by siRNA reduced
ST2 mRNA levels in KU812 and LAD2 cells and ST2 protein levels in LAD2 cells; in 
contrast, GATA1 siRNA transfection up-regulated ST2 mRNA levels in KU812 cells.
The ST2 promoter was transactivated by GATA2 and repressed by GATA1 in
coexpression analysis. When these siRNAs were introduced into human peripheral
blood basophils, GATA2 siRNA reduced ST2 mRNA, whereas GATA1 siRNA up-regulated
ST2 mRNA. These results indicate that GATA2 and GATA1 positively and negatively
control human ST2 gene transcription, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3463314
PMID: 22865859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mo Med. 2012 May-Jun;109(3):195-8.

Research from the bedside to the lab bench & back.

White RA(1), Silvey M, Logsdon DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kansas City University of Medicine and
Biosciences, USA. jtolley@kcumb.edu

Transgenic mice represent a unique opportunity in biomedical research to discover
the genes underlying disease and understand how manipulating the function of
single genes and proteins alters physiology in a whole animal system. These
advances in biomedical research may accelerate the time between when basic
discoveries are made and when the research can be 'translated', that is, when the
research will positively impact the lives of patients. The purpose of this
article is to present some examples of promising mouse models of human diseases.

PMID: 22860286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Hematol Oncol. 2012 Aug 1;5:45. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-5-45.

The GATA1s isoform is normally down-regulated during terminal haematopoietic
differentiation and over-expression leads to failure to repress MYB, CCND2 and
SKI during erythroid differentiation of K562 cells.

Halsey C(1), Docherty M, McNeill M, Gilchrist D, Le Brocq M, Gibson B, Graham G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Level 3, Glasgow Biomedical
Research Centre, 120, University Place, Glasgow, G12 8TA, UK.
chris.halsey@glasgow.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Although GATA1 is one of the most extensively studied haematopoietic 
transcription factors little is currently known about the physiological functions
of its naturally occurring isoforms GATA1s and GATA1FL in humans-particularly
whether the isoforms have distinct roles in different lineages and whether they
have non-redundant roles in haematopoietic differentiation. As well as being of
general interest to understanding of haematopoiesis, GATA1 isoform biology is
important for children with Down syndrome associated acute megakaryoblastic
leukaemia (DS-AMKL) where GATA1FL mutations are an essential driver for disease
pathogenesis.
METHODS: Human primary cells and cell lines were analyzed using GATA1 isoform
specific PCR. K562 cells expressing GATA1s or GATA1FL transgenes were used to
model the effects of the two isoforms on in vitro haematopoietic differentiation.
RESULTS: We found no evidence for lineage specific use of GATA1 isoforms; however
GATA1s transcripts, but not GATA1FL transcripts, are down-regulated during in
vitro induction of terminal megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation in the
cell line K562. In addition, transgenic K562-GATA1s and K562-GATA1FL cells have
distinct gene expression profiles both in steady state and during terminal
erythroid differentiation, with GATA1s expression characterised by lack of
repression of MYB, CCND2 and SKI.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the theory that the GATA1s isoform plays a
role in the maintenance of proliferative multipotent megakaryocyte-erythroid
precursor cells and must be down-regulated prior to terminal differentiation. In 
addition our data suggest that SKI may be a potential therapeutic target for the 
treatment of children with DS-AMKL.

PMCID: PMC3476960
PMID: 22853316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Genome Res. 2012 Dec;22(12):2385-98. doi: 10.1101/gr.135707.111. Epub 2012 Jul
26.

Novel roles for KLF1 in erythropoiesis revealed by mRNA-seq.

Tallack MR(1), Magor GW, Dartigues B, Sun L, Huang S, Fittock JM, Fry SV, Glazov 
EA, Bailey TL, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Mater Medical Research Institute, Mater Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland 4101,
Australia.

KLF1 (formerly known as EKLF) regulates the development of erythroid cells from
bi-potent progenitor cells via the transcriptional activation of a diverse set of
genes. Mice lacking Klf1 die in utero prior to E15 from severe anemia due to the 
inadequate expression of genes controlling hemoglobin production, cell membrane
and cytoskeletal integrity, and the cell cycle. We have recently described the
full repertoire of KLF1 binding sites in vivo by performing KLF1 ChIP-seq in
primary erythroid tissue (E14.5 fetal liver). Here we describe the KLF1-dependent
erythroid transcriptome by comparing mRNA-seq from Klf1(+/+) and Klf1(-/-)
erythroid tissue. This has revealed novel target genes not previously obtainable 
by traditional microarray technology, and provided novel insights into the
function of KLF1 as a transcriptional activator. We define a cis-regulatory
module bound by KLF1, GATA1, TAL1, and EP300 that coordinates a core set of
erythroid genes. We also describe a novel set of erythroid-specific promoters
that drive high-level expression of otherwise ubiquitously expressed genes in
erythroid cells. Our study has identified two novel lncRNAs that are dynamically 
expressed during erythroid differentiation, and discovered a role for KLF1 in
directing apoptotic gene expression to drive the terminal stages of erythroid
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3514668
PMID: 22835905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Plant Physiol. 2012 Sep;160(1):332-48. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.198705. Epub 2012 Jul 
17.

Functional characterization of the GATA transcription factors GNC and CGA1
reveals their key role in chloroplast development, growth, and division in
Arabidopsis.

Chiang YH(1), Zubo YO, Tapken W, Kim HJ, Lavanway AM, Howard L, Pilon M, Kieber
JJ, Schaller GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

Chloroplasts develop from proplastids in a process that requires the interplay of
nuclear and chloroplast genomes, but key steps in this developmental process have
yet to be elucidated. Here, we show that the nucleus-localized transcription
factors GATA NITRATE-INDUCIBLE CARBON-METABOLISM-INVOLVED (GNC) and
CYTOKININ-RESPONSIVE GATA1 (CGA1) regulate chloroplast development, growth, and
division in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). GNC and CGA1 are highly expressed
in green tissues, and the phytohormone cytokinin regulates their expression. A
gnc cga1 mutant exhibits a reduction in overall chlorophyll levels as well as in 
chloroplast size in the hypocotyl. Ectopic overexpression of either GNC or CGA1
promotes chloroplast biogenesis in hypocotyl cortex and root pericycle cells,
based on increases in the number and size of the chloroplasts, and also results
in expanded zones of chloroplast production into the epidermis of hypocotyls and 
cotyledons and into the cortex of roots. Ectopic overexpression also promotes the
development of etioplasts from proplastids in dark-grown seedlings, subsequently 
enhancing the deetiolation process. Inducible expression of GNC demonstrates that
GNC-mediated chloroplast biogenesis can be regulated postembryonically, notably
so for chloroplast production in cotyledon epidermal cells. Analysis of the gnc
cga1 loss-of-function and overexpression lines supports a role for these
transcription factors in regulating the effects of cytokinin on chloroplast
division. These data support a model in which GNC and CGA1 serve as two of the
master transcriptional regulators of chloroplast biogenesis, acting downstream of
cytokinin and mediating the development of chloroplasts from proplastids and
enhancing chloroplast growth and division in specific tissues.

PMCID: PMC3440210
PMID: 22811435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. BMC Syst Biol. 2011;5 Suppl 2:S7. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-5-S2-S7. Epub 2011 Dec
14.

Combinatorial motif analysis of regulatory gene expression in Mafb deficient
macrophages.

Morita M(1), Nakamura M, Hamada M, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1,
Tennodai, Tsukuba, 305-8575, Ibaraki, Japan. c0730195@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Deficiency of the transcription factor MafB, which is normally
expressed in macrophages, can underlie cellular dysfunction associated with a
range of autoimmune diseases and arteriosclerosis. MafB has important roles in
cell differentiation and regulation of target gene expression; however, the
mechanisms of this regulation and the identities of other transcription factors
with which MafB interacts remain uncertain. Bioinformatics methods provide a
valuable approach for elucidating the nature of these interactions with
transcriptional regulatory elements from a large number of DNA sequences. In
particular, identification of patterns of co-occurrence of regulatory
cis-elements (motifs) offers a robust approach.
RESULTS: Here, the directional relationships among several functional motifs were
evaluated using the Log-linear Graphical Model (LGM) after extraction and search 
for evolutionarily conserved motifs. This analysis highlighted GATA-1 motifs and 
5'AT-rich half Maf recognition elements (MAREs) in promoter regions of 18 genes
that were down-regulated in Mafb deficient macrophages. GATA-1 motifs and MafB
motifs could regulate expression of these genes in both a negative and positive
manner, respectively. The validity of this conclusion was tested with data from a
luciferase assay that used a C1qa promoter construct carrying both the GATA-1
motifs and MAREs. GATA-1 was found to inhibit the activity of the C1qa promoter
with the GATA-1 motifs and MafB motifs.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that both the GATA-1 motifs and MafB
motifs are important for lineage specific expression of C1qa. In addition, these 
findings show that analysis of combinations of evolutionarily conserved motifs
can be successfully used to identify patterns of gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3287487
PMID: 22784578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;32(19):3814-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05938-11. Epub 2012 Jul 
16.

A novel complex, RUNX1-MYEF2, represses hematopoietic genes in erythroid cells.

van Riel B(1), Pakozdi T, Brouwer R, Monteiro R, Tuladhar K, Franke V, Bryne JC, 
Jorna R, Rijkers EJ, van Ijcken W, Andrieu-Soler C, Demmers J, Patient R, Soler
E, Lenhard B, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

RUNX1 is known to be an essential transcription factor for generating
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), but much less is known about its role in the
downstream process of hematopoietic differentiation. RUNX1 has been shown to be
part of a large transcription factor complex, together with LDB1, GATA1, TAL1,
and ETO2 (N. Meier et al., Development 133:4913-4923, 2006) in erythroid cells.
We used a tagging strategy to show that RUNX1 interacts with two novel protein
partners, LSD1 and MYEF2, in erythroid cells. MYEF2 is bound in undifferentiated 
cells and is lost upon differentiation, whereas LSD1 is bound in differentiated
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) and
microarray expression analysis were used to show that RUNX1 binds approximately
9,000 target sites in erythroid cells and is primarily active in the
undifferentiated state. Functional analysis shows that a subset of the target
genes is suppressed by RUNX1 via the newly identified partner MYEF2. Knockdown of
Myef2 expression in developing zebrafish results in a reduced number of HSC.

PMCID: PMC3457535
PMID: 22801375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(18):3624-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00163-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
9.

GATA-1 utilizes Ikaros and polycomb repressive complex 2 to suppress Hes1 and to 
promote erythropoiesis.

Ross J(1), Mavoungou L, Bresnick EH, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The transcription factor Hairy Enhancer of Split 1 (HES1), a downstream effector 
of the Notch signaling pathway, is an important regulator of hematopoiesis. Here,
we demonstrate that in primary erythroid cells, Hes1 gene expression is
transiently repressed around proerythroblast stage of differentiation. Using
mouse erythroleukemia cells, we found that the RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated
depletion of HES1 enhances erythroid cell differentiation, suggesting that this
protein opposes terminal erythroid differentiation. This is also supported by the
decreased primary erythroid cell differentiation upon HES1 upregulation in
Ikaros-deficient mice. A comprehensive analysis led us to determine that Ikaros
favors Hes1 repression in erythroid cells by facilitating recruitment of the
master regulator of erythropoiesis GATA-1 alongside FOG-1, which mediates Hes1
repression. GATA-1 is then necessary for the chromatin binding of the NuRD
remodeling complex ATPase MI-2, the transcription factor GFI1B, and the histone
H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2 along with Polycomb repressive complex 2. We show
that EZH2 is required for the transient repression of Hes1 in erythroid cells. In
aggregate, our results describe a mechanism whereby GATA-1 utilizes Ikaros and
Polycomb repressive complex 2 to promote Hes1 repression as an important step in 
erythroid cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3430200
PMID: 22778136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Blood. 2012 Aug 30;120(9):1810-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-414755. Epub 2012
Jul 9.

Clinical characteristics and outcome of refractory/relapsed myeloid leukemia in
children with Down syndrome.

Taga T(1), Saito AM, Kudo K, Tomizawa D, Terui K, Moritake H, Kinoshita A,
Iwamoto S, Nakayama H, Takahashi H, Tawa A, Shimada A, Taki T, Kigasawa H, Koh K,
Adachi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.
ttaga@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

Myeloid leukemia in Down syndrome (ML-DS) is associated with good response to
chemotherapy and favorable prognosis. Because little research has been focused on
refractory/relapsed (R/R) cases, we conducted a retrospective analysis for R/R
ML-DS. Among ML-DS patients diagnosed between 2000 and 2010 in Japan, 26 relapsed
(25 in the BM and 1 in the skin), and 3 refractory patients were enrolled. The
male/female ratio was 18/11. The median age at initial diagnosis of ML-DS was 2
years, and the median time to relapse was 8.6 months. Each patient initially had 
been treated with ML-DS-specific protocols. Thirteen of the 26 patients achieved 
complete remission with various kinds of reinduction chemotherapies; 2 of 8
survived without further recurrence after receiving allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation, and 4 of 5 maintained complete remissions with chemotherapy
alone. Treatment failures mostly were associated with disease progression rather 
than treatment-related toxicities. The 3-year OS rate was 25.9% ± 8.5%. A longer 
duration from initial diagnosis to relapse was a significant favorable prognostic
factor (P < .0001). We conclude that clinical outcome for patients with R/R ML-DS
generally are unfavorable, even in those receiving hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. Novel methods to identify poor prognostic factors for ML-DS are 
necessary.

PMID: 22776818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell. 2012 Aug 24;47(4):608-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.051. Epub 2012 
Jul 5.

Cofactor-mediated restriction of GATA-1 chromatin occupancy coordinates
lineage-specific gene expression.

Chlon TM(1), Doré LC, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

GATA-1 and its cofactor FOG-1 are required for the differentiation of
erythrocytes and megakaryocytes. In contrast, mast cell development requires
GATA-1 and the absence of FOG-1. Through genome-wide comparison of the chromatin 
occupancy of GATA-1 and a naturally occurring mutant that cannot bind FOG-1
(GATA-1(V205G)), we reveal that FOG-1 intricately regulates the chromatin
occupancy of GATA-1. We identified GATA1-selective and GATA-1(V205G)-selective
binding sites and show that GATA-1, in the absence of FOG-1, occupies
GATA-1(V205G)-selective sites, but not GATA1-selective sites. By integrating
ChIP-seq and gene expression data, we discovered that GATA-1(V205G) binds and
activates mast cell-specific genes via GATA-1(V205G)-selective sites. We further 
show that exogenous expression of FOG-1 in mast cells leads to displacement of
GATA-1 from mast cell-specific genes and causes their downregulation. Together
these findings establish a mechanism of gene regulation whereby a non-DNA binding
cofactor directly modulates the occupancy of a transcription factor to control
lineage specification.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432917
PMID: 22771118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039327. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Ginger stimulates hematopoiesis via Bmp pathway in zebrafish.

Ferri-Lagneau KF(1), Moshal KS, Grimes M, Zahora B, Lv L, Sang S, Leung T.

Author information: 
(1)The Biomedical/Biotechnology Research Institute, North Carolina Central
University, North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Anemia is a hematologic disorder with decreased number of
erythrocytes. Erythropoiesis, the process by which red blood cells differentiate,
are conserved in humans, mice and zebrafish. The only known agents available to
treat pathological anemia are erythropoietin and its biologic derivatives.
However, erythropoietin therapy elicits unwanted side-effects, high cost and
intravenous or subcutaneous injection, warranting the development of a more cost 
effective and non-peptide alternative. Ginger (Zingiber officinale) has been
widely used in traditional medicine; however, to date there is no scientific
research documenting the potential of ginger to stimulate hematopoiesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we utilized gata1:dsRed transgenic
zebrafish embryos to investigate the effect of ginger extract on hematopoiesis in
vivo and we identified its bioactive component, 10-gingerol. We confirmed that
ginger and 10-gingerol promote the expression of gata1 in erythroid cells and
increase the expression of hematopoietic progenitor markers cmyb and scl. We also
demonstrated that ginger and 10-gingerol can promote the hematopoietic recovery
from acute hemolytic anemia in zebrafish, by quantifying the number of
circulating erythroid cells in the dorsal aorta using video microscopy. We found 
that ginger and 10-gingerol treatment during gastrulation results in an increase 
of bmp2b and bmp7a expression, and their downstream effectors, gata2 and eve1. At
later stages ginger and 10-gingerol can induce bmp2b/7a, cmyb, scl and lmo2
expression in the caudal hematopoietic tissue area. We further confirmed that
Bmp/Smad pathway mediates this hematopoiesis promoting effect of ginger by using 
the Bmp-activated Bmp type I receptor kinase inhibitors dorsomorphin, LND193189
and DMH1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study provides a strong foundation to further
evaluate the molecular mechanism of ginger and its bioactive components during
hematopoiesis and to investigate their effects in adults. Our results will
provide the basis for future research into the effect of ginger during mammalian 
hematopoiesis to develop novel erythropoiesis promoting agents.

PMCID: PMC3382625
PMID: 22761764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 15;26(14):1587-601. doi: 10.1101/gad.192054.112. Epub 2012
Jul 3.

A Src family kinase-Shp2 axis controls RUNX1 activity in megakaryocyte and
T-lymphocyte differentiation.

Huang H(1), Woo AJ, Waldon Z, Schindler Y, Moran TB, Zhu HH, Feng GS, Steen H,
Cantor AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 15;26(14):1520-6.

Hematopoietic development occurs in complex microenvironments and is influenced
by key signaling events. Yet how these pathways communicate with master
hematopoietic transcription factors to coordinate differentiation remains
incompletely understood. The transcription factor RUNX1 plays essential roles in 
definitive hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) ontogeny, HSC maintenance, megakaryocyte
(Mk) maturation, and lymphocyte differentiation. It is also the most frequent
target of genetic alterations in human leukemia. Here, we report that RUNX1 is
phosphorylated by Src family kinases (SFKs) and that this occurs on multiple
tyrosine residues located within its negative regulatory DNA-binding and
autoinhibitory domains. Retroviral transduction, chemical inhibitor, and genetic 
studies demonstrate a negative regulatory role of tyrosine phosphorylation on
RUNX1 activity in Mk and CD8 T-cell differentiation. We also demonstrate that the
nonreceptor tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 binds directly to RUNX1 and contributes to 
its dephosphorylation. Last, we show that RUNX1 tyrosine phosphorylation
correlates with reduced GATA1 and enhanced SWI/SNF interactions. These findings
link SFK and Shp2 signaling pathways to the regulation of RUNX1 activity in
hematopoiesis via control of RUNX1 multiprotein complex assembly.

PMCID: PMC3404386
PMID: 22759635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Exp Hematol. 2012 Oct;40(10):837-46. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.06.007. Epub 2012
Jun 19.

Effect of endoglin overexpression during embryoid body development.

Baik J(1), Borges L, Magli A, Thatava T, Perlingeiro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Increasing evidence points to endoglin (Eng), an accessory receptor for the
transforming growth factor-ß superfamily commonly associated with the endothelial
lineage, as an important regulator of the hematopoietic lineage. We have shown
that lack of Eng results in reduced numbers of primitive erythroid colonies as
well as downregulation of key hematopoietic genes. To determine the effect of Eng
overexpression in hematopoietic development, we generated a doxycycline-inducible
embryonic stem cell line. Our results demonstrate that induction of Eng during
embryoid body differentiation leads to a significant increase in the frequency of
hematopoietic progenitors, in particular, the erythroid lineage, which correlated
with upregulation of Scl, Gata1, Runx1, and embryonic globin. Interestingly,
activation of the hematopoietic program happened at the expense of endothelial
and cardiac cells, as differentiation into these mesoderm lineages was
compromised. Eng-induced enhanced erythroid activity was accompanied by high
levels of Smad1 phosphorylation. This effect was attenuated by addition of a bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling inhibitor to these cultures. Among the
BMPs, BMP4 is well known for its role in hematopoietic specification from
mesoderm by promoting expression of several hematopoietic genes, including Scl.
Because Scl is considered the master regulator of the hematopoietic program, we
investigated whether Scl would be capable of rescuing the defective hematopoietic
phenotype observed in Eng(-/-) embryonic stem cells. Scl expression in
Eng-deficient embryonic stem cells resulted in increased erythroid colony-forming
activity and upregulation of Gata1 and Gata2, positioning Eng upstream of Scl.
Taken together, these findings support the premise that Eng modulates the
hematopoietic transcriptional network, most likely through regulation of BMP4
signaling.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3447113
PMID: 22728030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2439-43. doi: 10.1172/JCI63597. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Exome sequencing identifies GATA1 mutations resulting in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

Sankaran VG(1), Ghazvinian R, Do R, Thiru P, Vergilio JA, Beggs AH, Sieff CA,
Orkin SH, Nathan DG, Lander ES, Gazda HT.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2346-9.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a hypoplastic anemia characterized by impaired
production of red blood cells, with approximately half of all cases attributed to
ribosomal protein gene mutations. We performed exome sequencing on two siblings
who had no known pathogenic mutations for DBA and identified a mutation in the
gene encoding the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1. This mutation, which 
occurred at a splice site of the GATA1 gene, impaired production of the
full-length form of the protein. We further identified an additional patient
carrying a distinct mutation at the same splice site of the GATA1 gene. These
findings provide insight into the pathogenesis of DBA, showing that the reduction
in erythropoiesis associated with the disease can arise from causes other than
defects in ribosomal protein genes. These results also illustrate the
multifactorial role of GATA1 in human hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3386831
PMID: 22706301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2346-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI63989. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

What's in a name?

Weiss MJ, Mason PJ, Bessler M.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2439-43.

Mutations in numerous genes encoding ribosomal proteins (RPs) occur in 50%-70% of
individuals with Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA), establishing the disease as a
ribosomopathy. As described in this issue of JCI, Sankaran, Gazda, and colleagues
used genome-wide exome sequencing to study DBA patients with no detectable
mutations in RP genes. They identified two unrelated pedigrees in which the
disease is associated with mutations in GATA1, which encodes an essential
hematopoietic transcription factor with no known mechanistic links to ribosomes. 
These findings ignite an interesting and potentially emotional debate on how we
define DBA and whether the term should be restricted to pure ribosomopathies.
More generally, the work reflects the powerful knowledge and controversies
arising from the deluge of data generated by new genetic technologies that are
being used to analyze human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3386834
PMID: 22706300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Proteomics. 2012 Dec 21;77:14-26. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.06.003. Epub 2012
Jun 15.

BCR/ABL modulates protein phosphorylation associated with the etoposide-induced
DNA damage response.

Griaud F(1), Williamson AJ, Taylor S, Potier DN, Spooncer E, Pierce A, Whetton
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Leukaemia Proteomics Laboratory, Manchester Academic Health,
Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Wolfson Molecular Imaging, Centre, 
27 Palatine Road, Withington, Manchester, M20 3LJ, UK.

BCR/ABL expression is the key characteristic of chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML). 
The progression of CML is associated with genomic instability. Systematic
analysis of DNA damage signalling in the presence of BCR/ABL thus offers
opportunities to identify mechanisms of leukaemic progression. We therefore
undertook a quantitative phosphoproteomics study to test whether BCR/ABL
expression could globally affect the response to genotoxic stress signalling.
Etoposide-induced DNA damage was chosen and the concentration and time of
exposure determined such that apoptosis was not associated with the study. More
than 1100 phosphoentities were identified. BCR/ABL was shown to significantly
alter the response to etoposide in many cases. These include sites on MDC1, a key
component of DNA repair, and Hemogen. Hemogen is a transcriptional target of
HOXB4 and GATA1, two transcription factors involved in haemopoietic development, 
and is overexpressed in acute myeloid leukaemia. To validate Hemogen
phosphorylation, absolute quantification using an isotopomeric standard and
selected reaction monitoring was performed. This revealed a strong correlation
with isobaric tagging data and offering quantification at about 10 fmol per
million cells. Furthermore we found that multiple protein phosphorylation changes
mediated by BCR/ABL were connected to the increased activation of NF<U+03BA>B, a key
survival transcription factor, after etoposide exposure.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22705319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cell. 2012 Jun 8;149(6):1233-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.051.

Controlling long-range genomic interactions at a native locus by targeted
tethering of a looping factor.

Deng W(1), Lee J, Wang H, Miller J, Reik A, Gregory PD, Dean A, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Chromatin loops juxtapose distal enhancers with active promoters, but their
molecular architecture and relationship with transcription remain unclear. In
erythroid cells, the locus control region (LCR) and ß-globin promoter form a
chromatin loop that requires transcription factor GATA1 and the associated
molecule Ldb1. We employed artificial zinc fingers (ZF) to tether Ldb1 to the
ß-globin promoter in GATA1 null erythroblasts, in which the ß-globin locus is
relaxed and inactive. Remarkably, targeting Ldb1 or only its self-association
domain to the ß-globin promoter substantially activated ß-globin transcription in
the absence of GATA1. Promoter-tethered Ldb1 interacted with endogenous Ldb1
complexes at the LCR to form a chromatin loop, causing recruitment and
phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II. ZF-Ldb1 proteins were inactive at alleles
lacking the LCR, demonstrating that their activities depend on long-range
interactions. Our findings establish Ldb1 as a critical effector of
GATA1-mediated loop formation and indicate that chromatin looping causally
underlies gene regulation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3372860
PMID: 22682246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Cancer Cell Int. 2012 Jun 7;12(1):25. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-12-25.

Acute myeloid leukemia and transcription factors: role of erythroid Krüppel-like 
factor (EKLF).

Ayala R(1), Martínez-López J, Gilsanz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
rayaladiaz@hematologia12octubre.com.

We have investigated the role of erythroid transcription factors mRNA expression 
in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in the context of cytogenetic and
other prognostic molecular markers, such as FMS-like Tyrosine Kinase 3 (FLT3),
Nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1), and CCAAT/enhance-binding protein a (CEBPA) mutations.
Further validation of Erythroid Krüppel-like Factor (EKLF) mRNA expression as a
prognostic factor was assessed.We evaluated GATA binding protein 1 (GATA1), GATA 
binding protein 2 (GATA2), EKLF and Myeloproliferative Leukemia virus oncogen
homology (cMPL) gene mRNA expression in the bone marrow of 65 AML patients at
diagnosis, and assessed any correlation with NPM1, FLT3 and CEBPA mutations.
EKLF-positive AML was associated with lower WBC in peripheral blood (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.049), 
a higher percentage of erythroblasts in bone marrow (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.057), and secondary
AMLs (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.036). High expression levels of EKLF showed a trend to association
with T-cell antigen expression, such as CD7 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.057). Patients expressing EKLF
had longer Overall Survival (OS) and Event Free Survival (EFS) than those
patients not expressing EKLF (median OS was 35.61 months and 19.31 months,
respectively, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0241; median EFS was 19.80 months and 8.03 months,
respectively, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0140). No correlation of GATA1, GATA2, EKLF and cMPL levels
was observed with FLT-3 or NPM1 mutation status. Four of four CEBPA mutated AMLs 
were EKLF positive versus 10 of 29 CEBPA wild-type AMLs; three of the CEBPA
mutated, EKLF-positive AMLs were also GATA2 positive. There were no cases of
CEBPA mutations in the EKLF-negative AML group. In conclusion, we have validated 
EKLF mRNA expression as an independent predictor of outcome in AML, and its
expression is not associated with FLT3-ITD and NPM1 mutations. EKLF mRNA
expression in AML patients may correlate with dysregulated CEBPA.

PMCID: PMC3407786
PMID: 22676581  [PubMed]


353. J Transl Med. 2012 Jun 7;10:116. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-116.

JAK-STAT and AKT pathway-coupled genes in erythroid progenitor cells through
ontogeny.

Cokic VP(1), Bhattacharya B, Beleslin-Cokic BB, Noguchi CT, Puri RK, Schechter
AN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute for Medical Research,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, 11129, Serbia. vl@imi.bg.ac.rs

BACKGROUND: It has been reported that the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)-AKT signaling pathway regulates erythropoietin (EPO)-induced survival,
proliferation, and maturation of early erythroid progenitors. Erythroid cell
proliferation and survival have also been related to activation of the JAK-STAT
pathway. The goal of this study was to observe the function of EPO activation of 
JAK-STAT and PI3K/AKT pathways in the development of erythroid progenitors from
hematopoietic CD34+ progenitor cells, as well as to distinguish early EPO target 
genes in human erythroid progenitors during ontogeny.
METHODS: Hematopoietic CD34+ progenitor cells, isolated from fetal and adult
hematopoietic tissues, were differentiated into erythroid progenitor cells. We
have used microarray analysis to examine JAK-STAT and PI3K/AKT related genes, as 
well as broad gene expression modulation in these human erythroid progenitor
cells.
RESULTS: In microarray studies, a total of 1755 genes were expressed in fetal
liver, 3844 in cord blood, 1770 in adult bone marrow, and 1325 genes in
peripheral blood-derived erythroid progenitor cells. The erythroid progenitor
cells shared 1011 common genes. Using the Ingenuity Pathways Analysis software,
we evaluated the network pathways of genes linked to hematological system
development, cellular growth and proliferation. The KITLG, EPO, GATA1, PIM1 and
STAT3 genes represent the major connection points in the hematological system
development linked genes. Some JAK-STAT signaling pathway-linked genes were
steadily upregulated throughout ontogeny (PIM1, SOCS2, MYC, PTPN11), while others
were downregulated (PTPN6, PIAS, SPRED2). In addition, some JAK-STAT pathway
related genes are differentially expressed only in some stages of ontogeny
(STATs, GRB2, CREBB). Beside the continuously upregulated (AKT1, PPP2CA, CHUK,
NFKB1) and downregulated (FOXO1, PDPK1, PIK3CG) genes in the PI3K-AKT signaling
pathway, we also observed intermittently regulated gene expression (NFKBIA,
YWHAH).
CONCLUSIONS: This broad overview of gene expression in erythropoiesis revealed
transcription factors differentially expressed in some stages of ontogenesis.
Finally, our results show that EPO-mediated proliferation and survival of
erythroid progenitors occurs mainly through modulation of JAK-STAT pathway
associated STATs, GRB2 and PIK3 genes, as well as AKT pathway-coupled NFKBIA and 
YWHAH genes.

PMCID: PMC3412720
PMID: 22676255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7690-704. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Integration of Hi-C and ChIP-seq data reveals distinct types of chromatin
linkages.

Lan X(1), Witt H, Katsumura K, Ye Z, Wang Q, Bresnick EH, Farnham PJ, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, 460 W 12th Avenue, 212 BRT, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

We have analyzed publicly available K562 Hi-C data, which enable genome-wide
unbiased capturing of chromatin interactions, using a Mixture Poisson Regression 
Model and a power-law decay background to define a highly specific set of
interacting genomic regions. We integrated multiple ENCODE Consortium resources
with the Hi-C data, using DNase-seq data and ChIP-seq data for 45 transcription
factors and 9 histone modifications. We classified 12 different sets (clusters)
of interacting loci that can be distinguished by their chromatin modifications
and which can be categorized into two types of chromatin linkages. The different 
clusters of loci display very different relationships with transcription
factor-binding sites. As expected, many of the transcription factors show binding
patterns specific to clusters composed of interacting loci that encompass
promoters or enhancers. However, cluster 9, which is distinguished by marks of
open chromatin but not by active enhancer or promoter marks, was not bound by
most transcription factors but was highly enriched for three transcription
factors (GATA1, GATA2 and c-Jun) and three chromatin modifiers (BRG1, INI1 and
SIRT6). To investigate the impact of chromatin organization on gene regulation,
we performed ribonucleicacid-seq analyses before and after knockdown of GATA1 or 
GATA2. We found that knockdown of the GATA factors not only alters the expression
of genes having a nearby bound GATA but also affects expression of genes in
interacting loci. Our work, in combination with previous studies linking
regulation by GATA factors with c-Jun and BRG1, provides genome-wide evidence
that Hi-C data identify sets of biologically relevant interacting loci.

PMCID: PMC3439894
PMID: 22675074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2012 Oct;34(7):565-8.

Spontaneous remission of childhood acute marrow fibrosis and megakaryoblastic
leukemia.

Elhasid R(1), Tohami T, Moustafa-Hawash N, Ben-Ezra J, Izraeli S, Sayar D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv
University, Israel. ronite@tasmc.health.gov.il

Spontaneous remission in 2 children with myelofibrosis, one with megakaryocytic
acute myeloblastic leukemia and t(1;22) (with recurrence later) and one with Down
syndrome and GATA1 mutation (permanent), are described. One had sepsis and was
treated with antibiotics and blood products, whereas the other received only
blood products. Remission was spontaneous, without chemotherapy treatment.
Possible explanations for these outcomes include immunologic response to sepsis
by a leukemia-specific T-cell response or the release of various cytokines, such 
as tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-2, during infections. Natural killer and
cytotoxic T cells transfused with blood products might have also triggered an
immune response.

PMID: 22627572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1819(8):885-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.05.001.
Epub 2012 May 18.

Ldb1 regulates carbonic anhydrase 1 during erythroid differentiation.

Song SH(1), Kim A, Dale R, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. song1030@snu.ac.kr

Carbonic anhydrase 1 (Car1), an early specific marker of the erythroid
differentiation, has been used to distinguish fetal and adult erythroid cells
since its production closely follows the <U+03B3>- to ß-globin transition, but the
molecular mechanism underlying transcriptional regulation of Car1 is unclear.
Here, we show that Car1 mRNA decreases significantly when erythroid
differentiation is induced in MEL cells. The Ldb1 protein complex including
GATA1/SCL/LMO2 binds to the Car1 promoter in uninduced cells and reduced
enrichment of the complex during differentiation correlates with loss of Car1
expression. Knockdown of Ldb1 results in a reduction of Ser2 phosphorylated RNA
Pol II and Cdk9 at the Car1 promoter region, suggesting that Ldb1 is required for
recruitment of Pol II as well as the transcription regulator P-TEFb to enhance
elongation of Car1 transcripts. Taken together, these data show that Ldb1 forms a
regulatory complex to maintain Car1 expression in erythroid cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3720789
PMID: 22609543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Hypertension. 2012 Jun;59(6):1232-40. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.183608.
Epub 2012 May 7.

Pulsatile atheroprone shear stress affects the expression of transient receptor
potential channels in human endothelial cells.

Thilo F(1), Vorderwülbecke BJ, Marki A, Krueger K, Liu Y, Baumunk D, Zakrzewicz
A, Tepel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
Florian.Thilo@charite.de

The goal of the study was to assess whether pulsatile atheroprone shear stress
modulates the expression of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, TRPC3,
TRPC6, TRPM7, and TRPV1 mRNA, in human umbilical vascular endothelial cells.
Exposure of cultured vascular endothelial cells to defined shear stress,
producing a constant laminar flow (generating a shear stress of 6 dyne/cm(2)),
laminar pulsatile atheroprotective flow (with a mean shear stress of 20
dyne/cm(2)), or laminar atheroprone bidirectional flow (with a mean shear stress 
of 0 dyne/cm(2)) differentially induced TRPC6 and TRPV1 mRNA as measured by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH expression. Thereby, TRPC6 
and TRPV1 mRNA expressions were significantly increased after 24 hours of
exposure to an atheroprone flow profile compared with an atheroprotective flow
profile. Furthermore, the expression of transcription factors GATA1 and GATA4 was
significantly correlated with the expression of TRPC6 mRNA. In contrast, after 24
hours of constant laminar flow, the expression of TRPC6 and TRPV1 mRNA was
unchanged, whereas the expression of TRPC3 and TRPM7 was significantly higher in 
endothelial cells exposed to shear stress in comparison with endothelial cells
grown under static conditions. There was a significant association between the
expression of TRPC6 and tumor necrosis factor-a mRNA in human vascular tissue.
No-flow and atheroprone flow conditions are equally characterized by an increase 
in the expression of tumor necrosis factor-a; however, inflammation-associated
endothelial cell reactions may be further aggravated at atheroprone flow
conditions by the increase of TRPV1 and TRPC6, as observed in our study.

PMID: 22566504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 20;21(17):3197-208. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0112. Epub
2012 Jun 11.

Mild hyperthermia promotes and accelerates development and maturation of
erythroid cells.

Tounkara FK(1), Dumont N, Fournier S, Boyer L, Nadeau P, Pineault N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development, Héma-Québec, Québec, Province of
Québec, Canada.

Hyperthermia treatment has at times been associated with increased platelet
levels in humans. The heat shock protein HSP70, which can be induced by
hyperthermia in megakaryocytes and erythrocytes, was recently shown to protect
GATA-1 from degradation and to be required for erythroid differentiation. Based
on these findings, we hypothesize that mild hyperthermia (MH), such as fever
(39°C), could impact the differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors into
erythrocytes and their subsequent maturation. Cell growth and erythroid
differentiation increased dramatically in cord blood CD34(+) cell cultures
incubated under MH. Erythroid maturation was also strongly promoted, which
resulted in an increased proportion of hemoglobinized and enucleated erythroids. 
The rise in erythroid development was traced to a strong synergistic activity
between MH and erythropoietin (EPO). The molecular basis for this potent synergy 
appears to originate from the capacity of MH to increase the basal activation of 
several signaling molecules downstream of the EPO receptor and the
transcriptional activity of GATA-1. Moreover, the potent impact of MH on
erythroid development was found be dependent on increased intracellular levels of
reactive oxygen species. Thus, fever-like temperatures can promote the
differentiation of progenitors along the erythroid lineage and accelerate their
maturation through normal regulatory circuitry.

PMID: 22564002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Sep;38(1):187-92. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2012.04.008. Epub
2012 May 2.

The role of Nfil3 in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Progatzky F(1), Taylor H, Bugeon L, Cassidy S, Radbruch A, Dallman MJ, Lamb JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial 
College London, London, UK. fraenze.progatzky09@imperial.ac.uk

Nfil3, a transcription factor that has an array of functions in immune cells, has
been described as key regulator of CD8a(+) dendritic cell and natural killer cell
development in mice. In this report we show that Nfil3 is enriched in the myeloid
compartment of adult zebrafish including eosinophils. Knockdown of Nfil3 in
pu.1:GFP embryos resulted in a reduced number of myeloid cells as early as 24h
post-fertilization, while erythropoiesis was unaffected. Using mpx and
fms-fluorescent transgenic fish we found that all myeloid cell lineages, and in
particular macrophages, had reduced numbers at 4days post-fertilization. This was
reflected by less myeloid cells accumulating at a wound site. Pu.1, l-plastin,
csf1r and mpx had reduced expression in Nfil3 morphants while runx1, gata1 and
rag1 were unaffected. Collectively, these results describe a conserved expression
pattern of Nfil3 in evolutionarily divergent species and indicate that Nfil3 is
central to myeloid lineage commitment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22561072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 15;287(25):21439-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.370437. Epub
2012 May 2.

N- and C-terminal transactivation domains of GATA1 protein coordinate
hematopoietic program.

Kaneko H(1), Kobayashi E, Yamamoto M, Shimizu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA1 regulates the expression of a cluster of genes
important for hematopoietic cell differentiation toward erythroid and
megakaryocytic lineages. Three functional domains have been identified in GATA1, 
a transactivation domain located in the N terminus (N-TAD) and two zinc finger
domains located in the middle of the molecule. Although N-TAD is known as a
solitary transactivation domain for GATA1, clinical observations in Down syndrome
leukemia suggest that there may be additional transactivation domains. In this
study, we found in reporter co-transfection assays that transactivation activity 
of GATA1 was markedly reduced by deletion of the C-terminal 95 amino acids
without significant attenuation of the DNA binding activity or self-association
potential. We therefore generated transgenic mouse lines that expressed GATA1
lacking the C-terminal region (GATA1-<U+0394>CT). When we crossed these transgenic mouse
lines to the Gata1-deficient mouse, we found that the GATA1-<U+0394>CT transgene rescued
Gata1-deficient mice from embryonic lethality. The embryos rescued with an almost
similar level of GATA1-<U+0394>CT to endogenous GATA1 developed beyond embryonic 13.5
days, showing severe anemia with accumulation of immature erythroid cells, as was
the case for the embryos rescued by endogenous levels of GATA1 lacking N-TAD
(GATA1-<U+0394>NT). Distinct sets of target genes were affected in the embryos rescued
by GATA1-<U+0394>CT and GATA1-<U+0394>NT. We also found attenuated GATA1 function in cell cycle
control of immature megakaryocytes in both lines of rescued embryos. These
results thus demonstrate that GATA1 has two independent transactivation domains, 
N-TAD and C-TAD. Both N-TAD and C-TAD retain redundant as well as specific
activities for proper hematopoiesis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3375565
PMID: 22556427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Dev Biol. 2012 Jun 15;366(2):185-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.03.021. Epub 2012 
Apr 19.

Zebrafish globin switching occurs in two developmental stages and is controlled
by the LCR.

Ganis JJ(1), Hsia N, Trompouki E, de Jong JL, DiBiase A, Lambert JS, Jia Z, Sabo 
PJ, Weaver M, Sandstrom R, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Zhou Y, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical
School, 1 Blackfan Cir., Karp 7, Boston, MA 02115, USA. jganis@fas.harvard.edu

Globin gene switching is a complex, highly regulated process allowing expression 
of distinct globin genes at specific developmental stages. Here, for the first
time, we have characterized all of the zebrafish globins based on the completed
genomic sequence. Two distinct chromosomal loci, termed major (chromosome 3) and 
minor (chromosome 12), harbor the globin genes containing a/ß pairs in a 5'-3' to
3'-5' orientation. Both these loci share synteny with the mammalian a-globin
locus. Zebrafish globin expression was assayed during development and
demonstrated two globin switches, similar to human development. A conserved
regulatory element, the locus control region (LCR), was revealed by analyzing
DNase I hypersensitive sites, H3K4 trimethylation marks and GATA1 binding sites. 
Surprisingly, the position of these sites with relation to the globin genes is
evolutionarily conserved, despite a lack of overall sequence conservation. Motifs
within the zebrafish LCR include CACCC, GATA, and NFE2 sites, suggesting
functional interactions with known transcription factors but not the same LCR
architecture. Functional homology to the mammalian a-LCR MCS-R2 region was
confirmed by robust and specific reporter expression in erythrocytes of
transgenic zebrafish. Our studies provide a comprehensive characterization of the
zebrafish globin loci and clarify the regulation of globin switching.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3378398
PMID: 22537494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. BMC Genomics. 2012 Apr 26;13:153. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-153.

Characterization of the transcriptome profiles related to globin gene switching
during in vitro erythroid maturation.

Li B(1), Ding L, Li W, Story MD, Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pediatrics, Georgia Health Sciences University, 1120 15th St,
CN-4112, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

BACKGROUND: The fetal and adult globin genes in the human ß-globin cluster on
chromosome 11 are sequentially expressed to achieve normal hemoglobin switching
during human development. The pharmacological induction of fetal <U+03B3>-globin (HBG)
to replace abnormal adult sickle ßS-globin is a successful strategy to treat
sickle cell disease; however the molecular mechanism of <U+03B3>-gene silencing after
birth is not fully understood. Therefore, we performed global gene expression
profiling using primary erythroid progenitors grown from human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells to characterize gene expression patterns during the <U+03B3>-globin to
ß-globin (<U+03B3>/ß) switch observed throughout in vitro erythroid differentiation.
RESULTS: We confirmed erythroid maturation in our culture system using cell
morphologic features defined by Giemsa staining and the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch by
reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis. We observed maximal
<U+03B3>-globin expression at day 7 with a switch to a predominance of ß-globin
expression by day 28 and the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch occurred around day 21. Expression
patterns for transcription factors including GATA1, GATA2, KLF1 and NFE2
confirmed our system produced the expected pattern of expression based on the
known function of these factors in globin gene regulation. Subsequent gene
expression profiling was performed with RNA isolated from progenitors harvested
at day 7, 14, 21, and 28 in culture. Three major gene profiles were generated by 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). For profile-1 genes, where expression
decreased from day 7 to day 28, we identified 2,102 genes down-regulated >
1.5-fold. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) for profile-1 genes demonstrated
involvement of the Cdc42, phospholipase C, NF-Kß, Interleukin-4, and p38 mitogen 
activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. Transcription factors known
to be involved in <U+03B3>-and ß-globin regulation were identified.The same approach was
used to generate profile-2 genes where expression was up-regulated over 28 days
in culture. IPA for the 2,437 genes with > 1.5-fold induction identified the
mitotic roles of polo-like kinase, aryl hydrocarbon receptor, cell cycle control,
and ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Protein) signaling pathways; transcription
factors identified included KLF1, GATA1 and NFE2 among others. Finally, profile-3
was generated from 1,579 genes with maximal expression at day 21, around the time
of the <U+03B3>/ß-globin switch. IPA identified associations with cell cycle control,
ATM, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptome analysis completed with erythroid progenitors
grown in vitro identified groups of genes with distinct expression profiles,
which function in metabolic pathways associated with cell survival,
hematopoiesis, blood cells activation, and inflammatory responses. This study
represents the first report of a transcriptome analysis in human primary
erythroid progenitors to identify transcription factors involved in hemoglobin
switching. Our results also demonstrate that the in vitro liquid culture system
is an excellent model to define mechanisms of global gene expression and the
DNA-binding protein and signaling pathways involved in globin gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3353202
PMID: 22537182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Blood. 2012 Jun 7;119(23):5417-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-11-391896. Epub 2012
Apr 24.

A critical role for endoglin in the emergence of blood during embryonic
development.

Borges L(1), Iacovino M, Mayerhofer T, Koyano-Nakagawa N, Baik J, Garry DJ, Kyba 
M, Letarte M, Perlingeiro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Much remains unknown about the signals that induce early mesoderm to initiate
hematopoietic differentiation. Here, we show that endoglin (Eng), a receptor for 
the TGFß superfamily, identifies all cells with hematopoietic fate in the early
embryo. These arise in an Eng(+)Flk1(+) mesodermal precursor population at
embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5), a cell fraction also endowed with endothelial
potential. In Eng-knockout embryos, hematopoietic colony activity and numbers of 
CD71(+)Ter119(+) erythroid progenitors were severely reduced. This coincided with
severely reduced expression of embryonic globin and key bone morphogenic protein 
(BMP) target genes, including the hematopoietic regulators Scl, Gata1, Gata2, and
Msx-1. To interrogate molecular pathways active in the earliest hematopoietic
progenitors, we applied transcriptional profiling to sorted cells from E7.5
embryos. Eng(+)Flk-1(+) progenitors coexpressed TGFß and BMP receptors and target
genes. Furthermore, Eng(+)Flk-1(+) cells presented high levels of
phospho-SMAD1/5, indicating active TGFß and/or BMP signaling. Remarkably, under
hematopoietic serum-free culture conditions, hematopoietic outgrowth of
Eng-expressing cells was dependent on the TGFß superfamily ligands BMP4, BMP2, or
TGF-ß1. These data demonstrate that the E(+)F(+) fraction at E7.5 represents
mesodermal cells competent to respond to TGFß1, BMP4, or BMP2, shaping their
hematopoietic development, and that Eng acts as a critical regulator in this
process by modulating TGF/BMP signaling.

PMCID: PMC3369678
PMID: 22535663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Klin Padiatr. 2012 Apr;224(3):153-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1308988. Epub 2012 Apr
18.

[GATA1-mutation associated leukemia in children with trisomy 21 mosaic].

[Article in German]

Reinhardt D(1), Reinhardt K, Neuhoff C, Sander A, Klusmann JH, Pekrun A,
Sauerbrey A, von Stackelberg A, Rössig C, Creutzig U, Kolenova A.

Author information: 
(1)Kinderheilkunde, Pädiatrische Onkologie und Hämatologie, Medizinische
-Hochschule Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Straße 1, Hannover.
reinhardt.dirk@mh-hannover.de

Mutations of the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1 (GATA1s) are
pathognomonic in newborn with transient leukemia and children with Down syndrome 
and myeloid leukemia (ML-DS). Both TL and ML-DS can also occur in children with
trisomy 21 mosaic.Between 2002 and 2011, 15 newborns and infants were diagnosed
with DS mosaic. 9 of them presented with TL and 8 children suffered from ML-DS; 2
of them with a history of TL. In children without stigmata the special morphology
and immunophenotype of blasts triggered the screening for GATA1 mutation and
trisomy 21 mosaic.All newborns with TL achieved complete remission (CR). Due to
clinical symptoms caused by the leukemic blasts, in 3 children low-dose
cytarabine was applied. 1 patient died due to cardiac defect. In all patients
GATA 1 s was confirmed. 6 children with ML-DS were initially treated according
the AML-BFM protocol. After ML-DS was confirmed, therapy was continued with the
intensity reduced schedule according to the ML-DS 2006 protocol. All children are
still in CR (follow-up 1.8-7 years, median 2.7 yrs). 2 children with unknown
trisomy 21 mosaic were diagnosed as acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) and
treated according the high risk arm of the AML-BFM 2004 including allogeneic stem
cell transplantation in one child). GATA1 mutation was identified
retrospectively. Both children are alive in CR.GATA1s associated leukemia has to 
be excluded in all young children with AMKL (<5 years old) to prevent
overtreatment. Treatment with reduced intensity seems sufficient in children
trisomy 21 mosaic and ML-DS.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22513796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 4;421(2):367-74. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.019. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Vap (Vascular Associated Protein): a novel factor involved in erythropoiesis and 
angiogenesis.

Kawahara A(1), Endo S, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)HMRO, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Yoshida, Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto 606-8501,
Japan. a.kawahara@riken.jp

Both endothelial and erythroid cells are generated in the intermediate cell mass 
(ICM) during zebrafish embryogenesis, but the nature of the genes that contribute
to the processes of erythrocyte maturation and blood vessel network formation is 
not fully understood. From our in situ-based screening, we have identified a
novel factor, Vap (Vascular Associated Protein) that is predominantly expressed
in the ICM, and subsequently enriched in endothelial cells. Vap expression in the
ICM was drastically suppressed in the cloche mutant that has defects in both
vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis, whereas Vap expression was not affected in the 
vlad tepes/gata1 mutant. Knockdown of Vap using anti-sense morpholinos (VAP-MO)
not only resulted in decreased numbers of erythrocytes but also in the strong
suppression of hemoglobin production. Further, we found that Vap knockdown caused
the disorganization of the intersegmental vessels (ISVs), which show irregular
branching. We propose that Vap plays an important role in the maturation of
endothelial and erythroid cells in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3412281
PMID: 22510405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2012 Mar;53(3):287-94.

[Genome-wide analysis of GATA transcription factor in hematopoietic cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujiwara T.

PMID: 22499044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Dev Biol. 2012 May 1;365(1):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.023. Epub 2012 Feb
24.

Mapping mouse hemangioblast maturation from headfold stages.

Rhee JM(1), Iannaccone PM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Developmental
Biology Program, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
IL, USA. jerry-rhee@northwestern.edu

The mouse posterior primitive streak at neural plate/headfold stages (NP/HF, ~7.5
dpc-8 dpc) represents an optimal window from which hemangioblasts can be
isolated. We performed immunohistochemistry on this domain using established
monoclonal antibodies for proteins that affect blood and endothelial fates. We
demonstrate that HoxB4 and GATA1 are the first set of markers that segregate
independently to endothelial or blood populations during NP/HF stages of mouse
embryonic development. In a subset of cells, both proteins are co-expressed and
immunoreactivities appear mutually excluded within nuclear spaces. We searched
for this particular state at later sites of hematopoietic stem cell emergence,
viz., the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) and the fetal liver at 10.5-11.5 dpc, and
found that only a rare number of cells displayed this character. Based on this
spatial-temporal argument, we propose that the earliest blood progenitors emerge 
either directly from the epiblast or through segregation within the allantoic
core domain (ACD) through reduction of cell adhesion and pSmad1/5 nuclear
signaling, followed by a stochastic decision toward a blood or endothelial fate
that involves GATA1 and HoxB4, respectively. A third form in which binding
distributions are balanced may represent a common condition shared by
hemangioblasts and HSCs. We developed a heuristic model of hemangioblast
maturation, in part, to be explicit about our assumptions.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3322272
PMID: 22426104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Aug;17(4):196-201. doi:
10.1016/j.siny.2012.02.010. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Biology and management of transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) in children with 
Down syndrome.

Roy A(1), Roberts I, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haematology, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) have an increased risk of Acute Myeloid
Leukaemia (ML-DS), particularly megakaryoblastic leukaemia, which is clonally
-related to the neonatal myeloproliferative syndrome, Transient Abnormal
Myelopoiesis (TAM) unique to infants with DS. Molecular, biological, and clinical
data indicate that TAM is initiated before birth when fetal liver haematopoietic 
cells trisomic for chromosome 21 acquire mutations in GATA1. TAM usually resolves
spontaneously by 6 months; however 20-30% subsequently develop ML-DS harbouring
the same GATA1 mutation(s). This review focuses on recent studies describing
haematological, clinical and biological features of TAM and discusses approaches 
to diagnose, treat and monitor minimal residual disease in TAM. An important
unanswered question is whether ML-DS is always preceded by TAM as it may be
clinically and possibly haematologically 'silent'. We have briefly discussed the 
role of population-based screening for TAM and development of treatment
strategies to eliminate the preleukaemic TAM clone, thereby preventing ML-DS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22421527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Blood. 2012 Apr 19;119(16):3779-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-336743. Epub 2012 
Mar 9.

Efficacy of vorinostat in a murine model of polycythemia vera.

Akada H(1), Akada S, Gajra A, Bair A, Graziano S, Hutchison RE, Mohi G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, State University of New York Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, 13210, USA.

The discovery of the JAK2V617F mutation in most patients with Ph-negative
myeloproliferative neoplasms has led to the development of JAK2 kinase
inhibitors. However, JAK2 inhibitor therapy has shown limited efficacy and
dose-limiting hematopoietic toxicities in clinical trials. In the present study, 
we describe the effects of vorinostat, a small-molecule inhibitor of histone
deacetylase, against cells expressing JAK2V617F and in an animal model of
polycythemia vera (PV). We found that vorinostat markedly inhibited proliferation
and induced apoptosis in cells expressing JAK2V617F. In addition, vorinostat
significantly inhibited JAK2V617F-expressing mouse and human PV hematopoietic
progenitors. Biochemical analyses revealed significant inhibition of
phosphorylation of JAK2, Stat5, Stat3, Akt, and Erk1/2 in vorinostat-treated,
JAK2V617F-expressing human erythroleukemia (HEL) cells. Expression of JAK2V617F
and several other genes, including GATA1, KLF1, FOG1, SCL, C/EPBa, PU.1, and
NF-E2, was significantly down-regulated, whereas the expression of SOCS1 and
SOCS3 was up-regulated by vorinostat treatment. More importantly, we observed
that vorinostat treatment normalized the peripheral blood counts and markedly
reduced splenomegaly in Jak2V617F knock-in mice compared with placebo treatment. 
Vorinostat treatment also decreased the mutant allele burden in mice. Our results
suggest that vorinostat may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of PV
and other JAK2V617F-associated myeloproliferative neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC3335382
PMID: 22408262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Blood. 2012 May 31;119(22):5301-10. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-387167. Epub 2012 
Mar 9.

Expression of ABO blood-group genes is dependent upon an erythroid cell-specific 
regulatory element that is deleted in persons with the B(m) phenotype.

Sano R(1), Nakajima T, Takahashi K, Kubo R, Kominato Y, Tsukada J, Takeshita H,
Yasuda T, Ito K, Maruhashi T, Yokohama A, Isa K, Ogasawara K, Uchikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan.

The ABO blood group is of great importance in blood transfusion and organ
transplantation. However, the mechanisms regulating human ABO gene expression
remain obscure. On the basis of DNase I-hypersensitive sites in and upstream of
ABO in K562 cells, in the present study, we prepared reporter plasmid constructs 
including these sites. Subsequent luciferase assays indicated a novel positive
regulatory element in intron 1. This element was shown to enhance ABO promoter
activity in an erythroid cell-specific manner. Electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays demonstrated that it bound to the tissue-restricted transcription factor
GATA-1. Mutation of the GATA motifs to abrogate binding of this factor reduced
the regulatory activity of the element. Therefore, GATA-1 appears to be involved 
in the cell-specific activity of the element. Furthermore, we found that a
partial deletion in intron 1 involving the element was associated with B(m)
phenotypes. Therefore, it is plausible that deletion of the erythroid
cell-specific regulatory element could down-regulate transcription in the B(m)
allele, leading to reduction of B-antigen expression in cells of erythroid
lineage, but not in mucus-secreting cells. These results support the contention
that the enhancer-like element in intron 1 of ABO has a significant function in
erythroid cells.

PMID: 22408256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Immunogenetics. 2012 Jul;64(7):497-505. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0608-2. Epub 2012
Mar 7.

Molecular evolution of a malaria resistance gene (DARC) in primates.

Oliveira TY(1), Harris EE, Meyer D, Jue CK, Silva WA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA. stratus@lgmb.fmrp.usp.br

Genes involved in host-pathogen interactions are often strongly affected by
positive natural selection. The Duffy antigen, coded by the Duffy antigen
receptor for chemokines (DARC) gene, serves as a receptor for Plasmodium vivax in
humans and for Plasmodium knowlesi in some nonhuman primates. In the majority of 
sub-Saharan Africans, a nucleic acid variant in GATA-1 of the gene promoter is
responsible for the nonexpression of the Duffy antigen on red blood cells and
consequently resistance to invasion by P. vivax. The Duffy antigen also acts as a
receptor for chemokines and is expressed in red blood cells and many other
tissues of the body. Because of this dual role, we sequenced a ~3,000-bp region
encompassing the entire DARC gene as well as part of its 5' and 3' flanking
regions in a phylogenetic sample of primates and used statistical methods to
evaluate the nature of selection pressures acting on the gene during its
evolution. We analyzed both coding and regulatory regions of the DARC gene. The
regulatory analysis showed accelerated rates of substitution at several sites
near known motifs. Our tests of positive selection in the coding region using
maximum likelihood by branch sites and maximum likelihood by codon sites did not 
yield statistically significant evidence for the action of positive selection.
However, the maximum likelihood test in which the gene was subdivided into
different structural regions showed that the known binding region for P. vivax/P.
knowlesi is under very different selective pressures than the remainder of the
gene. In fact, most of the gene appears to be under strong purifying selection,
but this is not evident in the binding region. We suggest that the binding region
is under the influence of two opposing selective pressures, positive selection
possibly exerted by the parasite and purifying selection exerted by chemokines.

PMID: 22395823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Genes Cells. 2012 Apr;17(4):285-301. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2012.01588.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 5.

GATA transcription factors are involved in IgE-dependent mast cell degranulation 
by enhancing the expression of phospholipase C-<U+03B3>1.

Ishijima Y(1), Ohmori S, Uenishi A, Ohneda K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and
Welfare, 60 Nakaorui-machi, Takasaki, Gunma 370-0033, Japan.

Mast cell degranulation is a dynamic, highly organized process involving numerous
signaling molecules and enzymes. Although the molecular mechanisms underlying
antigen-mediated mast cell degranulation have been studied intensively, little is
known about the transcriptional control of this process. Here, we show that the
hematopoietic transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 are involved in mast cell
degranulation through the control of phospholipase C-<U+03B3>1 (PLC-<U+03B3>1) expression.
Knockdown of GATA1 and/or GATA2 by specific siRNA significantly reduced
antigen-induced degranulation and Ca(2+) mobilization in the rat basophilic
leukemia cell line RBL-2H3. RT-PCR analyses showed that PLC-<U+03B3>1 expression was
significantly decreased by this GATA factor repression. Other GATA factor
targets, such as the previously reported a and ß subunits of the high-affinity
IgE receptor (FceRI), were unaffected. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that GATA factors directly activate
PLC-<U+03B3>1 gene transcription through a conserved GATA-binding motif that resides in 
the 5'-upstream sequence. Furthermore, we show evidence that the PLC-<U+03B3>1
expression is regulated by GATA2 in mast cells derived from mouse bone marrow.
These data indicate that PLC-<U+03B3>1 is a target gene of GATA factors in mast cells
and provide evidence that GATA1 and GATA2 control antigen-mediated mast cell
degranulation by regulating the expression of PLC-<U+03B3>1.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2012 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22390417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Am J Hematol. 2012 Apr;87(4):447-50. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23130. Epub 2012 Mar 3.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia and severe pulmonary fibrosis in a child with
Down syndrome: successful treatment with ultra low-dose cytarabine using GATA1
mutation to monitor minimal residual disease.

Moritake H, Yamada A, Kimoto Y, Sawa D, Shimonodan H, Nunoi H.

PMID: 22389016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Blood. 2012 Apr 19;119(16):3724-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-380634. Epub 2012 
Mar 1.

Chromatin occupancy analysis reveals genome-wide GATA factor switching during
hematopoiesis.

Doré LC(1), Chlon TM, Brown CD, White KP, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

There are many examples of transcription factor families whose members control
gene expression profiles of diverse cell types. However, the mechanism by which
closely related factors occupy distinct regulatory elements and impart lineage
specificity is largely undefined. Here we demonstrate on a genome wide scale that
the hematopoietic GATA factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 bind overlapping sets of genes, 
often at distinct sites, as a means to differentially regulate target gene
expression and to regulate the balance between proliferation and differentiation.
We also reveal that the GATA switch, which entails a chromatin occupancy exchange
between GATA2 and GATA1 in the course of differentiation, operates on more than
one-third of GATA1 bound genes. The switch is equally likely to lead to
transcriptional activation or repression; and in general, GATA1 and GATA2 act
oppositely on switch target genes. In addition, we show that genomic regions
co-occupied by GATA2 and the ETS factor ETS1 are strongly enriched for regions
marked by H3K4me3 and occupied by Pol II. Finally, by comparing GATA1 occupancy
in erythroid cells and megakaryocytes, we find that the presence of ETS factor
motifs is a major discriminator of megakaryocyte versus red cell specification.

PMCID: PMC3335379
PMID: 22383799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 6;109(10):3832-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121019109. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

A core erythroid transcriptional network is repressed by a master regulator of
myelo-lymphoid differentiation.

Wontakal SN(1), Guo X, Smith C, MacCarthy T, Bresnick EH, Bergman A, Snyder MP,
Weissman SM, Zheng D, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

Two mechanisms that play important roles in cell fate decisions are control of a 
"core transcriptional network" and repression of alternative transcriptional
programs by antagonizing transcription factors. Whether these two mechanisms
operate together is not known. Here we report that GATA-1, SCL, and Klf1 form an 
erythroid core transcriptional network by co-occupying >300 genes. Importantly,
we find that PU.1, a negative regulator of terminal erythroid differentiation, is
a highly integrated component of this network. GATA-1, SCL, and Klf1 act to
promote, whereas PU.1 represses expression of many of the core network genes.
PU.1 also represses the genes encoding GATA-1, SCL, Klf1, and important GATA-1
cofactors. Conversely, in addition to repressing PU.1 expression, GATA-1 also
binds to and represses >100 PU.1 myelo-lymphoid gene targets in erythroid
progenitors. Mathematical modeling further supports that this dual mechanism of
repressing both the opposing upstream activator and its downstream targets
provides a synergistic, robust mechanism for lineage specification. Taken
together, these results amalgamate two key developmental principles, namely,
regulation of a core transcriptional network and repression of an alternative
transcriptional program, thereby enhancing our understanding of the mechanisms
that establish cellular identity.

PMCID: PMC3309740
PMID: 22357756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):948-62. doi: 10.1172/JCI60455. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Increased dosage of the chromosome 21 ortholog Dyrk1a promotes megakaryoblastic
leukemia in a murine model of Down syndrome.

Malinge S(1), Bliss-Moreau M, Kirsammer G, Diebold L, Chlon T, Gurbuxani S,
Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois
60611, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):807-10.

Individuals with Down syndrome (DS; also known as trisomy 21) have a markedly
increased risk of leukemia in childhood but a decreased risk of solid tumors in
adulthood. Acquired mutations in the transcription factor-encoding GATA1 gene are
observed in nearly all individuals with DS who are born with transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD), a clonal preleukemia, and/or who develop acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). Individuals who do not have DS but bear
germline GATA1 mutations analogous to those detected in individuals with TMD and 
DS-AMKL are not predisposed to leukemia. To better understand the functional
contribution of trisomy 21 to leukemogenesis, we used mouse and human cell models
of DS to reproduce the multistep pathogenesis of DS-AMKL and to identify
chromosome 21 genes that promote megakaryoblastic leukemia in children with DS.
Our results revealed that trisomy for only 33 orthologs of human chromosome 21
(Hsa21) genes was sufficient to cooperate with GATA1 mutations to initiate
megakaryoblastic leukemia in vivo. Furthermore, through a functional screening of
the trisomic genes, we demonstrated that DYRK1A, which encodes dual-specificity
tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A, was a potent megakaryoblastic
tumor-promoting gene that contributed to leukemogenesis through dysregulation of 
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) activation. Given that
calcineurin/NFAT pathway inhibition has been implicated in the decreased tumor
incidence in adults with DS, our results show that the same pathway can be both
proleukemic in children and antitumorigenic in adults.

PMCID: PMC3287382
PMID: 22354171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jun;39(6):6987-93. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1528-9. Epub 2012
Feb 4.

Characterization of a spliced variant of human IRF-3 promoter and its regulation 
by the transcription factor Sp1.

Ren W(1), Zhu LH, Xu HG, Jin R, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), an essential transcriptional regulator of
the interferon genes, plays an important role in host defense against viral and
microbial infection as well as in cell growth regulation. Promoter plays a
crucial role in gene transcription. We have reported the characterization of the 
wide type of human IRF-3 promoter, but the characterization of the spliced
variant of human IRF-3 Int2V1 promoter has not been systematically analyzed. To
observe the spliced variant of human IRF-3 promoter, we have cloned the human
IRF-3 gene promoter region containing 300 nucleotides upstream the transcription 
start site (TSS). Transient transfection of 5' deleted promoter-reporter
constructs and luciferase assay illustrated the region -159/-100 relative to the 
TSS is sufficient for full promoter activity. This region contains GATA1 and
specific protein-1 (Sp1) transcription factor binding sites. Interestingly,
mutation of this Sp1 site reduced the promoter activity by 50%. However,
overexpression of Sp1 increased the transcription activity by 2.4-fold. These
results indicated that the spliced variant of human IRF-3 gene core promoter was 
located within the region -159/-100 relative to the TSS. Sp1 transcription factor
upregulates the spliced variant of human IRF-3 gene promoter.

PMID: 22307793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Br J Haematol. 2012 Apr;157(2):180-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2012.09028.x. Epub
2012 Feb 1.

A 15q24 microdeletion in transient myeloproliferative disease (TMD) and acute
megakaryoblastic leukaemia (AMKL) implicates PML and SUMO3 in the leukaemogenesis
of TMD/AMKL.

Haemmerling S(1), Behnisch W, Doerks T, Korbel JO, Bork P, Moog U, Hentze S,
Grasshoff U, Bonin M, Rieß O, Janssen JW, Jauch A, Bartram CR, Reinhardt D, Koch 
KA, Bandapalli OR, Kulozik AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Haematology and Immunology, University of
Heidelberg Medical Centre, Heidelberg, Germany.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) of the newborn and acute
megakaryoblastic leukaemia (AMKL) in children with Down syndrome (DS) represent
paradigmatic models of leukaemogenesis. Chromosome 21 gene dosage effects and
truncating mutations of the X-chromosomal transcription factor GATA1 synergize to
trigger TMD and AMKL in most patients. Here, we report the occurrence of TMD,
which spontaneously remitted and later progressed to AMKL in a patient without DS
but with a distinct dysmorphic syndrome. Genetic analysis of the leukaemic clone 
revealed somatic trisomy 21 and a truncating GATA1 mutation. The analysis of the 
patient's normal blood cell DNA on a genomic single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
array revealed a de novo germ line 2·58 Mb 15q24 microdeletion including 41 known
genes encompassing the tumour suppressor PML. Genomic context analysis of
proteins encoded by genes that are included in the microdeletion, chromosome
21-encoded proteins and GATA1 suggests that the microdeletion may trigger
leukaemogenesis by disturbing the balance of a hypothetical regulatory network of
normal megakaryopoiesis involving PML, SUMO3 and GATA1. The 15q24 microdeletion
may thus represent the first genetic hit to initiate leukaemogenesis and
implicates PML and SUMO3 as novel components of the leukaemogenic network in
TMD/AMKL.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22296450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Blood. 2012 Mar 15;119(11):2608-11. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-324806. Epub 2012 
Jan 31.

Identification of TRIB1 R107L gain-of-function mutation in human acute
megakaryocytic leukemia.

Yokoyama T(1), Toki T, Aoki Y, Kanezaki R, Park MJ, Kanno Y, Takahara T, Yamazaki
Y, Ito E, Hayashi Y, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Trib1 has been identified as a myeloid oncogene in a murine leukemia model. Here 
we identified a TRIB1 somatic mutation in a human case of Down syndrome-related
acute megakaryocytic leukemia. The mutation was observed at well-conserved
arginine 107 residue in the pseudokinase domain. This R107L mutation remained in 
leukocytes of the remission stage in which GATA1 mutation disappeared, suggesting
the TRIB1 mutation is an earlier genetic event in leukemogenesis. The bone marrow
transfer experiment showed that acute myeloid leukemia development was
accelerated by transducing murine bone marrow cells with the R107L mutant in
which enhancement of ERK phosphorylation and C/EBPa degradation by Trib1
expression was even greater than in those expressing wild-type. These results
suggest that TRIB1 may be a novel important oncogene for Down syndrome-related
acute megakaryocytic leukemia.

PMID: 22294728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Blood. 2012 Mar 15;119(11):2615-23. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-382473. Epub 2012 
Jan 25.

Mature erythrocyte membrane homeostasis is compromised by loss of the GATA1-FOG1 
interaction.

Hasegawa A(1), Shimizu R, Mohandas N, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

GATA1 plays essential roles in erythroid gene expression. The N-terminal finger
of GATA1 (GATA1-Nf) is important for association with FOG1. Substitution
mutations in GATA1-Nf, such as GATA1(V205M) that diminish the GATA1-FOG1
association, have been identified in human thrombocytopenia and anemia cases. A
mouse model of human thrombocytopenia has been established using a transgenic
complementation rescue approach; GATA1-deficient mice were successfully rescued
from embryonic lethality by excess expression of GATA1(V205G), but rescued adult 
mice suffered from severe thrombocytopenia. In this study, we examined
GATA1-deficient mice rescued with GATA1(V205G) at a comparable level to
endogenous GATA1. Mice rescued with this level of GATA1(V205G) rarely survive to 
adulthood. Rescued newborns suffered from severe anemia and jaundice accompanied 
with anisocytosis and spherocytosis. Expression of Slc4a1, Spna1, and Aqp1 genes 
(encoding the membrane proteins band-3, a-spectrin, and aquaporin-1,
respectively) were strikingly diminished, whereas expression of other canonical
GATA1-target genes, such as Alas2, were little affected. Lack of these membrane
proteins provoked perturbation of membrane skeleton. Importantly, the red cells
exhibited increased reactive oxygen species accumulation. These results thus
demonstrate that the loss of the GATA1-FOG1 interaction causes a unique
combination of membrane protein deficiency and disturbs the function of GATA1 in 
maintaining erythroid homeostasis.

PMID: 22279059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. BMC Mol Biol. 2012 Jan 23;13:3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-13-3.

The transcriptional activator ZNF143 is essential for normal development in
zebrafish.

Halbig KM(1), Lekven AC, Kunkel GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

BACKGROUND: ZNF143 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that stimulates
transcription of both small RNA genes by RNA polymerase II or III, or
protein-coding genes by RNA polymerase II, using separable activating domains. We
describe phenotypic effects following knockdown of this protein in developing
Danio rerio (zebrafish) embryos by injection of morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides that target znf143 mRNA.
RESULTS: The loss of function phenotype is pleiotropic and includes a broad array
of abnormalities including defects in heart, blood, ear and midbrain hindbrain
boundary. Defects are rescued by coinjection of synthetic mRNA encoding
full-length ZNF143 protein, but not by protein lacking the amino-terminal
activation domains. Accordingly, expression of several marker genes is affected
following knockdown, including GATA-binding protein 1 (gata1), cardiac myosin
light chain 2 (cmlc2) and paired box gene 2a (pax2a). The zebrafish pax2a gene
proximal promoter contains two binding sites for ZNF143, and reporter gene
transcription driven by this promoter in transfected cells is activated by this
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Normal development of zebrafish embryos requires ZNF143.
Furthermore, the pax2a gene is probably one example of many protein-coding gene
targets of ZNF143 during zebrafish development.

PMCID: PMC3282657
PMID: 22268977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Exp Hematol. 2012 May;40(5):393-400. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.01.007. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Abnormal differentiation of erythroid precursors in p45 NF-E2(-/-) mice.

Gasiorek JJ(1), Nouhi Z, Blank V.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research and Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish
General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

The transcription factor p45 nuclear factor-erythroid-derived 2 (NF-E2) plays
major roles in erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. Here, we investigated the
role of p45 NF-E2 in erythroid differentiation in vivo. Absence of p45 NF-E2 in
mice leads to a twofold increase in serum erythropoietin levels. In the bone
marrow of these animals, we found a different distribution of precursor
populations compared to wild-type mice, suggesting abnormal differentiation. Loss
of p45 NF-E2 was also associated with an increase in splenic erythropoiesis, as
evidenced by an accumulation of early precursors, namely, late basophilic and
polychromatic erythroblasts. These observations are consistent with a stress
erythropoiesis phenotype and indicate that the spleen is likely compensating for 
ineffective erythropoiesis in the bone marrow. Analysis of bone marrow samples
revealed increased GATA1 levels, as well as an increased proportion of erythroid 
cells arrested at the G(1) stage of cell cycle in p45 NF-E2-deficient mice. These
results suggest that p45 NF-E2 is required for the differentiation of erythroid
precursors.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22265708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Mar 15;185(6):620-7. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201108-1503OC. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

The clinical and environmental determinants of airway transcriptional profiles in
allergic asthma.

Yang IV(1), Tomfohr J, Singh J, Foss CM, Marshall HE, Que LG, McElvania-Tekippe
E, Florence S, Sundy JS, Schwartz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. 
ivana.yang@ucdenver.edu

RATIONALE: Gene expression profiling of airway epithelial and inflammatory cells 
can be used to identify genes involved in environmental asthma.
METHODS: Airway epithelia and inflammatory cells were obtained via bronchial
brush and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) from 39 subjects comprising three
phenotypic groups (nonatopic nonasthmatic, atopic nonasthmatic, and atopic
asthmatic) 4 hours after instillation of LPS, house dust mite antigen, and saline
in three distinct subsegmental bronchi. RNA transcript levels were assessed using
whole genome microarrays.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Baseline (saline exposure) differences in gene
expression were related to airflow obstruction in epithelial cells (C3, ALOX5AP, 
CCL18, and others), and to serum IgE (innate immune genes and focal adhesion
pathway) and allergic-asthmatic phenotype (complement genes, histone
deacetylases, and GATA1 transcription factor) in inflammatory cells. LPS
stimulation resulted in pronounced transcriptional response across all subjects
in both airway epithelia and BAL cells, with strong association to nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B and IFN-inducible genes as well as signatures of other transcription
factors (NRF2, C/EBP, and E2F1) and histone proteins. No distinct transcriptional
profile to LPS was observed in the asthma and atopy phenotype. Finally, although 
no consistent expression changes were observed across all subjects in response to
house dust mite antigen stimulation, we observed subtle differences in gene
expression (e.g., GATA1 and GATA2) in BAL cells related to the asthma and atopy
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that among individuals with allergic asthma,
transcriptional changes in airway epithelia and inflammatory cells are influenced
by phenotype as well as environmental exposures.

PMCID: PMC3326287
PMID: 22246175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029518. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Knockdown of ZNF268, which is transcriptionally downregulated by GATA-1, promotes
proliferation of K562 cells.

Zeng Y(1), Wang W, Ma J, Wang X, Guo M, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.

The human ZNF268 gene encodes a typical KRAB-C2H2 zinc finger protein that may
participate in hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. A recent microarray study
revealed that ZNF268 expression continuously decreases during erythropoiesis.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying regulation of ZNF268 during
hematopoiesis are not well understood. Here we found that GATA-1, a master
regulator of erythropoiesis, repressed the promoter activity and transcription of
ZNF268. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays showed that GATA-1 directly bound to a GATA binding site in the ZNF268
promoter in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown of ZNF268 in K562 erythroleukemia cells 
with specific siRNA accelerated cellular proliferation, suppressed apoptosis, and
reduced expression of erythroid-specific developmental markers. It also promoted 
growth of subcutaneous K562-derived tumors in nude mice. These results suggest
that ZNF268 is a crucial downstream target and effector of GATA-1. They also
suggest the downregulation of ZNF268 by GATA-1 is important in promoting the
growth and suppressing the differentiation of K562 erythroleukemia cells.

PMCID: PMC3250450
PMID: 22235304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Exp Mol Med. 2012 Apr 30;44(4):268-80. doi: 10.3858/emm.2012.44.4.022.

CpG methylation at GATA elements in the regulatory region of CCR3 positively
correlates with CCR3 transcription.

Uhm TG(1), Lee SK, Kim BS, Kang JH, Park CS, Rhim TY, Chang HS, Kim do J, Chung
IY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, College of Science and Technology,
Hanyang University, Ansan 426-791, Korea.

DNA methylation may regulate gene expression by restricting the access of
transcription factors. We have previously demonstrated that GATA-1 regulates the 
transcription of the CCR3 gene by dynamically interacting with both positively
and negatively acting GATA elements of high affinity binding in the proximal
promoter region including exon 1. Exon 1 has three CpG sites, two of which are
positioned at the negatively acting GATA elements. We hypothesized that the
methylation of these two CpGs sites might preclude GATA-1 binding to the
negatively acting GATA elements and, as a result, increase the availability of
GATA-1 to the positively acting GATA element, thereby contributing to an increase
in GATA-1-mediated transcription of the gene. To this end, we determined the
methylation of the three CpG sites by bisulfate pyrosequencing in peripheral
blood eosinophils, cord blood (CB)-derived eosinophils, PBMCs, and cell lines
that vary in CCR3 mRNA expression. Our results demonstrated that methylation of
CpG sites at the negatively acting GATA elements severely reduced GATA-1 binding 
and augmented transcription activity in vitro. In agreement, methylation of these
CpG sites positively correlated with CCR3 mRNA expression in the primary cells
and cell lines examined. Interestingly, methylation patterns of these three CpG
sites in CB-derived eosinophils mostly resembled those in peripheral blood
eosinophils. These results suggest that methylation of CpG sites at the GATA
elements in the regulatory regions fine-tunes CCR3 transcription.

PMCID: PMC3349909
PMID: 22217447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5600-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.289843. Epub 2011 
Dec 20.

Functional regulation of pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox interacting protein 1
(PBXIP1/HPIP) in erythroid differentiation.

Manavathi B(1), Lo D, Bugide S, Dey O, Imren S, Weiss MJ, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, School
of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad-500046, India.
manavathibsl@uohyd.ernet.in

Pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox interacting protein 1 or human PBX1 interacting
protein (PBXIP1/HPIP) is a co-repressor of pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox 1 (PBX1) 
and is also known to regulate estrogen receptor functions by associating with the
microtubule network. Despite its initial discovery in the context of
hematopoietic cells, little is yet known about the role of HPIP in hematopoiesis.
Here, we show that lentivirus-mediated overexpression of HPIP in human CD34(+)
cells enhances hematopoietic colony formation in vitro, whereas HPIP knockdown
leads to a reduction in the number of such colonies. Interestingly, erythroid
colony number was significantly higher in HPIP-overexpressing cells. In addition,
forced expression of HPIP in K562 cells, a multipotent erythro-megakaryoblastic
leukemia cell line, led to an induction of erythroid differentiation. HPIP
overexpression in both CD34(+) and K562 cells was associated with increased
activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, and corresponding treatment with a
PI3K-specific inhibitor, LY-294002, caused a reduction in clonogenic progenitor
number in HPIP-expressing CD34(+) cells and decreased K562 cell differentiation. 
Combined, these findings point to an important role of the PI3K/AKT pathway in
mediating HPIP-induced effects on the growth and differentiation of hematopoietic
cells. Interestingly, HPIP gene expression was found to be induced in K562 cells 
in response to erythroid differentiation signals such as DMSO and erythropoietin.
The erythroid lineage-specific transcription factor GATA1 binds to the HPIP
promoter and activates HPIP gene transcription in a CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF)-dependent manner. Co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization experiments
revealed the association of CTCF with GATA1 indicating the recruitment of
CTCF/GATA1 transcription factor complex onto the HPIP promoter. Together, this
study provides evidence that HPIP is a target of GATA1 and CTCF in erythroid
cells and plays an important role in erythroid differentiation by modulating the 
PI3K/AKT pathway.

PMCID: PMC3285334
PMID: 22187427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e27955. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027955. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

The GATA1-HS2 enhancer allows persistent and position-independent expression of a
ß-globin transgene.

Miccio A(1), Poletti V, Tiboni F, Rossi C, Antonelli A, Mavilio F, Ferrari G.

Author information: 
(1)H. San Raffaele-Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (HSR-TIGET), Istituto
Scientifico H. San Raffaele, Milan, Italy.

Gene therapy of genetic diseases requires persistent and position-independent
expression of a therapeutic transgene. Transcriptional enhancers binding
chromatin-remodeling and modifying complexes may play a role in shielding
transgenes from repressive chromatin effects. We tested the activity of the HS2
enhancer of the GATA1 gene in protecting the expression of a ß-globin minigene
delivered by a lentiviral vector in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. Gene
expression from proviruses carrying GATA1-HS2 in both LTRs was persistent and
resistant to silencing at most integration sites in the in vivo progeny of human 
hematopoietic progenitors and murine long-term repopulating stem cells. The
GATA1-HS2-modified vector allowed correction of murine ß-thalassemia at low copy 
number without inducing clonal selection of erythroblastic progenitors. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies showed that GATA1 and the CBP acetyltransferase bind 
to GATA1-HS2, significantly increasing CBP-specific histone acetylations at the
LTRs and ß-globin promoter. Recruitment of CBP by the LTRs thus establishes an
open chromatin domain encompassing the entire provirus, and increases the
therapeutic efficacy of ß-globin gene transfer by reducing expression variegation
and epigenetic silencing.

PMCID: PMC3229501
PMID: 22164220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cytometry A. 2012 Feb;81(2):176-82. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.21167. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

An optical platform for cell tracking in adult zebrafish.

Zhang L(1), Alt C, Li P, White RM, Zon LI, Wei X, Lin CP.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced microscopy program, Center for Systems Biology and Wellman Center for
Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Adult zebrafish are being increasingly used as a model in cancer and stem cell
research. Here we describe an integrated optical system that combines a laser
scanning confocal microscope (LSCM) and an in vivo flow cytometer (IVFC) for
simultaneous visualization and cell quantification. The system is set up
specifically for non-invasive tracking of both stationary and circulating cells
in adult zebrafish (casper) that have been engineered to be optically
transparent. Confocal imaging in this instrument serves the dual purpose of
visualizing fish tissue microstructure and an imaging-based guide to locate a
suitable vessel for quantitative analysis of circulating cells by IVFC. We
demonstrate initial testing of this novel instrument by imaging the transparent
adult zebrafish casper vasculature and tracking circulating cells in
CD41-GFP/Gata1-DsRed transgenic fish whose thrombocytes/erythrocytes express the 
green and red fluorescent proteins. In vivo measurements allow cells to be
tracked under physiological conditions in the same fish over time, without
drawing blood samples or sacrificing animals. We also discuss the potential
applications of this instrument in biomedical research.

Copyright © 2011 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

PMID: 22162445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Blood. 2012 Feb 9;119(6):1532-42. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-343475. Epub 2011
Dec 12.

Defective nuclear localization of Hsp70 is associated with dyserythropoiesis and 
GATA-1 cleavage in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Frisan E(1), Vandekerckhove J, de Thonel A, Pierre-Eugène C, Sternberg A, Arlet
JB, Floquet C, Gyan E, Kosmider O, Dreyfus F, Gabet AS, Courtois G, Vyas P,
Ribeil JA, Zermati Y, Lacombe C, Mayeux P, Solary E, Garrido C, Hermine O,
Fontenay M.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Immuno-Hématologie, Institut Cochin, 27 rue du Faubourg
Saint-Jacques, Paris, France.

Normal human erythroid cell maturation requests the transcription factor GATA-1
and a transient activation of caspase-3, with GATA-1 being protected from
caspase-3-mediated cleavage by interaction with the chaperone heat shock protein 
70 (Hsp70) in the nucleus. Erythroid cell dysplasia observed in early
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) involves impairment of differentiation and excess
of apoptosis with a burst of caspase activation. Analysis of gene expression in
MDS erythroblasts obtained by ex vivo cultures demonstrates the down-regulation
of a set of GATA-1 transcriptional target genes, including GYPA that encodes
glycophorin A (GPA), and the up-regulation of members of the HSP70 family. GATA-1
protein expression is decreased in MDS erythroblasts, but restores in the
presence of a pan-caspase inhibitor. Expression of a mutated GATA-1 that cannot
be cleaved by caspase-3 rescues the transcription of GATA-1 targets, and the
erythroid differentiation, but does not improve survival. Hsp70 fails to protect 
GATA-1 from caspases because the protein does not accumulate in the nucleus with 
active caspase-3. Expression of a nucleus-targeted mutant of Hsp70 protects
GATA-1 and rescues MDS erythroid cell differentiation. Alteration of Hsp70
cytosolic-nuclear shuttling is a major feature of MDS that favors GATA-1 cleavage
and differentiation impairment, but not apoptosis, in dysplastic erythroblasts.

PMID: 22160620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 15;31(4):986-99. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.450. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Dynamic long-range chromatin interactions control Myb proto-oncogene
transcription during erythroid development.

Stadhouders R(1), Thongjuea S, Andrieu-Soler C, Palstra RJ, Bryne JC, van den
Heuvel A, Stevens M, de Boer E, Kockx C, van der Sloot A, van den Hout M, van
Ijcken W, Eick D, Lenhard B, Grosveld F, Soler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The key haematopoietic regulator Myb is essential for coordinating proliferation 
and differentiation. ChIP-Sequencing and Chromosome Conformation Capture
(3C)-Sequencing were used to characterize the structural and protein-binding
dynamics of the Myb locus during erythroid differentiation. In proliferating
cells expressing Myb, enhancers within the Myb-Hbs1l intergenic region were shown
to form an active chromatin hub (ACH) containing the Myb promoter and first
intron. This first intron was found to harbour the transition site from
transcription initiation to elongation, which takes place around a conserved CTCF
site. Upon erythroid differentiation, Myb expression is downregulated and the ACH
destabilized. We propose a model for Myb activation by distal enhancers
dynamically bound by KLF1 and the GATA1/TAL1/LDB1 complex, which primarily
function as a transcription elongation element through chromatin looping.

PMCID: PMC3280550
PMID: 22157820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Crit Rev Oncog. 2011;16(1-2):25-36.

Myeloid leukemia in Down syndrome.

Khan I(1), Malinge S, Crispino J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois
60611, USA.

Although adults with Down syndrome (DS) show a decreased incidence of cancer
compared to individuals without DS, children with DS are at an increased risk of 
leukemia. Nearly half of these childhood leukemias are classified as acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), a relatively rare subtype of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Here, we summarize the clinical features of myeloid leukemia in
DS, review recent research on the mechanisms of leukemogenesis, including the
roles of GATA1 mutations and trisomy 21, and discuss treatment strategies. Given 
that trisomy 21 is a relatively common event in hematologic malignancies, greater
knowledge of how the genes on chromosome 21 contribute to DS-AMKL will increase
our understanding of a broader class of patients with leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3243928
PMID: 22150305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;44(2):423-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2011.11.018.
Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Upregulation of Polo-like kinase 2 gene expression by GATA-1 acetylation in human
osteosarcoma MG-63 cells.

Shen T(1), Li Y, Yang L, Xu X, Liang F, Liang S, Ba G, Xue F, Fu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, No. 36, Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang 110004, People's
Republic of China.

Polo-like kinase 2 (Plk2) is a member of the serine/threonine protein kinase
family involved in cell-cycle regulation and cellular response to stresses. It is
of great interest to investigate the molecular mechanisms that control the
expression of Plk2. Here, using real-time PCR and Western blot assays, we show
that trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, upregulated Plk2 mRNA
and protein expression in the human osteosarcoma MG-63 cell line. Luciferase
activity analysis of the truncated Plk2 promoter indicated that the region from
-1220 to -830 of the Plk2 promoter was sensitive to TSA. Moreover, using the
electrophoresis mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we 
identified two GATA-1 responsive elements at positions -1051 and -949, to which
GATA-1 binding was enhanced by TSA under in vitro and in vivo conditions.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot showed that the levels of acetylated GATA-1 
were increased with TSA in MG-63 cells, consistent with their binding affinities 
to the GATA-1 responsive elements. In summary, these data demonstrate that
acetylation plays a crucial role in Plk2 expression and acetylation of GATA-1 by 
TSA treatment may upregulate their DNA-binding affinities, resulting in the
activation of Plk2 promoter. These results may contribute to the understanding of
the molecular mechanism of Plk2 regulation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22138223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Circ Res. 2012 Jan 20;110(2):220-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.251298. Epub 2011
Dec 1.

Etsrp/Etv2 is directly regulated by Foxc1a/b in the zebrafish angioblast.

Veldman MB(1), Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, 621 Charles E Young Dr South, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1606, USA.

RATIONALE: Endothelial cells are developmentally derived from angioblasts
specified in the mesodermal germ cell layer. The transcription factor etsrp/etv2 
is at the top of the known genetic hierarchy for angioblast development. The
transcriptional events that induce etsrp expression and angioblast specification 
are not well understood.
OBJECTIVE: We generated etsrp:gfp transgenic zebrafish and used them to identify 
regulatory regions and transcription factors critical for etsrp expression and
angioblast specification from mesoderm.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To investigate the mechanisms that initiate angioblast cell 
transcription during embryogenesis, we have performed promoter analysis of the
etsrp locus in zebrafish. We describe three enhancer elements sufficient for
endothelial gene expression when place in front of a heterologous promoter. The
deletion of all 3 regulatory regions led to a near complete loss of endothelial
expression from the etsrp promoter. One of the enhancers, located 2.3 kb upstream
of etsrp contains a consensus FOX binding site that binds Foxc1a and Foxc1b in
vitro by EMSA and in vivo using ChIP. Combined knockdown of foxc1a/b, using
morpholinos, led to a significant decrease in etsrp expression at early
developmental stages as measured by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction and in situ hybridization. Decreased expression of primitive
erythrocyte genes scl and gata1 was also observed, whereas pronephric gene pax2a 
was relatively normal in expression level and pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify mesodermal foxc1a/b as a direct upstream
regulator of etsrp in angioblasts. This establishes a new molecular link in the
process of mesoderm specification into angioblast.

PMCID: PMC3457812
PMID: 22135404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2012 May;34(4):e149-51. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0b013e31822bf608.

Improving circulatory disturbance in transient abnormal myelopoiesis.

Koga H(1), Miyako K, Suga N, Hidaka T, Takahashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Beppu Medical Center,
Oita, Japan. sakuraliberty@beppu2.hosp.go.jp

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) in neonates with Down syndrome (DS) is
characterized by circulating blast cells in the blood. TAM usually resolves
spontaneously, but several studies have associated this condition with early
death, focusing on the development of effective treatments. We report the case of
a neonate with DS who had TAM and novel GATA1 mutation. Although the patient
eventually died of hepatic failure, exchange blood transfusion and low-dose
cytarabine treatment dramatically improved pulmonary hypertension and acute renal
failure refractory to conventional therapy. Such a blast-reducing approach might 
be useful for improving circulatory disturbances in neonates with DS and TAM.

PMID: 22134612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Br J Haematol. 2012 Feb;156(3):316-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08948.x.
Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Molecular lesions in childhood and adult acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia.

Hama A(1), Muramatsu H, Makishima H, Sugimoto Y, Szpurka H, Jasek M, O'Keefe C,
Takahashi Y, Sakaguchi H, Doisaki S, Shimada A, Watanabe N, Kato K, Kiyoi H, Naoe
T, Kojima S, Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

While acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (AMKL) occurs in children with (DS-AMKL)
and without (paediatric non-DS-AMKL) Down syndrome, it can also affect adults
without DS (adult non-DS-AMKL). We have analysed these subgroups of patients (11 
children with DS-AMKL, 12 children and four adults with non-DS-AMKL) for the
presence of molecular lesions, including mutations and chromosomal abnormalities 
studied by sequencing and single nucleotide polymorphism array-based karyotyping,
respectively. In children, AMKL was associated with trisomy 21 (somatic in
non-DS-AMKL), while numerical aberrations of chromosome 21 were only rarely
associated with adult AMKL. DS-AMKL was also associated with recurrent somatic
gains of 1q (4/11 DS-AMKL patients). In contrast to trisomy 21 and gains of 1q,
other additional chromosomal lesions were evenly distributed between children and
adults with AMKL. A mutational screen found GATA1 mutations in 11/12 DS-AMKL, but
mutations were rare in paediatric non-DS-AMKL (1/12) and adult AMKL (0/4). JAK3
(1/11), JAK2 (1/11), and TP53 mutations (1/11) were found only in patients with
DS-AMKL. ASXL1, IDH1/2, DNMT3A, RUNX1 and CBL mutations were not found in any of 
the patient group studied, while NRAS mutation was identified in two patients
with paediatric non-DS-AMKL.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22122069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Bol Asoc Med P R. 2011 Apr-Jun;103(2):48-52.

Subacute thyroiditis and dyserythropoesis after influenza vaccination suggesting 
immune dysregulation.

Hernán Martinez J(1), Corder E, Uzcategui M, Garcia M, Sostre S, Garcia A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Immunology Department, San Juan Bautista School of Medicine, 
San Juan Bautista Medical Center, Caguas, Puerto Rico. jhernan.martinez@gmail.com

Subacute thyroiditis (SAT) is an extremely rare complication of influenza
vaccination. Several infectious agents have been related with SAT. It is also
well known the association between HLA-B35 and the development of SAT. We
describe a case of subacute thyroiditis and dyserythropoesis occurring shortly
after administration of an influenza vaccine in a 55-year-old man with history of
diabetes and psoriasis, family history of autoimmunity without clinical evidence 
of acute viral infection prior to the onset of symptoms. We propose that, the
events occurring in the patient may be explained as result of complex
interactions between the individual genetic background and environmental exposure
to infectious agents that generated a pro-inflammatory status, where the vaccine 
was the trigger for the subsequent alterations in thyroid and bone marrow. These 
findings highlight the importance of immunogenetic factors involved in response
to vaccination that is the central theme in the growing field of 'vaccinomics'.

PMID: 22111471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27486. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027486. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

A unique role of GATA1s in Down syndrome acute megakaryocytic leukemia biology
and therapy.

Xavier AC(1), Edwards H, Dombkowski AA, Balci TB, Berman JN, Dellaire G, Xie C,
Buck SA, Matherly LH, Ge Y, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan,
Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL) in Down syndrome (DS) children
is uniformly associated with somatic GATA1 mutations, which result in the
synthesis of a shorter protein (GATA1s) with altered transactivation activity
compared to the wild-type GATA1. It is not fully established whether
leukemogenesis and therapeutic responses in DS AMkL patients are due to loss of
the wild-type GATA1 or due to a unique function of GATA1s.
METHODOLOGY: Stable clones of CMK cells with decreased GATA1s or Bcl-2 levels
were generated by using GATA1- or BCL-2-specific lentivirus shRNAs. In vitro
ara-C, daunorubicin, and VP-16 cytotoxicities of the shRNA stable clones were
determined by using the Cell Titer-blue reagent. Apoptosis and cell cycle
distribution were determined by flow cytometry analysis. Changes in gene
transcript levels were determined by gene expression microarray and/or real-time 
RT-PCR. Changes in protein levels were measured by Western blotting. In vivo
binding of GATA1s to IL1A promoter was determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: Lentivirus shRNA knockdown of the GATA1 gene in the DS AMkL cell line,
CMK (harbors a mutated GATA1 gene and only expresses GATA1s), resulting in lower 
GATA1s protein levels, promoted cell differentiation towards the megakaryocytic
lineage and repressed cell proliferation. Increased basal apoptosis and
sensitivities to ara-C, daunorubicin, and VP-16 accompanied by down-regulated
Bcl-2 were also detected in the CMK GATA1 shRNA knockdown clones. Essentially the
same results were obtained when Bcl-2 was knocked down with lentivirus shRNA in
CMK cells. Besides Bcl-2, down-regulation of GATA1s also resulted in altered
expression of genes (e.g., IL1A, PF4, and TUBB1) related to cell death,
proliferation, and differentiation.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that GATA1s may facilitate leukemogenesis and
potentially impact therapeutic responses in DS AMkL by promoting proliferation
and survival, and by repressing megakaryocytic lineage differentiation,
potentially by regulating expression of Bcl-2 protein and other relevant genes.

PMCID: PMC3217966
PMID: 22110660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Jan;79(1):64-73. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21409. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Expression of GATA1 in the ovine conceptus and endometrium during the
peri-attachment period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA1 is known to play an essential role in
hematopoiesis, but its other roles have not been well characterized. The purpose 
of this study was to determine relationships between GATA1 and GATA2 and/or
GATA3, and to identify their possible functions in ovine development. GATA1 mRNA 
was found in ovine conceptuses and endometrial epithelial regions of Day 15 (Day 
0=day of estrus) cyclic and Days 15, 17, and 21 pregnant ovine uteri. GATA1 mRNA 
was strongly expressed in conceptuses on Day 21, when trophoblast attachment to
the maternal endometrium progressed. Similarly, GATA1 protein expression was
relatively high on Day 21. To localize GATA1 mRNA, ovine conceptuses and pregnant
uteri were subjected to in situ hybridization on Days 15, 17, and 21, confirming 
that GATA1 mRNA was expressed in trophoblasts and uterine endometrial epithelial 
cells in these gestation days. The presence of GATA1 protein was further
confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Because high GATA1 expression appeared to
coincide with reduced GATA2/3 expression, a potential role of GATA1 was examined 
through transfection of a mouse Gata1 expression plasmid into bovine trophoblast 
F3 cells. This over-expression resulted in the down-regulation of endogenous
GATA2 transcripts. These observations indicate that GATA1 exists in the ovine
conceptus and uterus during the peri-attachment period, and suggest that GATA1 is
integral to conceptus and endometrial development through the regulation of GATA2
and possibly other developmentally important genes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22102538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2011 Sep;37(6):682-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1291378. Epub 2011
Nov 18.

Inherited thrombocytopenia due to GATA-1 mutations.

Millikan PD(1), Balamohan SM, Raskind WH, Kacena MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors, including the founding member, GATA-1, 
have an important role in gene regulation. GATA-1 is integral to successful
hematopoiesis. A wide variety of mutations in GATA-1 affect its function, as well
as its interaction with its cofactors (especially Friend of GATA) and the genes
upon which GATA-1 acts. Here we review the known mutations, focusing on the
specific alterations within the amino acid sequence, the resulting effect on
hematopoietic development, and the clinical manifestations that result. Attention
is also paid to the relationship between Trisomy 21, also known as Down syndrome,
and the phenomenon of a truncated GATA-1, named GATA-1s. The evidence for
specific interaction between GATA-1 and chromosome 21, which may explain the
correlation between these two mutations, is briefly reviewed.

Thieme Medical Publishers.

PMID: 22102271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Stem Cells. 2012 Feb;30(2):140-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.778.

5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxyamide ribonucleoside induces G(1)/S arrest and Nanog
downregulation via p53 and enhances erythroid differentiation.

Chae HD(1), Lee MR, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Molecular mechanisms of how energy metabolism affects embryonic stem cell (ESC)
pluripotency remain unclear. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a key regulator
for controlling energy metabolism, is activated in response to ATP-exhausting
stress. We investigated whether cellular energy homeostasis is associated with
maintenance of self-renewal and pluripotency in mouse ESCs (mESCs) by using
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxyamide ribonucleoside (AICAR) as an activator of AMPK.
We demonstrate that AICAR treatment activates the p53/p21 pathway and markedly
inhibits proliferation of R1 mESCs by inducing G(1) /S-phase cell cycle arrest,
without influencing apoptosis. Treatment with AICAR also significantly reduces
pluripotent stem cell markers, Nanog and stage-specific embryonic antigen-1, in
the presence of leukemia inhibitory factor, without affecting expression of Oct4.
H9 human ESCs also responded to AICAR with induction of p53 activation and
repression of Nanog expression. AICAR reduced Nanog mRNA levels in mESCs
transiently, an effect not due to expression of miR-134 which can suppress Nanog 
expression. AICAR induced Nanog degradation, an effect inhibited by MG132, a
proteasome inhibitor. Although AICAR reduced embryoid body formation from mESCs, 
it increased expression levels of erythroid cell lineage markers (Ter119, GATA1, 
Klf1, Hbb-b, and Hbb-bh1). Although erythroid differentiation was enhanced by
AICAR, endothelial lineage populations were remarkably reduced in AICAR-treated
cells. Our results suggest that energy metabolism regulated by AMPK activity may 
control the balance of self-renewal and differentiation of ESCs.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3349353
PMID: 22076938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Feb;51(2):196-206. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20944. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

High frequency of BTG1 deletions in acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children with
down syndrome.

Lundin C(1), Hjorth L, Behrendtz M, Nordgren A, Palmqvist L, Andersen MK,
Biloglav A, Forestier E, Paulsson K, Johansson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund University, Sweden. catarina.lundin@med.lu.se

Previous cytogenetic studies of myeloid and acute lymphoblastic leukemias in
children with Down syndrome (ML-DS and DS-ALL) have revealed significant
differences in abnormality patterns between such cases and acute leukemias in
general. Also, certain molecular genetic aberrations characterize DS-related
leukemias, such as GATA1 mutations in ML-DS and deregulation of the CRLF2 gene in
DS-ALL. Whether microdeletions/microduplications also vary between DS and non-DS 
cases is presently unclear. To address this issue, we performed single nucleotide
polymorphism array analyses of eight pediatric ML-DS and 17 B-cell precursor
DS-ALL. In the ML-DS cases, a total of 29 imbalances (20 gains and nine losses)
and two partial uniparental isodisomies (pUPDs) were detected. None of the 11
small (defined as <10 Mb) imbalances were recurrent, nor were the pUPDs, whereas 
of the 18 large aberrations, three were recurrent-dup(1q), +8 and +21. In
contrast, several frequent changes were identified in the DS-ALL cases, which
harbored 82 imbalances (30 gains and 52 losses) and four pUPDs. Of the 40 large
changes, 28 were gains and 12 losses, with +X, dup(Xq), dup(1q), del(7p),
dup(8q), del(9p), dup(9p), del(12p), dup(17q), and +21 being recurrent. Of the 40
microdeletions identified, several targeted specific genes, with the following
being repeatedly deleted: BTG1 and CDKN2A/B (29% of cases), ETV6, IKZF1, PAX5 and
SERP2 (18%), and BTLA, INPP4B, P2RY8, and RB1 (12%). Loss of the SERP2 and INPP4B
genes, encoding the stress-associated endoplasmic reticulum protein family member
2 and the inositol polyphosphate 4-phosphatase-II, respectively, has previously
never been implicated in leukemia. Although deletions of the other genes have
been associated with ALL, the high frequency of BTG1 loss is a novel finding.
Such deletions may characterize a clinical subgroup of DS-ALL, comprising mainly 
boys with a high median age. In conclusion, ML-DS and DS-ALL are genetically
distinct, with mainly gains in ML-DS and deletions in DS-ALL. Furthermore, DS-ALL
is characterized by several recurrent gene deletions, with BTG1 loss being
particularly frequent.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 22072402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 18;31(2):351-65. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.390. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

FOG-1 and GATA-1 act sequentially to specify definitive megakaryocytic and
erythroid progenitors.

Mancini E(1), Sanjuan-Pla A, Luciani L, Moore S, Grover A, Zay A, Rasmussen KD,
Luc S, Bilbao D, O'Carroll D, Jacobsen SE, Nerlov C.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL Mouse Biology Unit, Monterotondo, Italy.

The transcription factors that control lineage specification of haematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) have been well described for the myeloid and lymphoid lineages,
whereas transcriptional control of erythroid (E) and megakaryocytic (Mk) fate is 
less understood. We here use conditional removal of the GATA-1 and FOG-1
transcription factors to identify FOG-1 as required for the formation of all
committed Mk- and E-lineage progenitors, whereas GATA-1 was observed to be
specifically required for E-lineage commitment. FOG-1-deficient HSCs and
preMegEs, the latter normally bipotent for the Mk and E lineages, underwent
myeloid transcriptional reprogramming, and formed myeloid, but not erythroid and 
megakaryocytic cells in vitro. These results identify FOG-1 and GATA-1 as
required for formation of bipotent Mk/E progenitors and their E-lineage
commitment, respectively, and show that FOG-1 mediates transcriptional Mk/E
programming of HSCs as well as their subsequent Mk/E-lineage commitment. Finally,
C/EBPs and FOG-1 exhibited transcriptional cross-regulation in early
myelo-erythroid progenitors making their functional antagonism a potential
mechanism for separation of the myeloid and Mk/E lineages.

PMCID: PMC3261555
PMID: 22068055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Aug;16(8):1889-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01484.x.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1-mediated human GATA1 induction promotes erythroid
differentiation under hypoxic conditions.

Zhang FL(1), Shen GM, Liu XL, Wang F, Zhao YZ, Zhang JW.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

Hypoxia-inducible factor promotes erythropoiesis through coordinated cell
type-specific hypoxia responses. GATA1 is essential to normal erythropoiesis and 
plays a crucial role in erythroid differentiation. In this study, we show that
hypoxia-induced GATA1 expression is mediated by HIF1 in erythroid cells. Under
hypoxic conditions, significantly increased GATA1 mRNA and protein levels were
detected in K562 cells and erythroid induction cultures of CD34(+) haematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Enforced HIF1a expression increased GATA1 expression,
while HIF1a knockdown by RNA interference decreased GATA1 expression. In silico
analysis revealed one potential hypoxia response element (HRE). The results from 
reporter gene and mutation analysis suggested that this element is necessary for 
hypoxic response. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-PCR showed that the
putative HRE was recognized and bound by HIF1 in vivo. These results demonstrate 
that the up-regulation of GATA1 during hypoxia is directly mediated by HIF1.The
mRNA expression of some erythroid differentiation markers was increased under
hypoxic conditions, but decreased with RNA interference of HIF1a or GATA1. Flow
cytometry analysis also indicated that hypoxia, desferrioxamine or CoCl(2)
induced expression of erythroid surface markers CD71 and CD235a, while expression
repression of HIF1a or GATA1 by RNA interference led to a decreased expression of
CD235a. These results suggested that HIF1-mediated GATA1 up-regulation promotes
erythropoiesis in order to satisfy the needs of an organism under hypoxic
conditions.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822700
PMID: 22050843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cell. 2011 Oct 28;147(3):577-89. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.044.

Lineage regulators direct BMP and Wnt pathways to cell-specific programs during
differentiation and regeneration.

Trompouki E(1), Bowman TV, Lawton LN, Fan ZP, Wu DC, DiBiase A, Martin CS, Cech
JN, Sessa AK, Leblanc JL, Li P, Durand EM, Mosimann C, Heffner GC, Daley GQ,
Paulson RF, Young RA, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

BMP and Wnt signaling pathways control essential cellular responses through
activation of the transcription factors SMAD (BMP) and TCF (Wnt). Here, we show
that regeneration of hematopoietic lineages following acute injury depends on the
activation of each of these signaling pathways to induce expression of key blood 
genes. Both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 co-occupy sites with master regulators adjacent to
hematopoietic genes. In addition, both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 follow the binding of the
predominant lineage regulator during differentiation from multipotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells to erythroid cells. Furthermore, induction of the 
myeloid lineage regulator C/EBPa in erythroid cells shifts binding of SMAD1 to
sites newly occupied by C/EBPa, whereas expression of the erythroid regulator
GATA1 directs SMAD1 loss on nonerythroid targets. We conclude that the
regenerative response mediated by BMP and Wnt signaling pathways is coupled with 
the lineage master regulators to control the gene programs defining cellular
identity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3219441
PMID: 22036566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;32(1):226-39. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06166-11. Epub 2011 Oct
24.

Autophagy driven by a master regulator of hematopoiesis.

Kang YA(1), Sanalkumar R, O'Geen H, Linnemann AK, Chang CJ, Bouhassira EE,
Farnham PJ, Keles S, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, Paul Carbone Cancer Center,
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Developmental and homeostatic remodeling of cellular organelles is mediated by a 
complex process termed autophagy. The cohort of proteins that constitute the
autophagy machinery functions in a multistep biochemical pathway. Though
components of the autophagy machinery are broadly expressed, autophagy can occur 
in specialized cellular contexts, and mechanisms underlying cell-type-specific
autophagy are poorly understood. We demonstrate that the master regulator of
hematopoiesis, GATA-1, directly activates transcription of genes encoding the
essential autophagy component microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3B
(LC3B) and its homologs (MAP1LC3A, GABARAP, GABARAPL1, and GATE-16). In addition,
GATA-1 directly activates genes involved in the biogenesis/function of lysosomes,
which mediate autophagic protein turnover. We demonstrate that GATA-1 utilizes
the forkhead protein FoxO3 to activate select autophagy genes. GATA-1-dependent
LC3B induction is tightly coupled to accumulation of the active form of LC3B and 
autophagosomes, which mediate mitochondrial clearance as a critical step in
erythropoiesis. These results illustrate a novel mechanism by which a master
regulator of development establishes a genetic network to instigate
cell-type-specific autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3255705
PMID: 22025678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Int J Oncol. 2012 Mar;40(3):655-64. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1236. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

GATA-binding protein 1 is a novel transcription regulator of peroxiredoxin 5 in
human breast cancer cells.

Seo MJ(1), Liu X, Chang M, Park JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Peroxiredoxin 5 (Prx5) is a member of a family consisting of six antioxidant
enzymes. Prx5 is ubiquitously expressed in various tissues including mitochondria
and peroxisomes, implying that Prx5 functions as a regulator of the cellular
oxidation state. Prx5 plays a critical role in protecting cells from oxidative
stress by inhibiting the accumulation of reactive oxygen species and cell death. 
Overexpression of Prx5 in mammary tissue is associated with poor prognosis of
breast cancer. The present study was conducted to elucidate the regulatory
mechanisms of Prx5 gene expression and the physiological relevance of Prx5 in
breast cancer cell survival. Analysis of the promoter region of the Prx5 gene and
reporter gene assays revealed the promoter region critical for Prx5 gene
regulation to which the novel negative transcription regulator, GATA1 binds in
human breast cancer cell lines. GATA1 was further confirmed as a potential
transcription factor for Prx5 gene expression in another set of transfection
assays using a reporter gene construct that contained a mutated GATA1 binding
site. Direct binding of GATA1 to the Prx5 promoter was demonstrated using
chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Finally,
functions of Prx5 associated with apoptosis were examined in two human breast
cancer cell lines displaying high levels of either Prx5 or GATA1 expression.
Knockdown of GATA1 led to increased expression of Prx5 and inhibition of
apoptosis. Our data suggest that Prx5 may protect cells from oxidative
stress-mediated apoptosis in a GATA1-regulated manner.

PMID: 22020876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Blood. 2011 Dec 1;118(23):6200-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-363101. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Distinct Ldb1/NLI complexes orchestrate <U+03B3>-globin repression and reactivation
through ETO2 in human adult erythroid cells.

Kiefer CM(1), Lee J, Hou C, Dale RK, Lee YT, Meier ER, Miller JL, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The Ldb1/GATA-1/TAL1/LMO2 complex mediates long-range interaction between the
ß-globin locus control region (LCR) and gene in adult mouse erythroid cells, but 
whether this complex mediates chromatin interactions at other developmental
stages or in human cells is unknown. We investigated NLI (Ldb1 homolog) complex
occupancy and chromatin conformation of the ß-globin locus in human erythroid
cells. In addition to the LCR, we found robust NLI complex occupancy at a site
downstream of the (A)<U+03B3>-globin gene within sequences of BGL3, an intergenic RNA
transcript. In cells primarily transcribing ß-globin, BGL3 is not transcribed and
BGL3 sequences are occupied by NLI core complex members, together with
corepressor ETO2 and by <U+03B3>-globin repressor BCL11A. The LCR and ß-globin gene
establish proximity in these cells. In contrast, when <U+03B3>-globin transcription is
reactivated in these cells, ETO2 participation in the NLI complex at BGL3 is
diminished, as is BCL11A occupancy, and both BGL3 and <U+03B3>-globin are transcribed.
In these cells, proximity between the BGL3/<U+03B3>-globin region and the LCR is
established. We conclude that alternative NLI complexes mediate <U+03B3>-globin
transcription or silencing through long-range LCR interactions involving an
intergenic site of noncoding RNA transcription and that ETO2 is critical to this 
process.

PMCID: PMC3234672
PMID: 22010104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Blood. 2011 Dec 1;118(23):6183-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-363580. Epub 2011
Oct 11.

Pleiotropic platelet defects in mice with disrupted FOG1-NuRD interaction.

Wang Y(1), Meng R, Hayes V, Fuentes R, Yu X, Abrams CS, Heijnen HF, Blobel GA,
Marks MS, Poncz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

Understanding platelet biology has been aided by studies of mice with mutations
in key megakaryocytic transcription factors. We have shown that point mutations
in the GATA1 cofactor FOG1 that disrupt binding to the nucleosome remodeling and 
deacetylase (NuRD) complex have erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages defects.
Mice that are homozygous for a FOG1 point mutation (ki/ki), which ablates
FOG1-NuRD interactions, have platelets that display a gray platelet syndrome
(GPS)-like macrothrombocytopenia. These platelets have few a-granules and an
increased number of lysosomal-like vacuoles on electron microscopy, reminiscent
of the platelet in patients with GATA1-related X-linked GPS. Here we further
characterized the platelet defect in ki/ki mice. We found markedly deficient
levels of P-selectin protein limited to megakaryocytes and platelets. Other
a-granule proteins were expressed at normal levels and were appropriately
localized to a-granule-like structures. Treatment of ki/ki platelets with
thrombin failed to stimulate Akt phosphorylation, resulting in poor granule
secretion and platelet aggregation. These studies show that disruption of the
GATA1/FOG1/NuRD transcriptional system results in a complex, pleiotropic platelet
defect beyond GPS-like macrothrombocytopenia and suggest that this
transcriptional complex regulates not only megakaryopoiesis but also a-granule
generation and signaling pathways required for granule secretion.

PMCID: PMC3234671
PMID: 21989988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cell Biol Int. 2012 Feb;36(2):195-202. doi: 10.1042/CBI20110169.

Ectopic expression of Hmgn2 antagonizes mouse erythroid differentiation in vitro.

Kulkeaw K(1), Inoue T, Mizuochi C, Horio Y, Ishihama Y, Sugiyama D.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Medical Initiatives, Division of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, Department
of Advanced Medical Initiatives, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

Hmgn2 (high mobility group nucleosomal 2), a ubiquitous nucleosome-binding
protein that unfolds chromatin fibres and enhances DNA replication, reportedly
regulates differentiation of epithelial and mesenchymal cells. To investigate how
Hmgn2 regulates HC (haemopoietic cell) differentiation, we quantified Hmgn2
expression in HCs of mouse FL (fetal liver) during erythroid differentiation.
Hmgn2 expression levels were >10-fold higher in immature erythroid progenitors
than in mature erythroid cells, suggesting that Hmgn2 antagonizes erythroid
differentiation. To address this issue, Hmgn2 were transfected into both Friend
erythroleukaemia cells and FL HCs. There was a 3.3-fold decrease in relatively
mature c-Kit(+)/CD71(+) erythroid cells, a 2.9-fold increase in immature
c-Kit(+)/CD71(-) erythroid cells in transfected Friend cells, a 1.1-fold decrease
in relatively mature CD71(+)/Ter119(+) erythroid cells, and a 1.7-fold increase
in relatively immature c-Kit(+)/CD71(+) erythroid cells in FL HCs accompanied by 
down-regulation of genes encoding the erythroid transcription factors, Gata1 and 
Klf1. Two days after Hmgn2 transfection of Friend erythroleukaemia cells, the
number of S-phase cells increased, whereas the number of cells in G(1) decreased,
while that of mitotic cells remained unchanged. We conclude that ectopic
expression of Hmgn2 antagonizes mouse erythroid differentiation in vitro, which
may be due to enhancement of DNA replication and/or blocking entry of mitosis at 
S-phase.

PMID: 21988615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Jan;91(1):69-81. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0711338. Epub 2011 Oct 7.

High MafB expression following burn augments monocyte commitment and inhibits DC 
differentiation in hemopoietic progenitors.

Howell K(1), Posluszny J, He LK, Szilagyi A, Halerz J, Gamelli RL, Shankar R,
Muthu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

We have previously shown that perturbed bone marrow progenitor development
promotes hyporesponsive monocytes following experimental burn sepsis. Clinical
and experimental sepsis is associated with monocyte deactivation and depletion of
mDCs. Decrease in circulating DCs is reported in burn patients who develop
sepsis. In our 15% TBSA scald burn model, we demonstrate a significant reduction 
in the circulating MHC-II(+) population and mDCs (Gr1(neg)CD11b(+)CD11c(+)) with 
a corresponding decrease in bone marrow MHC-II(+) cells and mDCs for up to 14
days following burn. We explored the underlying mechanism(s) that regulate bone
marrow development of monocytes and DCs following burn injury. We found a robust 
bone marrow response with a significant increase in multipotential HSCs (LSK) and
bipotential GMPs following burn injury. GMPs from burn mice exhibit a significant
reduction in GATA-1, which is essential for DC development, but express high
levels of MafB and M-CSFRs, both associated with monocyte production. GMPs
obtained from burn mice differentiated 1.7 times more into M<U+03D5> and 1.6-fold less
into DCs compared with sham. Monocytes and DCs expressed 50% less MHC-II in burn 
versus sham. Increased monocyte commitment in burn GMPs was a result of high MafB
and M-CSFR expressions. Transient silencing of MafB (siRNA) in GMP-derived
monocytes from burn mice partially restored DC differentiation deficits and
increased GATA-1 expression. We provide evidence that high MafB following burn
plays an inhibitory role in monocyte-derived DC differentiation by regulating
M-CSFR and GATA-1 expressions.

PMCID: PMC3250307
PMID: 21984745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cell Biol Int. 2012 Jan;36(1):47-55. doi: 10.1042/CBI20110236.

Possible interaction between B1 retrotransposon-containing sequences and ß(major)
globin gene transcriptional activation during MEL cell erythroid differentiation.

Vizirianakis IS(1), Tezias SS, Amanatiadou EP, Tsiftsoglou AS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, GR54124 Thessaloniki, Greece. ivizir@pharm.auth.gr

Repetitive sequences consist of >50% of mammalian genomic DNAs and among these
SINEs (short interspersed nuclear elements), e.g. B1 elements, account for 8% of 
the mouse genome. In an effort to delineate the molecular mechanism(s) involved
in the blockade of the in vitro differentiation program of MEL (murine
erythroleukaemia) cells by treatment with methylation inhibitors, we detected a
DNA region of 559 bp in chromosome 7 located downstream of the 3'-end of the
ß(major) globin gene (designated B1-559) with unique characteristics. We have
fully characterized this B1-559 region that includes a B1 element, several
repeats of ATG initiation codons and consensus DNA-binding sites for
erythroid-specific transcription factors NF-E2 (nuclear factor-erythroid-derived 
2), GATA-1 and EKLF (erythroid Krüppel-like factor). Fragments derived from
B1-559 incubated with nuclear extracts form protein complexes in both
undifferentiated and differentiated MEL cells. Transient reporter-gene
experiments in MEL and human erythroleukaemia K-562 cells with recombinant
constructs containing B1-559 fragments linked to HS-2 (hypersensitive site-2)
sequences of human ß-globin gene LCR (locus control region) indicated potential
cooperation upon erythropoiesis and globin gene expression. The possible
interaction between the B1-559 region and ß(major) globin gene transcriptional
activation upon execution of erythroid MEL cell differentiation programme is
discussed.

© The Author(s) Journal compilation © 2012 Portland Press Limited

PMID: 21970403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Eur J Haematol. 2012 Feb;88(2):144-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01715.x.
Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Epigenetic dysregulation of GATA1 is involved in myelodysplastic syndromes
dyserythropoiesis.

Hopfer O(1), Nolte F, Mossner M, Komor M, Kmetsch A, Benslasfer O, Reissmann M,
Nowak D, Hoelzer D, Thiel E, Hofmann WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Berlin, Germany. olaf.hopfer@charite.de

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are characterized by dyserythropoiesis resulting 
in anemia. This pathological hallmark is incompletely understood. Notch signaling
has been linked to impaired erythropoietic and megakaryopoietic development of
CD34+ progenitor cells, but its role in MDS is unclear. We have analyzed the
transcriptional activity of Notch pathway elements and its association with the
key erythroid factor globin transcription factor 1 (GATA1) and the apoptosis
regulatory gene B-cell lymphoma-xl (BCLxl) in MDS. The methylation of GATA1
erythroid promoter CpG dinucleotides flanking cis-regulatory elements, including 
an N-box suppressor binding site for HES1 and a GATA-box binding site, was
examined in normal and MDS erythropoiesis. We have generated a kinetic in vitro
model of MDS erythropoiesis using CD34+ bone marrow cells from healthy donors (n 
= 7) and patients with MDS (low risk: RA/n = 6, RARS/n = 3; high risk: RAEB/n =
4, RAEB-T/n = 2). RNA expression of GATA1, BCLxl, DLK1, Notch1, HES1, and HERP2
was measured by real-time RT-PCR (qPCR). DNA methylation at seven CpG
dinucleotides of the GATA1 gene promoter was quantitatively analyzed by
pyrosequencing of bisulfite-treated genomic DNA at any specific time point. For
the Notch pathway elements, no conclusive expression differences were found
between MDS and normal erythropoiesis. But we found steadily up-regulated RNA
expression of GATA1 and of BCLxl during late normal erythropoietic
differentiation. In contrast, during MDS, erythropoiesis a loss of typical
up-regulation of GATA1 and BCLxl was observed. Hypermethylation of CpG
dinucleotides flanking the repressor HES1 binding site within the 5' region of
GATA1 was detected particularly during late MDS erythropoiesis. Interestingly,
decremental GATA1 promotor methylation values were seen during normal
erythropoiesis matching GATA1 RNA up-regulation. Our data show that the critical 
erythropoietic transcription factor GATA1 as well as the antiapoptotic molecule
BCLxl fails to be normally up-regulated during MDS erythropoiesis. The higher
residual 5'-GATA1 methylation values in MDS erythropoiesis but decremental loss
thereof in normal erythropoiesis suggest a gene dose effect for GATA1 during
erythropoiesis being finely tuned by CpG methylation. Its dysregulation may
contribute to the ineffective erythropoiesis observed in MDS.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21967505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Int J Dev Biol. 2011;55(6):613-8. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.103249kp.

Zebrafish enhancer trap line recapitulates embryonic aquaporin 1a expression
pattern in vascular endothelial cells.

Rehn K(1), Wong KS, Balciunas D, Sumanas S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Aquaporin 1 (Aqp1) is a water channel protein, expressed widely in microvascular 
endothelial cells and implicated in mammalian tumor angiogenesis. However, its
developmental expression has not yet been characterized in great detail. An
enhancer trap screen was performed using a Tol2-derived GFP reporter in zebrafish
embryos. An insertional Et(GBT-B1)tpl1 line was identified that has reporter
insertion in the vicinity of the aqp1a gene. We further characterized the
embryonic expression pattern of this GFP reporter line, as well as that of
endogenous aqp1a. Both endogenous aqp1a and reporter GFP expression were
restricted to the vascular endothelial cells within the dorsal aorta, cranial,
intersegmental and other secondary vessels, but were absent in the axial venous
vasculature. In addition, endogenous aqp1a expression was observed in both
primitive and definitive hematopoietic erythroid progenitors, as well as in the
otic vesicle, swim bladder, pneumatic duct, intestine and a subset of neurons
within the retina and the midbrain-hindbrain region. We further show that gata1
and etsrp/etv2 function is required for hematopoietic and endothelial aqp1a
expression, respectively. Aqp1a expression is restricted to endothelial and
erythroid cells during early embryogenesis. The transgenic Et(GBT-B1)tpl1 line
recapitulates endogenous endothelial aqp1a expression. Because currently very few
reporter lines can differentiate between arterial and venous endothelial cells,
the Et(GBT-B1)tpl1 transgenic line and characterization of the aqp1a expression
pattern will be useful for future studies of endothelial and arterial-venous
differentiation.

PMID: 21948709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Biomed Sci. 2011 Sep 22;18:70. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-18-70.

ß-Lapachone induces heart morphogenetic and functional defects by promoting the
death of erythrocytes and the endocardium in zebrafish embryos.

Wu YT(1), Lin CY, Tsai MY, Chen YH, Lu YF, Huang CJ, Cheng CM, Hwang SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: ß-Lapachone has antitumor and wound healing-promoting activities. To 
address the potential influences of various chemicals on heart development of
zebrafish embryos, we previously treated zebrafish embryos with chemicals from a 
Sigma LOPAC1280 library and found several chemicals including ß-lapachone that
affected heart morphogenesis. In this study, we further evaluated the effects of 
ß-lapachone on zebrafish embryonic heart development.
METHODS: Embryos were treated with ß-lapachone or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at 24
or 48 hours post fertilization (hpf) for 4 h at 28°C. Heart looping and valve
development was analyzed by whole-mount in situ hybridization and histological
analysis. For fractional shortening and wall shear stress analyses, AB and Tg
(gata1:DsRed) embryos were recorded for their heart pumping and blood cell
circulations via time-lapse fluorescence microscopy. Dextran rhodamine dye
injection into the tail reticular cells was used to analyze circulation. Reactive
oxygen species (ROS) was analyzed by incubating embryos in 5-(and
6-)-chloromethyl-2',7'-dichloro-dihydrofluorescein diacetate (CM-H2DCFDA) and
recorded using fluorescence microscopy. o-Dianisidine (ODA) staining and whole
mount in situ hybridization were used to analyze erythrocytes. TUNEL assay was
used to examine DNA fragmentation.
RESULTS: We observed a linear arrangement of the ventricle and atrium,
bradycardia arrhythmia, reduced fractional shortening, circulation with a few or 
no erythrocytes, and pericardial edema in ß-lapachone-treated 52-hpf embryos.
Abnormal expression patterns of cmlc2, nppa, BMP4, versican, and nfatc1, and
histological analyses showed defects in heart-looping and valve development of
ß-lapachone-treated embryos. ROS production was observed in erythrocytes and DNA 
fragmentation was detected in both erythrocytes and endocardium of
ß-lapachone-treated embryos. Reduction in wall shear stress was uncovered in
ß-lapachone-treated embryos. Co-treatment with the NQO1 inhibitor, dicoumarol, or
the calcium chelator, BAPTA-AM, rescued the erythrocyte-deficiency in circulation
and heart-looping defect phenotypes in ß-lapachone-treated embryos. These results
suggest that the induction of apoptosis of endocardium and erythrocytes by
ß-lapachone is mediated through an NQO1- and calcium-dependent pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel finding of this study is that ß-lapachone affects heart
morphogenesis and function through the induction of apoptosis of endocardium and 
erythrocytes. In addition, this study further demonstrates the importance of
endocardium and hemodynamic forces on heart morphogenesis and contractile
performance.

PMCID: PMC3197495
PMID: 21936955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Eur J Haematol. 2012 Feb;88(2):136-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2011.01710.x.
Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Myeloid malignancies with acquired trisomy 21 as the sole cytogenetic change are 
clinically highly variable and display a heterogeneous pattern of copy number
alterations and mutations.

Larsson N(1), Lilljebjörn H, Lassen C, Johansson B, Fioretos T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. nina.larsson@med.lu.se

OBJECTIVES: Acquired trisomy 21 is one of the most common numerical abnormalities
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS),
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), and MDS/MPN; however, little is known about
its pathogenic impact, accompanying submicroscopic changes, and its relation to
other clinical features. Furthermore, previous studies addressing this issue have
mainly focused on cases in which +21 was part of a complex karyotype.
METHODS: We ascertained the incidence of +21, both as a sole change (T21s) and
irrespective of additional changes (T21all), in relation to disease type,
morphologic subgroup, gender, and age in all published AML, MDS, MPN, and MDS/MPN
cases. Furthermore, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis was
performed on 11 myeloid malignancies with T21s, followed by mutation analysis of 
the FGFR1, FLT3, GATA1, JAK2, KIT, NPM1, NRAS, RUNX1, and TET2 genes.
RESULTS: The frequencies of T21s and/or T21all varied significantly among the
AML, MDS, MPN, and MDS/MPN cases, among the AML and MPN subtypes, and in relation
to the age of the AML, MDS, and MPN patients. In the 11 cases analyzed by SNP
array, a total of nine genomic imbalances, comprising seven deletions and two
duplications, were identified in six cases; none of the alterations were
recurrent. Partial uniparental disomies (UPDs) were found in five cases; two
recurrent UPDs were identified, namely UPD4q and UPD7q. Mutations in NPM1, RUNX1,
and TET2 were detected in five cases, three of which harbored a pathogenic RUNX1 
mutation. The TET2 mutation was found in one of the cases with UPD4q.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that trisomy 21-positive myeloid malignancies are
clinically highly variable and that they display a heterogeneous pattern of copy 
number alterations and mutations.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21933280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):442-56. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.08.004. Epub
2011 Sep 3.

The role of stat1b in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Song H(1), Yan YL, Titus T, He X, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, 1425 E. 13th Avenue, Eugene, 
OR 97403, USA. hsong@uoregon.edu

STAT1 mediates response to interferons and regulates immunity, cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and sensitivity of Fanconi Anemia cells to apoptosis
after interferon signaling; the roles of STAT1 in embryos, however, are not
understood. To explore embryonic functions of STAT1, we investigated stat1b, an
unstudied zebrafish co-ortholog of human STAT1. Zebrafish stat1a encodes all five
domains of the human STAT1-alpha splice form but, like the human STAT1-beta
splice variant, stat1b lacks a complete transactivation domain; thus, two
unlinked zebrafish paralogs encode protein forms translated from two splice
variants of a single human gene, as expected by sub-functionalization after
genome duplication. Phylogenetic and conserved synteny studies showed that stat1b
and stat1a arose as duplicates in the teleost genome duplication (TGD) and
clarified the evolutionary origin of STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, STAT4, STAT5A, STAT5B
and STAT6 by tandem and genome duplication. RT-PCR revealed maternal expression
of stat1a and stat1b. In situ hybridization detected stat1b but not stat1a
expression in embryonic hematopoietic tissues. Morpholino knockdown of stat1b,
but not stat1a, decreased expression of the myeloid and granulocyte markers spi
and mpo and increased expression of the hematopoietic progenitor marker scl, the 
erythrocyte marker gata1, and hemoglobin. These results suggest that zebrafish
Stat1b promotes myeloid development at the expense of erythroid development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3223297
PMID: 21914475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 18;108(42):17257-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1113249108. Epub 2011 Sep 12.

Dynamics and control of state-dependent networks for probing genomic
organization.

Rajapakse I(1), Groudine M, Mesbahi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 18;108(42):17243-4.

A state-dependent dynamic network is a collection of elements that interact
through a network, whose geometry evolves as the state of the elements changes
over time. The genome is an intriguing example of a state-dependent network,
where chromosomal geometry directly relates to genomic activity, which in turn
strongly correlates with geometry. Here we examine various aspects of a genomic
state-dependent dynamic network. In particular, we elaborate on one of the
important ramifications of viewing genomic networks as being state-dependent,
namely, their controllability during processes of genomic reorganization such as 
in cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3198315
PMID: 21911407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Blood. 2011 Oct 27;118(17):e139-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-355107. Epub 2011 
Sep 6.

Genome-wide ChIP-Seq reveals a dramatic shift in the binding of the transcription
factor erythroid Kruppel-like factor during erythrocyte differentiation.

Pilon AM(1), Ajay SS, Kumar SA, Steiner LA, Cherukuri PF, Wincovitch S, Anderson 
SM; NISC Comparative Sequencing Center, Mullikin JC, Gallagher PG, Hardison RC,
Margulies EH, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Erythropoiesis is dependent on the activity of transcription factors, including
the erythroid-specific erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF). ChIP followed by
massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is a powerful, unbiased method to map
trans-factor occupancy. We used ChIP-Seq to study the interactome of EKLF in
mouse erythroid progenitor cells and more differentiated erythroblasts. We
correlated these results with the nuclear distribution of EKLF, RNA-Seq analysis 
of the transcriptome, and the occupancy of other erythroid transcription factors.
In progenitor cells, EKLF is found predominantly at the periphery of the nucleus,
where EKLF primarily occupies the promoter regions of genes and acts as a
transcriptional activator. In erythroblasts, EKLF is distributed throughout the
nucleus, and erythroblast-specific EKLF occupancy is predominantly in intragenic 
regions. In progenitor cells, EKLF modulates general cell growth and cell cycle
regulatory pathways, whereas in erythroblasts EKLF is associated with repression 
of these pathways. The EKLF interactome shows very little overlap with the
interactomes of GATA1, GATA2, or TAL1, leading to a model in which EKLF directs
programs that are independent of those regulated by the GATA factors or TAL1.

PMCID: PMC3208289
PMID: 21900194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Stem Cells. 2011 Nov;29(11):1774-82. doi: 10.1002/stem.719.

Novel hematopoietic progenitor populations revealed by direct assessment of GATA1
protein expression and cMPL signaling events.

Heffner GC(1), Clutter MR, Nolan GP, Weissman IL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Ludwig Center at Stanford, Institute of Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) must exhibit tight regulation of both
self-renewal and differentiation to maintain homeostasis of the hematopoietic
system as well as to avoid aberrations in growth that may result in leukemias or 
other disorders. In this study, we sought to understand the molecular basis of
lineage determination, with particular focus on factors that influence
megakaryocyte/erythrocyte-lineage commitment, in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells. We used intracellular flow cytometry to identify two novel
hematopoietic progenitor populations within the mouse bone-marrow cKit(+) Lineage
(-) Sca1(+) (KLS) Flk2 (+) compartment that differ in their protein-level
expression of GATA1, a critical megakaryocyte/erythrocyte-promoting transcription
factor. GATA1-high repopulating cells exhibited the cell surface phenotype KLS
Flk2(+ to int), CD150(int), CD105(+), cMPL(+), and were termed "FSE cells."
GATA1-low progenitors were identified as KLS Flk2(+), CD150(-), and cMPL(-), and 
were termed "Flk(+) CD150(-) cells." FSE cells had increased
megakaryocyte/platelet potential in culture and transplant settings and exhibited
a higher clonal frequency of colony-forming unit-spleen activity compared with
Flk(+) CD150(-) cells, suggesting functional consequences of GATA1 upregulation
in promoting megakaryocyte and erythroid lineage priming. Activation of ERK and
AKT signal-transduction cascades was observed by intracellular flow cytometry in 
long-term HSCs and FSE cells, but not in Flk(+) CD150(-) cells in response to
stimulation with thrombopoietin, an important megakaryocyte-promoting cytokine.
We provide a mechanistic rationale for megakaryocyte/erythroid bias within KLS
Flk2(+) cells, and demonstrate how assessment of intracellular factors and
signaling events can be used to refine our understanding of lineage commitment
during early definitive hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4100980
PMID: 21898686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2011 Aug;52(8):695-702.

[Leukemogenesis caused by dysfunctions of GATA1 transcription factor].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimizu R.

PMID: 21897077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Chin J Cancer Res. 2011 Sep;23(3):239-41. doi: 10.1007/s11670-011-0239-4.

Mosaic Trisomy 21 and Trisomy 14 as Acquired Cytogenetic Abnormalities without
GATA1 Mutation in A Pediatric Non-Down Syndrome Acute Megakaryoblastic Leukemia.

Xiao Y(1), Wei J, Xu JH, Zhou JF, Zhang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

One case of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) with trisomy 21, trisomy 14
and unmutated GATA1 gene in a phenotypically normal girl was reported. The
patient experienced transient myelodysplasia before the onset of AMKL. The bone
marrow blasts manifested typical morphology of megakaryoblast both by the
May-Giemsa staining and under the electronic microscopy. Leukemic cells were
positive for CD13, CD33, CD117, CD56, CD38, CD41 and CD61 in flow cytometry
analysis. Cytogenetic study showed karyotype of 48, XX, +14, +21 in 40%
metaphases. Known mutations of GATA1 gene in Down syndrome or acquired trisomy 21
were not detected in this case.

PMCID: PMC3587565
PMID: 23467713  [PubMed]


422. J Biosci. 2011 Sep;36(4):621-38.

The regulatory epicenter of miRNAs.

Jha A(1), Mehra M, Shankar R.

Author information: 
(1)Studio of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Biotechnology Division,
CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research, Palampur 176061, HP, India.

miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs with average length of ~21 bp. miRNA formation
seems to be dependent upon multiple factors besides Drosha and Dicer, in a
tissue/stage-specific manner, with interplay of several specific binding factors.
In the present study, we have investigated transcription factor binding sites in 
and around the genomic sequences of precursor miRNAs and RNA-binding protein
(RBP) sites in miRNA precursor sequences, analysed and tested in comprehensive
manner. Here, we report that miRNA precursor regions are positionally enriched
for binding of transcription factors as well as RBPs around the 3' end of mature 
miRNA region in 5' arm. The pattern and distribution of such regulatory sites
appears to be a characteristic of precursor miRNA sequences when compared with
non-miRNA sequences as negative dataset and tested statistically.When compared
with 1 kb upstreamregions, a sudden sharp peak for binding sites arises in the
enriched zone near the mature miRNA region. An expression-data-based correlation 
analysis was performed between such miRNAs and their corresponding transcription 
factors and RBPs for this region. Some specific groups of binding factors and
associated miRNAs were identified. We also identified some of the overrepresented
transcription factors and associated miRNAs with high expression correlation
values which could be useful in cancer-related studies. The highly correlated
groups were found to host experimentally validated composite regulatory modules, 
in which Lmo2-GATA1 appeared as the predominant one. For many of RBP-miRNAs
associations, coexpression similarity was also evident among the associated miRNA
common to given RBPs, supporting the Regulon model, suggesting a common role and 
common control of these miRNAs by the associated RBPs. Based on our findings, we 
propose that the observed characteristic distribution of regulatory sites in
precursor miRNA sequence regions could be critical inmiRNA transcription,
processing, stability and formation and are important for therapeutic studies.
Our findings also support the recently proposed theory of self-sufficient mode of
transcription by miRNAs, which states that miRNA transcription can be carried out
in host-independent mode too.

PMID: 21857109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 30;108(35):14443-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105898108. Epub 2011 Aug 15.

Structural basis of simultaneous recruitment of the transcriptional regulators
LMO2 and FOG1/ZFPM1 by the transcription factor GATA1.

Wilkinson-White L(1), Gamsjaeger R, Dastmalchi S, Wienert B, Stokes PH, Crossley 
M, Mackay JP, Matthews JM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, New South Wales, 2006
Sydney, Australia.

The control of red blood cell and megakaryocyte development by the regulatory
protein GATA1 is a paradigm for transcriptional regulation of gene expression in 
cell lineage differentiation and maturation. Most GATA1-regulated events require 
GATA1 to bind FOG1, and essentially all GATA1-activated genes are cooccupied by a
TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 complex; however, it is not known whether FOG1 and
TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 are simultaneously recruited by GATA1. Our structural data
reveal that the FOG1-binding domain of GATA1, the N finger, can also directly
contact LMO2 and show that, despite the small size (< 50 residues) of the GATA1 N
finger, both FOG1 and LMO2 can simultaneously bind this domain. LMO2 in turn can 
simultaneously contact both GATA1 and the DNA-binding protein TAL1/E2A at
bipartite E-box/WGATAR sites. Taken together, our data provide the first
structural snapshot of multiprotein complex formation at GATA1-dependent genes
and support a model in which FOG1 and TAL1/E2A/LMO2/LDB1 can cooccupy
E-box/WGATAR sites to facilitate GATA1-mediated activation of gene activation.

PMCID: PMC3167507
PMID: 21844373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Br J Haematol. 2011 Oct;155(2):167-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08810.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 2.

NUP98-HOXA9-transgenic zebrafish develop a myeloproliferative neoplasm and
provide new insight into mechanisms of myeloid leukaemogenesis.

Forrester AM(1), Grabher C, McBride ER, Boyd ER, Vigerstad MH, Edgar A, Kai FB,
Da'as SI, Payne E, Look AT, Berman JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

NUP98-HOXA9 [t(7;11) (p15;p15)] is associated with inferior prognosis in de novo 
and treatment-related acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and contributes to blast
crisis in chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML). We have engineered an inducible
transgenic zebrafish harbouring human NUP98-HOXA9 under the zebrafish spi1(pu.1) 
promoter. NUP98-HOXA9 perturbed zebrafish embryonic haematopoiesis, with
upregulated spi1 expression at the expense of gata1a. Markers associated with
more differentiated myeloid cells, lcp1, lyz, and mpx were also elevated, but to 
a lesser extent than spi1, suggesting differentiation of early myeloid
progenitors may be impaired by NUP98-HOXA9. Following irradiation,
NUP98-HOXA9-expressing embryos showed increased numbers of cells in G2-M
transition compared to controls and absence of a normal apoptotic response, which
may result from an upregulation of bcl2. These data suggest NUP98-HOXA9-induced
oncogenesis may result from a combination of defects in haematopoiesis and an
aberrant response to DNA damage. Importantly, 23% of adult NUP98-HOXA9-transgenic
fish developed a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) at 19-23 months of age. In
summary, we have identified an embryonic haematopoietic phenotype in a transgenic
zebrafish line that subsequently develops MPN. This tool provides a unique
opportunity for high-throughput in vivo chemical modifier screens to identify
novel therapeutic agents in high risk AML.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21810091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Thromb Haemost. 2011 Jul;9 Suppl 1:76-91. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04274.x.

Advances in our understanding of the molecular basis of disorders of platelet
function.

Nurden A(1), Nurden P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Référence des Pathologies Plaquettaires, Plateforme Technologique
d'Innovation Biomédicale, Hôpital Xavier Arnozan, Pessac, France.
Alan.Nurden@cnrshl.u-bordeaux2.fr

Genetic defects of platelet function give rise to mucocutaneous bleeding of
varying severity because platelets fail to fulfil their haemostatic role after
vessel injury. Abnormalities of pathways involving glycoprotein (GP) mediators of
adhesion (Bernard-Soulier syndrome, platelet-type von Willebrand disease) and
aggregation (Glanzmann thrombasthenia) are the most studied and affect the
GPIb-IX-V complex and integrin aIIbß3, respectively. Leukocyte adhesion
deficiency-III combines Glanzmann thrombasthenia with infections and defects of
kindlin-3, a mediator of integrin activation. Agonist-specific deficiencies in
platelet aggregation relate to mutations of primary receptors for ADP (P2Y(12)), 
thromboxane A(2) (TXA2R) and collagen (GPVI); however, selective abnormalities of
intracellular signalling pathways remain better understood in mouse models.
Defects of secretion from d-granules are accompanied by pigment defects in the
Hermansky-Pudlak and Chediak-Higashi syndromes; they concern multiple genes and
protein complexes involved in secretory organelle biogenesis and function. Quebec
syndrome is linked to a tandem duplication of the urokinase plasminogen activator
(PLAU) gene while locus assignment to chromosome 3p has advanced the search for
the gene(s) responsible for a-granule deficiency in the gray platelet syndrome.
Defects of a-granule biosynthesis also involve germline VPS33B mutations in the
ARC (arthrogryposis, renal dysfunction and cholestasis) syndrome. A mutation in
transmembrane protein 16F (TMEM16F) has been linked to a defective procoagulant
activity and phosphatidylserine expression in the Scott syndrome. Cytoskeletal
dysfunction (with platelet anisotrophy) occurs not only in the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome but also in filamin A deficiency or MYH9-related disease while GATA1
mutations or RUNX1 haploinsufficiency can affect expression of multiple platelet 
proteins.

© 2011 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 21781244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Genome Res. 2011 Oct;21(10):1659-71. doi: 10.1101/gr.125088.111. Epub 2011 Jul
27.

Dynamics of the epigenetic landscape during erythroid differentiation after GATA1
restoration.

Wu W(1), Cheng Y, Keller CA, Ernst J, Kumar SA, Mishra T, Morrissey C, Dorman CM,
Chen KB, Drautz D, Giardine B, Shibata Y, Song L, Pimkin M, Crawford GE, Furey
TS, Kellis M, Miller W, Taylor J, Schuster SC, Zhang Y, Chiaromonte F, Blobel GA,
Weiss MJ, Hardison RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Interplays among lineage-specific nuclear proteins, chromatin modifying enzymes, 
and the basal transcription machinery govern cellular differentiation, but their 
dynamics of action and coordination with transcriptional control are not fully
understood. Alterations in chromatin structure appear to establish a permissive
state for gene activation at some loci, but they play an integral role in
activation at other loci. To determine the predominant roles of chromatin states 
and factor occupancy in directing gene regulation during differentiation, we
mapped chromatin accessibility, histone modifications, and nuclear factor
occupancy genome-wide during mouse erythroid differentiation dependent on the
master regulatory transcription factor GATA1. Notably, despite extensive changes 
in gene expression, the chromatin state profiles (proportions of a gene in a
chromatin state dominated by activating or repressive histone modifications) and 
accessibility remain largely unchanged during GATA1-induced erythroid
differentiation. In contrast, gene induction and repression are strongly
associated with changes in patterns of transcription factor occupancy. Our
results indicate that during erythroid differentiation, the broad features of
chromatin states are established at the stage of lineage commitment, largely
independently of GATA1. These determine permissiveness for expression, with
subsequent induction or repression mediated by distinctive combinations of
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3202283
PMID: 21795386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Genome Res. 2011 Oct;21(10):1650-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.121145.111. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Regulation of nucleosome landscape and transcription factor targeting at
tissue-specific enhancers by BRG1.

Hu G(1), Schones DE, Cui K, Ybarra R, Northrup D, Tang Q, Gattinoni L, Restifo
NP, Huang S, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Enhancers of transcription activate transcription via binding of
sequence-specific transcription factors to their target sites in chromatin. In
this report, we identify GATA1-bound distal sites genome-wide and find a global
reorganization of the nucleosomes at these potential enhancers during
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to erythrocytes. We show that 
the catalytic subunit BRG1 of BAF complexes localizes to these distal sites
during differentiation and generates a longer nucleosome linker region
surrounding the GATA1 sites by shifting the flanking nucleosomes away.
Intriguingly, we find that the nucleosome shifting specifically facilitates
binding of TAL1 but not GATA1 and is linked to subsequent transcriptional
regulation of target genes.

PMCID: PMC3202282
PMID: 21795385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Genes Cancer. 2010 Dec;1(12):1178-88. doi: 10.1177/1947601911404223.

GATA Transcription Factors and Cancer.

Zheng R(1), Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

It has been almost a quarter century since it was first appreciated that a class 
of oncogenes contained in rapidly transforming avian retroviruses encoded
DNA-binding transcription factors. As with other oncogenes, genetic recombination
with the viral genome led to their overexpression or functional alteration. In
the years that followed, alterations of numerous transcription factors were shown
to be causatively involved in various cancers in human patients and model
organisms. Depending on their normal cellular functions, these factors were
subsequently categorized as proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. This
review focuses on the role of GATA transcription factors in carcinogenesis. GATA 
factors are zinc finger DNA binding proteins that control the development of
diverse tissues by activating or repressing transcription. GATA factors thus
coordinate cellular maturation with proliferation arrest and cell survival.
Therefore, a role of this family of genes in human cancers is not surprising.
Prominent examples include structural mutations in GATA1 that are found in almost
all megakaryoblastic leukemias in patients with Down syndrome; loss of GATA3
expression in aggressive, dedifferentiated breast cancers; and silencing of GATA4
and GATA5 expression in colorectal and lung cancers. Here, we discuss possible
mechanisms of carcinogenesis vis-à-vis the normal functions of GATA factors as
they pertain to human patients and mouse models of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3092280
PMID: 21779441  [PubMed]


429. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002111. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002111. Epub
2011 Jul 14.

Discovering transcription factor binding sites in highly repetitive regions of
genomes with multi-read analysis of ChIP-Seq data.

Chung D(1), Kuan PF, Li B, Sanalkumar R, Liang K, Bresnick EH, Dewey C, Keles S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United 
States of America.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq)
is rapidly replacing chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with genome-wide
tiling array analysis (ChIP-chip) as the preferred approach for mapping
transcription-factor binding sites and chromatin modifications. The state of the 
art for analyzing ChIP-seq data relies on using only reads that map uniquely to a
relevant reference genome (uni-reads). This can lead to the omission of up to 30%
of alignable reads. We describe a general approach for utilizing reads that map
to multiple locations on the reference genome (multi-reads). Our approach is
based on allocating multi-reads as fractional counts using a weighted alignment
scheme. Using human STAT1 and mouse GATA1 ChIP-seq datasets, we illustrate that
incorporation of multi-reads significantly increases sequencing depths, leads to 
detection of novel peaks that are not otherwise identifiable with uni-reads, and 
improves detection of peaks in mappable regions. We investigate various
genome-wide characteristics of peaks detected only by utilization of multi-reads 
via computational experiments. Overall, peaks from multi-read analysis have
similar characteristics to peaks that are identified by uni-reads except that the
majority of them reside in segmental duplications. We further validate a number
of GATA1 multi-read only peaks by independent quantitative real-time ChIP
analysis and identify novel target genes of GATA1. These computational and
experimental results establish that multi-reads can be of critical importance for
studying transcription factor binding in highly repetitive regions of genomes
with ChIP-seq experiments.

PMCID: PMC3136429
PMID: 21779159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Br J Haematol. 2011 Oct;155(1):93-101. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08800.x.
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Resveratrol ameliorates TNFa-mediated suppression of erythropoiesis in human
CD34(+) cells via modulation of NF-<U+03BA>B signalling.

Jeong JY(1), Silver M, Parnes A, Nikiforow S, Berliner N, Vanasse GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Overexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tumour necrosis factor
alpha (TNFa), has been implicated in the pathogenesis of anaemia of inflammation.
TNFa suppresses erythroid colony formation via both direct and indirect effects
on haematopoietic progenitors, often involving activation of nuclear factor
(NF)-<U+03BA>B signalling resulting in downregulation of transcription factors critical 
for erythropoiesis. There is a dearth of effective and safe therapies for many
patients with inflammatory anaemia. Resveratrol is a flavanol found in red wine
grapes that possesses potent anti-inflammatory properties, but studies of its
impact on human erythropoiesis have proven contradictory. We investigated whether
resveratrol ameliorates TNFa-mediated suppression of erythropoiesis in human
CD34(+) haematopoietic progenitors. We found that resveratrol partially reverses 
the erythroid suppressive effects of TNFa, leading to significant recovery in
burst forming unit-erythroid colony formation in human CD34(+) cells. CD34(+)
cells pre-incubated with resveratrol for 72 h in the presence of TNFa inhibited
NF-<U+03BA>B activation via decreased NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear localization without altering total 
NF-<U+03BA>B protein levels and independent of I<U+03BA>B degradation. Resveratrol also
significantly restored the baseline expression of erythroid transcription factors
NFE2 and the GATA1/GATA2 ratio in CD34(+) cells treated with TNFa. In conclusion,
resveratrol may inhibit TNFa-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and promote erythropoiesis
in primary human CD34(+) cells.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3169745
PMID: 21762122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Blood. 2011 Sep 1;118(9):2443-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-331892. Epub 2011
Jul 13.

The Hbo1-Brd1/Brpf2 complex is responsible for global acetylation of H3K14 and
required for fetal liver erythropoiesis.

Mishima Y(1), Miyagi S, Saraya A, Negishi M, Endoh M, Endo TA, Toyoda T, Shinga
J, Katsumoto T, Chiba T, Yamaguchi N, Kitabayashi I, Koseki H, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical, Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

The histone acetyltransferases (HATs) of the MYST family include TIP60, HBO1,
MOZ/MORF, and MOF and function in multisubunit protein complexes.
Bromodomain-containing protein 1 (BRD1), also known as BRPF2, has been considered
a subunit of the MOZ/MORF H3 HAT complex based on analogy with BRPF1 and BRPF3.
However, its physiologic function remains obscure. Here we show that BRD1 forms a
novel HAT complex with HBO1 and regulates erythropoiesis. Brd1-deficient embryos 
showed severe anemia because of impaired fetal liver erythropoiesis. Biochemical 
analyses revealed that BRD1 bridges HBO1 and its activator protein, ING4.
Genome-wide mapping in erythroblasts demonstrated that BRD1 and HBO1 largely
colocalize in the genome and target key developmental regulator genes. Of note,
levels of global acetylation of histone H3 at lysine 14 (H3K14) were profoundly
decreased in Brd1-deficient erythroblasts and depletion of Hbo1 similarly
affected H3K14 acetylation. Impaired erythropoiesis in the absence of Brd1
accompanied reduced expression of key erythroid regulator genes, including Gata1,
and was partially restored by forced expression of Gata1. Our findings suggest
that the Hbo1-Brd1 complex is the major H3K14 HAT required for transcriptional
activation of erythroid developmental regulator genes.

PMID: 21753189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Exp Hematol. 2011 Oct;39(10):986-998.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2011.06.010. Epub 
2011 Jul 1.

Characterization of Sry-related HMG box group F genes in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Chung MI(1), Ma AC, Fung TK, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: The roles of Sry-related HMG box (Sox) genes in zebrafish
hematopoiesis are not clearly defined. In this study, we have characterized the
sequence homology, gene expression, hematopoietic functions, and regulation of
sox genes in F group (SoxF) in zebrafish embryos.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of zebrafish SoxF genes were analyzed by
whole-mount in situ hybridization, reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction, and real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction of
erythroid cells obtained from Tg(gata1:GFP) embryos by fluorescence-activated
cell sorting. Roles of SoxF genes were analyzed in zebrafish embryos using
morpholino knockdown and analyzed by whole-mount in situ hybridization and
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Embryo patterning and 
vascular development were analyzed.
RESULTS: All members, except sox17, contained a putative ß-catenin binding site. 
sox7 and 18 expressed primarily in the vasculature. sox17 expressed in the
intermediate cell mass and its knockdown significantly reduced primitive
erythropoiesis at 18 hours post-fertilization (hpf). Definitive hematopoiesis was
unaffected. Concomitant sox7 and sox18 knockdown disrupted vasculogenesis and
angiogenesis, but not hematopoiesis. sox32 knockdown delayed medial migration of 
hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors at 18 hpf and abolished cmyb expression
at the caudal hematopoietic tissue at 48 hpf. These defects could be prevented by
delaying its knockdown using a caged sox32 morpholino uncaged at 10 hpf.
Knockdown of SoxF genes significantly upregulated their own expression and that
of sox32 also upregulated sox18 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: sox17 helped to maintain primitive hematopoiesis, whereas sox7 and
sox18 regulated angiogenesis and vasculogenesis. sox32 affected both vascular and
hematopoietic development through its effects on medial migration of the
hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors.

Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21726513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Blood. 2011 Aug 25;118(8):2222-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-342774. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

Analysis of GATA1 mutations in Down syndrome transient myeloproliferative
disorder and myeloid leukemia.

Alford KA(1), Reinhardt K, Garnett C, Norton A, Böhmer K, von Neuhoff C, Kolenova
A, Marchi E, Klusmann JH, Roberts I, Hasle H, Reinhardt D, Vyas P; International 
Myeloid Leukemia-Down Syndrome Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) up to the age of 4 years are at a 150-fold
excess risk of developing myeloid leukemia (ML-DS). Approximately 4%-5% of
newborns with DS develop transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD). Blast cell 
structure and immunophenotype are similar in TMD and ML-DS. A mutation in the
hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1 is present in almost all cases. Here, we
show that simple techniques detect GATA1 mutations in the largest series of TMD
(n = 134; 88%) and ML-DS (n = 103; 85%) cases tested. Furthermore, no significant
difference in the mutational spectrum between the 2 disorders was seen. Thus, the
type of GATA1 sequence mutation is not a reliable tool and is not prognostic of
which patients with TMD are probable to develop ML-DS.

PMID: 21715302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jun 26;13(8):944-51. doi: 10.1038/ncb2278.

Variegated gene expression caused by cell-specific long-range DNA interactions.

Noordermeer D(1), de Wit E, Klous P, van de Werken H, Simonis M, Lopez-Jones M,
Eussen B, de Klein A, Singer RH, de Laat W.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 
3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Mammalian genomes contain numerous regulatory DNA sites with unknown target
genes. We used mice with an extra ß-globin locus control region (LCR) to
investigate how a regulator searches the genome for target genes. We find that
the LCR samples a restricted nuclear subvolume, wherein it preferentially
contacts genes controlled by shared transcription factors. No contacted gene is
detectably upregulated except for endogenous ß-globin genes located on another
chromosome. This demonstrates genetically that mammalian trans activation is
possible, but suggests that it will be rare. Trans activation occurs not
pan-cellularly, but in 'jackpot' cells enriched for the interchromosomal
interaction. Therefore, cell-specific long-range DNA contacts can cause
variegated expression.

PMCID: PMC3151580
PMID: 21706023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Int J Lab Hematol. 2011 Aug;33(4):369-77. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2011.01299.x. 
Epub 2011 Feb 25.

Distinctive hematological abnormalities in East Asian neonates and children with 
Down syndrome.

Kim DW(1), Kim HR, Shin MG, Baek HJ, Kook H, Hwang TJ, Shin JH, Suh SP, Ryang DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School 
and Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, South Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Neonates with Down syndrome (DS) are predisposed to developing
transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) associated
with DS. However, there is a paucity of data on hematological aberrations and
GATA1 mutations in neonates with DS in East Asian populations.
METHODS: Total 109 patients with DS who had one or more CBCs obtained were
enrolled. The molecular analysis of the GATA1 gene performed in 10 patients
(three TAM, three AML associated with DS at diagnosis, one remission case of AML 
associated with DS and three DS without TAM or AML).
RESULTS: East Asian DS neonates showed low frequency of thrombocytopenia,
uncommon neutrophilia and higher prevalence rate of TAM compared to previous
reports from western countries. GATA1 mutations were identified in almost all TAM
and AML associated with DS samples, but were not detected in the samples from DS 
without TAM or AML associated with DS.
CONCLUSION: East Asian DS neonates and children showed distinctive spectrum of
hematological abnormalities.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21692995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 20;13(3):R65. doi: 10.1186/bcr2902.

Stat3 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBP-beta) regulate Jab1/CSN5
expression in mammary carcinoma cells.

Shackleford TJ(1), Zhang Q, Tian L, Vu TT, Korapati AL, Baumgartner AM, Le XF,
Liao WS, Claret FX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas - MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The c-Jun coactivator, Jun activation-domain binding protein 1
(Jab1) also known as the fifth component of the COP9 signalosome complex (CSN5), 
is a novel candidate oncogene whose aberrant expression contributes to the
progression of breast carcinoma and other human cancers. The mechanism of Jab1
gene expression and its deregulation in cancer cells remains to be identified. We
therefore investigated the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms of Jab1
expression in human breast carcinoma cells.
METHODS: To identify potential regulators of Jab1 transcription, we cloned the 5'
upstream region of the human Jab1 gene and mapped its transcriptional start site.
We identified binding sequences for the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
and GATA, as well as a signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3)
consensus sequence overlapping the C/EBP site, using 5'- deletion analysis and a 
gene reporter assay. Mutational analysis of these binding sites was performed to 
confirm their roles in promoting Jab1 transcription in breast cancer cells. We
further confirmed these binding sites using electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSAs) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. We also analyzed whether
the siRNA-mediated inactivation of Stat3 and Src could reduce Jab1-promoter
activity and whether interleukine-6 (IL-6) could mediate increased Jab1
expression through Stat3 signaling.
RESULTS: We identified binding sequences for C/EBP, GATA, as well as a Stat3
consensus sequence overlapping the C/EBP site in the promoter region of Jab1.
C/EBP-beta2 is a potential transcriptional activator of Jab1 and mutation of the 
C/EBP/Stat3 binding site significantly reduced Jab1-promoter activity. In
addition, inhibiting Stat3 significantly reduced Jab1-promoter activation. EMSA
and ChIP assays confirmed that C/EBP, GATA1 and Stat3 bind to Jab1 promoter in
breast carcinoma cells. We also found that Src, an activator of Stat3, is
involved in Jab1-promoter activation. siRNA knockdown of Src reduced the
Jab1-promoter activity, similar to the results seen when Stat3 was inhibited in
breast carcinoma cells. Interestingly, reactivation of Stat3 in normal mammary
epithelial cells (MCF-10A, MCF-10F) is sufficient to reactivate Jab1 expression. 
Treatment with the cytokine IL-6 resulted in increased Jab1 expression that was
blocked by inhibition of Stat3.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal a novel mechanism of Jab1 gene regulation and 
provide functional and mechanistic links between the Src/Stat3 and IL-6/Stat3
signaling axes that are involved in the activation of Jab1 transcription and
regulation of this novel oncogenic protein.

PMCID: PMC3218954
PMID: 21689417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Thromb Haemost. 2011 Aug;9(8):1572-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04396.x.

c-Myb and GATA-1 alternate dominant roles during megakaryocyte differentiation.

García P(1), Berlanga O, Vegiopoulos A, Vyas P, Frampton J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, College of Medical and Dental Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. p.garcia@bham.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors are essential for blood cell formation. Mice
expressing low levels of c-Myb (c-Myb(low)) have an increased number of bone
marrow megakaryocytes (MKs) and corresponding thrombocytosis. In contrast, mice
engineered to express low levels of GATA-1 (GATA-1(low)) in the megakaryocytic
lineage exhibit aberrant megakaryocytopoiesis with hyperproliferation of
progenitors and defective terminal differentiation leading to thrombocytopenia.
These seemingly opposite roles may affect platelet turnover and thus be of
clinical relevance.
OBJECTIVE: To determine how these two transcription factors act together to
control megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet formation.
METHODS: We used a combination of cellular and molecular in vitro assays to
examine the ability of bone marrow cells from mice expressing low levels of both 
c-Myb and GATA-1 (referred to as double(low)) to produce MKs and platelets.
RESULTS: Double(low) cells, or those with low GATA-1 levels in which c-Myb is
conditionally deleted, lack the hyperproliferative capacity of GATA-1(low) cells,
allowing the cells to proceed towards more committed MKs that are, however,
impaired in their capacity to produce fully differentiated cells, as confirmed by
the abundance of morphologically aberrant cells that lack the ability to form
proplatelets.
CONCLUSION: c-Myb and GATA-1 act in concert to achieve correct megakaryocytic
differentiation. GATA-1 regulates both the proliferation of megakaryocytic
progenitors and their terminal maturation. c-Myb also acts at the level of the
progenitor by influencing its commitment to differentiation, but in contrast to
GATA-1 it does not have any effect on the process of terminal differentiation.

© 2011 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 21668739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Proteins. 2011 Aug;79(8):2365-71. doi: 10.1002/prot.23068. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Protein-protein interactions: analysis of a false positive GST pulldown result.

Wissmueller S(1), Font J, Liew CW, Cram E, Schroeder T, Turner J, Crossley M,
Mackay JP, Matthews JM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales 2006, Australia.

One of the most common ways to demonstrate a direct protein-protein interaction
in vitro is the glutathione-S-transferse (GST)-pulldown. Here we report the
detailed characterization of a putative interaction between two transcription
factor proteins, GATA-1 and Krüppel-like factor 3 (KLF3/BKLF) that show robust
interactions in GST-pulldown experiments. Attempts to map the interaction
interface of GATA-1 on KLF3 using a mutagenic screening approach did not yield a 
contiguous binding face on KLF3, suggesting that the interaction might be
non-specific. NMR experiments showed that the proteins do not interact at protein
concentrations of 50-100 µM. Rather, the GST tag can cause part of KLF3 to
misfold. In addition to misfolding, the fact that both proteins are DNA-binding
domains appears to introduce binding artifacts (possibly nucleic acid bridging)
that cannot be resolved by the addition of nucleases or ethidium bromide (EtBr). 
This study emphasizes the need for caution in relying on GST-pulldown results and
related methods, without convincing confirmation from different approaches.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21638332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2011 May;82(5):513-7.

Simulated microgravity, erythroid differentiation, and the expression of
transcription factor GATA-1 in CD34+ cells.

Zheng L(1), Liu JZ, Hu YW, Zhong TY, Xiong SL, Wang W, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine Center, China-UK Joint Research Center on Bioengineering
and Biomaterials, Nangfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China.

INTRODUCTION: The microgravity environment of spaceflight leads to a series of
changes in the human blood system. The aim of the present study was to examine
the influence of simulated microgravity on the differentiation of CD34+ cells and
to explore whether transcription factor GATA-1, required for the terminal
differentiation of committed erythroid progenitor cells, is involved in this
process.
METHODS: CD34+ cells were cultured in the simulated microgravity conditions
created by a rotary cell-culture system (RCCS). The effects of simulated
microgravity on the differentiation and apoptosis of CD34+ cells were analyzed
using flow cytometry and propidium iodide (PI) staining, respectively. Expression
of GATA-1 mRNA in CD34+ cells was determined by real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: In the RCCS group, GlyA+ (glycophorin A) expression was lower and CD33+ 
expression higher than in the 1-g liquid control group (22.21% +/- 3.02% and
60.05% +/- 3.08%, vs. 52.12% +/- 1.92% and 18.87% +/- 1.41%, respectively). The
proportion of differentiated cells in the 1-g methylcellulos e group (Gly+% =
54.39% +/- 2.86%, CD33+% = 21.09% +/- 3.19%) was similar to that in the 1-g
liquid control group. As shown by real-time quantitative PCR, the relative
expression of GATA-1 mRNA in the RCCS group was only 20% of that in the -g
control group. CONCLUSIONSs: The differentiation of CD3+ cells, and especially
erythroid differentiation, was inhibited by simulated microgravity by a mechanism
that appears to involve the suppression of GATA-1 mRNA expression. The results of
this study may be useful in understanding the critical effect of simulated
microgravity on the pathogenesis of space anemia.

PMID: 21614864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(16):6944-55. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr253. Epub 2011 
May 24.

The distinctive roles of erythroid specific activator GATA-1 and NF-E2 in
transcription of the human fetal <U+03B3>-globin genes.

Woon Kim Y(1), Kim S, Geun Kim C, Kim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, Korea.

GATA-1 and NF-E2 are erythroid specific activators that bind to the ß-globin
locus. To explore the roles of these activators in transcription of the human
fetal stage specific <U+03B3>-globin genes, we reduced GATA-1 and p45/NF-E2 using shRNA 
in erythroid K562 cells. GATA-1 or p45/NF-E2 knockdown inhibited the
transcription of the <U+03B3>-globin genes, hypersensitive site (HS) formation in the
LCR and chromatin loop formation of the ß-globin locus, but histone acetylation
across the locus was decreased only in the case of GATA-1 knockdown. In p45/NF-E2
knockdown cells, GATA-1 binding was maintained at the LCR HSs and <U+03B3>-globin
promoter, but NF-E2 binding at the LCR HSs was reduced by GATA-1 knockdown
regardless of the amount of p45/NF-E2 in K562 cells. These results indicate that 
histone acetylation is dependent on GATA-1 binding, but the binding of GATA-1 is 
not sufficient for the <U+03B3>-globin transcription, HS formation and chromatin loop
formation and NF-E2 is required. This idea is supported by the distinctive
binding pattern of CBP and Brg1 in the ß-globin locus. Furthermore
GATA-1-dependent loop formation between HS5 and 3'HS1 suggests correlation
between histone modifications and chromatin looping.

PMCID: PMC3167640
PMID: 21609963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012 Apr;82(1):1-17. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.04.007. Epub 2011 May 24.

The role of the GATA2 transcription factor in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

Vicente C(1), Conchillo A, García-Sánchez MA, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Center for Applied Medical Research, Department of
Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Hematopoiesis involves an elaborate regulatory network of transcription factors
that coordinates the expression of multiple downstream genes, and maintains
homeostasis within the hematopoietic system through the accurate orchestration of
cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival. As a result, defects in the
expression levels or the activity of these transcription factors are intimately
linked to hematopoietic disorders, including leukemia. The GATA family of nuclear
regulatory proteins serves as a prototype for the action of lineage-restricted
transcription factors. GATA1 and GATA2 are expressed principally in hematopoietic
lineages, and have essential roles in the development of multiple hematopoietic
cells, including erythrocytes and megakaryocytes. Moreover, GATA2 is crucial for 
the proliferation and maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells and multipotential 
progenitors. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge regarding the
biological properties and functions of the GATA2 transcription factor in normal
and malignant hematopoiesis.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21605981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Blood. 2011 Jun 30;117(26):7014-20. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325712. Epub 2011 
May 19.

Sumoylation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a promotes the biased primitive
hematopoiesis of zebrafish.

Yuan H(1), Zhou J, Deng M, Zhang Y, Chen Y, Jin Y, Zhu J, Chen SJ, de The H, Chen
Z, Liu TX, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-LIA124, Sino-French Research
Center for Life Sciences and Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui-Jin 
Hospital, China.

Hematopoiesis is evolutionarily conserved from zebrafish to mammals, and this
includes both primitive and definitive waves during embryogenesis. Primitive
hematopoiesis is dominated by erythropoiesis with limited myelopoiesis. Protein
sumoylation, a ubiquitination-like posttranslational protein modification, is
implicated in a variety of biochemical processes, most notably in transcriptional
repression. We show here that the loss of 6 small ubiquitin-related modifier
(SUMO) paralogs triggers a sharp up-regulation of the myeloid-specific marker mpo
and down-regulation of the erythroid-specific marker gata1 in myelo-erythroid
progenitor cells (MPCs) in the intermediate cell mass (ICM) during primitive
hematopoiesis. Accordingly, in transgenic zebrafish lines, hyposumoylation
expands myelopoiesis at the expense of erythropoiesis. A
SUMO-CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (SUMO-C/ebpa) fusion restores the normal
myelopoiesis/erythropoiesis balance, suggesting that sumoylation status of C/ebpa
contributes to myelo-erythroid lineage determination. Our results therefore
implicate sumoylation in early lineage determination and reveal the possible
molecular mechanism underlying the puzzling biased primitive hematopoiesis in
vertebrates.

PMID: 21596856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Dev Cell. 2011 May 17;20(5):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.04.008.

Genome-wide analysis of simultaneous GATA1/2, RUNX1, FLI1, and SCL binding in
megakaryocytes identifies hematopoietic regulators.

Tijssen MR(1), Cvejic A, Joshi A, Hannah RL, Ferreira R, Forrai A, Bellissimo DC,
Oram SH, Smethurst PA, Wilson NK, Wang X, Ottersbach K, Stemple DL, Green AR,
Ouwehand WH, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Hematopoietic differentiation critically depends on combinations of
transcriptional regulators controlling the development of individual lineages.
Here, we report the genome-wide binding sites for the five key hematopoietic
transcription factors--GATA1, GATA2, RUNX1, FLI1, and TAL1/SCL--in primary human 
megakaryocytes. Statistical analysis of the 17,263 regions bound by at least one 
factor demonstrated that simultaneous binding by all five factors was the most
enriched pattern and often occurred near known hematopoietic regulators. Eight
genes not previously appreciated to function in hematopoiesis that were bound by 
all five factors were shown to be essential for thrombocyte and/or erythroid
development in zebrafish. Moreover, one of these genes encoding the PDZK1IP1
protein shared transcriptional enhancer elements with the blood stem cell
regulator TAL1/SCL. Multifactor ChIP-Seq analysis in primary human cells coupled 
with a high-throughput in vivo perturbation screen therefore offers a powerful
strategy to identify essential regulators of complex mammalian differentiation
processes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3145975
PMID: 21571218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(13):2632-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05413-11. Epub 2011 May 
9.

Structural basis and specificity of acetylated transcription factor GATA1
recognition by BET family bromodomain protein Brd3.

Gamsjaeger R(1), Webb SR, Lamonica JM, Billin A, Blobel GA, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia.

Recent data demonstrate that small synthetic compounds specifically targeting
bromodomain proteins can modulate the expression of cancer-related or
inflammatory genes. Although these studies have focused on the ability of
bromodomains to recognize acetylated histones, it is increasingly becoming clear 
that histone-like modifications exist on other important proteins, such as
transcription factors. However, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms
through which these modifications modulate protein function is far from complete.
The transcription factor GATA1 can be acetylated at lysine residues adjacent to
the zinc finger domains, and this acetylation is essential for the normal
chromatin occupancy of GATA1. We have recently identified the
bromodomain-containing protein Brd3 as a cofactor that interacts with acetylated 
GATA1 and shown that this interaction is essential for the targeting of GATA1 to 
chromatin. Here we describe the structural basis for this interaction. Our data
reveal for the first time the molecular details of an interaction between a
transcription factor bearing multiple acetylation modifications and its cognate
recognition module. We also show that this interaction can be inhibited by an
acetyllysine mimic, highlighting the importance of further increasing the
specificity of compounds that target bromodomain and extraterminal (BET)
bromodomains in order to fully realize their therapeutic potential.

PMCID: PMC3133386
PMID: 21555453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;43(8):1218-27. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.04.015. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Knockdown of ribosomal protein S7 causes developmental abnormalities via p53
dependent and independent pathways in zebrafish.

Duan J(1), Ba Q, Wang Z, Hao M, Li X, Hu P, Zhang D, Zhang R, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Ribosomal proteins (RPs), structural components of the ribosome involved in
protein synthesis, are of significant importance in all organisms. Previous
studies have suggested that some RPs may have other functions in addition to
assembly of the ribosome. The small ribosomal subunits RPS7, has been reported to
modulate the mdm2-p53 interaction. To further investigate the biological
functions of RPS7, we used morpholino antisense oligonucleotides (MO) to
specifically knockdown RPS7 in zebrafish. In RPS7-deficient embryos, p53 was
activated, and its downstream target genes and biological events were induced,
including apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Hematopoiesis was also impaired
seriously in RPS7-deficient embryos, which was confirmed by the hemoglobin
O-dianisidine staining of blood cells, and the expression of scl, gata1 and a-E1 
globin were abnormal. The matrix metalloproteinase (mmp) family genes were also
activated in RPS7 morphants, indicating that improper cell migration might also
cause development defects. Furthermore, simultaneously knockdown of the p53
protein by co-injecting a p53 MO could partially reverse the abnormal phenotype
in the morphants. These results strengthen the hypothesis that specific ribosomal
proteins regulate p53 and that their deficiency affects hematopoiesis. Moreover, 
our data implicate that RPS7 is a regulator of matrix metalloproteinase (mmp)
family in zebrafish system. These specific functions of RPS7 may provide helpful 
clues to study the roles of RPs in human disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21550419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011 Sep;57(3):516-9. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23156. Epub 2011 Apr
29.

Bi-allelic deletions within 13q14 and transient trisomy 21 with absence of GATA1s
in pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.

Massaro SA(1), Bajaj R, Pashankar FD, Ornstein D, Gallagher PG, Krause DS, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA. stephanie.massaro@yale.edu

Oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization, karyotype and
fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses were employed to delineate the
cytogenetic abnormalities in a case of pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
Here we present a unique genetic profile that includes bi-allelic deletions
within 13q14, where the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene (RB1) resides, as
well as isolated trisomy 21 without a concomitant mutation in the hematopoietic
transcription factor GATA1s and translocation (17;22), that does not involve the 
megakaryoblastic leukemia 1 (MKL1) gene located on chromosome 22. Alteration of
the RB1 gene is most likely the critical leukemogenic event in this patient.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4517576
PMID: 21538823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 31;108(22):E159-68. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1102140108. Epub 2011 May 2.

Bromodomain protein Brd3 associates with acetylated GATA1 to promote its
chromatin occupancy at erythroid target genes.

Lamonica JM(1), Deng W, Kadauke S, Campbell AE, Gamsjaeger R, Wang H, Cheng Y,
Billin AN, Hardison RC, Mackay JP, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

Acetylation of histones triggers association with bromodomain-containing proteins
that regulate diverse chromatin-related processes. Although acetylation of
transcription factors has been appreciated for some time, the mechanistic
consequences are less well understood. The hematopoietic transcription factor
GATA1 is acetylated at conserved lysines that are required for its stable
association with chromatin. We show that the BET family protein Brd3 binds via
its first bromodomain (BD1) to GATA1 in an acetylation-dependent manner in vitro 
and in vivo. Mutation of a single residue in BD1 that is involved in
acetyl-lysine binding abrogated recruitment of Brd3 by GATA1, demonstrating that 
acetylation of GATA1 is essential for Brd3 association with chromatin. Notably,
Brd3 is recruited by GATA1 to both active and repressed target genes in a fashion
seemingly independent of histone acetylation. Anti-Brd3 ChIP followed by
massively parallel sequencing in GATA1-deficient erythroid precursor cells and
those that are GATA1 replete revealed that GATA1 is a major determinant of Brd3
recruitment to genomic targets within chromatin. A pharmacologic compound that
occupies the acetyl-lysine binding pockets of Brd3 bromodomains disrupts the
Brd3-GATA1 interaction, diminishes the chromatin occupancy of both proteins, and 
inhibits erythroid maturation. Together these findings provide a mechanism for
GATA1 acetylation and suggest that Brd3 "reads" acetyl marks on nuclear factors
to promote their stable association with chromatin.

PMCID: PMC3107332
PMID: 21536911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Jul 15;12(2):139-51. Epub 2011 Jul 15.

Identification of STAT3-independent regulatory effects for protein inhibitor of
activated STAT3 by binding to novel transcription factors.

Dabir S(1), Kluge A, Aziz MA, Houghton JA, Dowlati A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH USA.

Protein Inhibitor of Activated Signal Transducer and Activators of Transcription 
3 (PIAS3) is a molecule that regulates STAT3 and has antiproliferative
properties. Glioblastoma and squamous cell lung cancer lack PIAS3 expression. To 
test the hypothesis that PIAS3 transcriptional effects are STAT3-independent, we 
developed models for STAT3 knockdown and PIAS3 over-expression. PIAS3 expression 
results in a distinct transcriptional profile that does not occur with STAT3
knockdown. We identify novel transcription factor binding partners for PIAS3
including ETS, EGR1, NR1I2, and GATA1. PIAS3 binds to these factors and regulates
their transcriptional effects resulting in alterations in canonical pathways
including Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and functions such as cell death and
proliferation. A model is proposed by which PIAS3 effects EGR1 regulated
pathways.

PMCID: PMC3154286
PMID: 21532337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Blood. 2011 Jun 16;117(24):6489-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312389. Epub 2011 
Apr 22.

Smad1 signaling restricts hematopoietic potential after promoting hemangioblast
commitment.

Cook BD(1), Liu S, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Ave, New York,
NY 10065, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling regulates embryonic hematopoiesis via 
receptor-mediated activation of downstream SMAD proteins, including SMAD1. In
previous work, we showed that Smad1 expression is sufficient to enhance
commitment of mesoderm to hemangioblast fate. We also found indirect evidence to 
support a subsequent repressive function for Smad1 in hematopoiesis. To test this
hypothesis directly, we developed a novel system allowing temporal control of
Smad1 levels by conditional knockdown in embryonic stem cell derivatives.
Depletion of Smad1 in embryoid body cultures before hemangioblast commitment
limits hematopoietic potential because of a block in mesoderm development.
Conversely, when Smad1 is depleted in FlK1(+) mesoderm, at a stage after
hemangioblast commitment, the pool of hematopoietic progenitors is expanded. This
involves enhanced expression levels for genes specific to hematopoiesis,
including Gata1, Runx1 and Eklf, rather than factors required for earlier
specification of the hemangioblast. The phenotype correlates with increased
nuclear SMAD2 activity, indicating molecular cross-regulation between the BMP and
TGF-ß signaling pathways. Consistent with this mechanism, hematopoiesis was
enhanced when Smad2 was directly expressed during this same developmental window.
Therefore, this study reveals a temporally defined function for Smad1 in
restricting the expansion of early hematopoietic progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3123019
PMID: 21515822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Jul 15;82(2):156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.03.030. Epub
2011 Apr 9.

Tumor necrosis factor a-mediated inhibition of erythropoiesis involves
GATA-1/GATA-2 balance impairment and PU.1 over-expression.

Grigorakaki C(1), Morceau F, Chateauvieux S, Dicato M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, Rue Edward Steichen, Luxembourg.

Many physiological perturbations can cause anemia. In cancer patients, activation
of the immune system leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines
including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa), that have been shown to inhibit
red-cell production via poorly understood mechanisms. Treatment of anemia by
human recombinant erythropoietin (EPO) is strongly suspected to induce tumor
growth. This study focuses on the mechanisms involved in TNFa-mediated inhibition
of erythropoiesis. CD34(+) hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) were
isolated from human cord blood. Erythropoiesis was achieved in vitro by
stimulating cells with EPO. We show that TNFa clearly affected erythroid
development, as assessed by May-Grünwald/Giemsa staining, flow cytometry analysis
and fluorescent microscopy. The amount of hemoglobin-producing cells as well as
the expression of GATA-1 target erythro-specific genes (EPO receptor, glycophorin
A and globins) was found decreased after TNFa treatment of HSPC. In correlation, 
TNFa induced the expression of the transcription factors GATA-2 and PU.1,
described as inhibitors of erythropoiesis. In this regard, TNFa promoted the
formation of the GATA-1/PU.1 complex that has been reported to block the
transcriptional activity of GATA-1. Our results clearly demonstrate that TNFa
prevents EPO-mediated erythropoiesis of HSPC as an early event, by directly
affecting erythroid cell development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21501595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Blood. 2011 May 26;117(21):5719-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-333013. Epub 2011 
Apr 7.

Identification of a transforming MYB-GATA1 fusion gene in acute basophilic
leukemia: a new entity in male infants.

Quelen C(1), Lippert E, Struski S, Demur C, Soler G, Prade N, Delabesse E,
Broccardo C, Dastugue N, Mahon FX, Brousset P.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1037, Centre de Recherche sur le Cancer de Toulouse, Toulouse,
France.

Acute basophilic leukemia (ABL) is a rare subtype of acute leukemia with clinical
features and symptoms related to hyperhistaminemia because of excessive growth of
basophils. No known recurrent cytogenetic abnormality is associated with this
leukemia. Rare cases of t(X;6)(p11;q23) translocation have been described but
these were sporadic. We report here 4 cases of ABL with a t(X;6)(p11;q23)
translocation occurring in male infants. Because of its location on chromosome
6q23, MYB was a good candidate gene. Our molecular investigations, based on
fluorescence in situ hybridization and rapid amplification of cDNA ends, revealed
that the translocation generated a MYB-GATA1 fusion gene. Expression of MYB-GATA1
in mouse lineage-negative cells committed them to the granulocyte lineage and
blocked at an early stage of differentiation. Taken together, these results
establish, for the first time, a link between a recurrent chromosomal
translocation and the development of this particular subtype of infant leukemia.

PMID: 21474671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Immunol. 2011 May;48(9-10):1224-35. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.03.007. Epub
2011 Apr 6.

Distribution and expression analysis of transcription factors in tissues and
progenitor cell populations of the goldfish (Carassius auratus L.) in response to
growth factors and pathogens.

Katzenback BA(1), Karpman M, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

We report on the mRNA levels of a panel of transcription factors in the kidney
and spleen tissues, and in the cell populations from the blood, the spleen, and
in the sorted kidney progenitor cells. The mRNA levels of cebpa, cjun, cmyb,
egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1 were assessed in
healthy goldfish as well as in fish challenged with two different pathogens,
Aeromonas salmonicida A449 or Trypanosoma carassii. Spleen tissue from healthy
goldfish showed higher expression of myeloid (cjun), erythroid (gata1) and
lymphoid (gata3, pax5) transcription factors, and lower expression of the myeloid
transcription factor cebpa when compared to that of kidney. Splenocytes and PBLs 
had significantly higher mRNA levels of the transcription factors involved in
myeloid (pu.1, mafb, cjun, egr1, cebpa), erythroid (gata1, lmo2), and lymphoid
pathways (gata3 and pax5) compared to sorted kidney R1 progenitor cells, while R1
progenitor cells had higher mRNA levels of early progenitor transcription factors
(runx1 and cmyb). Furthermore, the R1 progenitor cells had higher mRNA levels of 
the transcription factors involved in early progenitor cells (egr1, gata2) and
the lymphoid lineage progenitors (gata3, pax5) compared to those in kidney. The
mRNA levels of the transcription factors (gata2, mafb, cjun, gata1, lmo2, gata3, 
and pax5) in R1 progenitor cells changed during cultivation; they were elevated
in day 2 R1 cells and down-regulated by day 6 of cultivation, when compared to
those of day 0 R1 cells. Treatment of day 2 R1 progenitor cells with rgCSF-1
resulted in an up-regulation of transcription factors important for myeloid cell 
development (cjun and egr1). Similarly, rgkitla up-regulated the expressions of
myeloid (mafb, egr1 and cebpa) transcription factors. Changes in the expression
of transcription factors in the R1 progenitor cells were related to the observed 
developmental processes of myeloid progenitor cells during cultivation or
treatment with recombinant growth factors in vitro. We also observed differential
expressions of the transcription factors in R1 progenitor cells following
exposure of the goldfish to either prokaryotic (heat-killed A. salmonicida A449) 
or eukaryotic (T. carassii) pathogens.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21474183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Circulation. 2011 Apr 19;123(15):1633-41. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.008185.
Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Nkx2-5 represses Gata1 gene expression and modulates the cellular fate of cardiac
progenitors during embryogenesis.

Caprioli A(1), Koyano-Nakagawa N, Iacovino M, Shi X, Ferdous A, Harvey RP, Olson 
EN, Kyba M, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest that the hematopoietic and cardiac lineages
have close ontogenic origins, and that an early mesodermal cell population has
the potential to differentiate into both lineages. Studies also suggest that
specification of these lineages is inversely regulated. However, the
transcriptional networks that govern the cell fate specification of these
progenitors are incompletely defined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we show that Nkx2-5 regulates the
hematopoietic/erythroid fate of the mesoderm precursors early during cardiac
morphogenesis. Using transgenic technologies to isolate Nkx2-5 expressing cells, 
we observed an induction of the erythroid molecular program, including Gata1, in 
the Nkx2-5-null embryos. We further observed that overexpression of Nkx2-5 with
an Nkx2-5-inducible embryonic stem cell system significantly repressed Gata1 gene
expression and suppressed the hematopoietic/erythroid potential, but not the
endothelial potential, of the embryonic stem cells. This suppression was
cell-autonomous, and was partially rescued by overexpressing Gata1. In addition, 
we demonstrated that Nkx2-5 binds to the Gata1 gene enhancer and represses the
transcriptional activity of the Gata1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the hematopoietic/erythroid cell fate
is suppressed via Nkx2-5 during mesodermal fate determination, and that the Gata1
gene is one of the targets that are suppressed by Nkx2-5.

PMCID: PMC3110259
PMID: 21464046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Math Biol. 2012 Feb;64(3):449-68. doi: 10.1007/s00285-011-0419-3. Epub 2011 Apr
2.

Mathematical modelling of stem cell differentiation: the PU.1-GATA-1 interaction.

Duff C(1), Smith-Miles K, Lopes L, Tian T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematical Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800,
Australia.

The transcription factors PU.1 and GATA-1 are known to be important in the
development of blood progenitor cells. Specifically they are thought to regulate 
the differentiation of progenitor cells into the granulocyte/macrophage lineage
and the erythrocyte/megakaryocite lineage. While several mathematical models have
been proposed to investigate the interaction between the transcription factors in
recent years, there is still debate about the nature of the progenitor state in
the dynamical system, and whether the existing models adequately capture new
knowledge about the interactions gleaned from experimental data. Further, the
models utilise different formalisms to represent the genetic regulation, and it
appears that the resulting dynamical system depends upon which formalism is
adopted. In this paper we analyse the four existing models, and propose an
alternative model which is shown to demonstrate a rich variety of dynamical
systems behaviours found across the existing models, including both bistability
and tristability required for modelling the undifferentiated progenitors.

PMID: 21461760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Arch Virol. 2011 Jul;156(7):1151-60. doi: 10.1007/s00705-011-0972-5. Epub 2011
Mar 22.

Attenuation of nitric oxide bioavailability in porcine aortic endothelial cells
by classical swine fever virus.

Wang CY(1), Yeh HI, Chang TJ, Hsiao HJ, Tsai MS, Tsai SM, Liu PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National
Chung Hsing University, 250 Road Kuo Kuang, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
cyoungwang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw

Classical swine fever (CSF) causes severe disease in pigs, characterized by
hemorrhage, fever, and leucopenia. A primary target of the virus is endothelial
cells, where a pro-inflammatory and pro-coagulant response occurs with
downregulation of gap junctional communication; these changes establish a basis
for haemostatic imbalance. The aim of this study was to gain an understanding of 
the effect of classical swine fever virus (CSFV) on endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (eNOS) expression and nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability. Porcine aortic 
endothelial cells (PAECs) were infected with CSFV at different multiplicity of
infection (M.O.I.) for 48 h. Downregulation of the transcription and translation 
levels of eNOS was detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR, immunoconfocal
microscopy, and western blotting. This was accompanied by a reduction in NO
bioavailability and attenuation of angiogenesis. Without influence from the
progeny virus titer, the decrease in eNOS protein was reversed by an ERK
inhibitor (PD98059) and two PI3/Akt inhibitors (LY294002 and wortmannin). In
addition, we found that the transcription factors AP1, Sp1, and GATA1/2 may be
involved in the downregulation of eNOS promoter activity. In conclusion,
infection of PAECs with CSFV attenuated the expression of eNOS and reduced NO
bioavailability through activation of the ERK and PI3/Akt pathways.

PMID: 21424728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Stem Cell Rev. 2011 Nov;7(4):958-68. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9249-3.

Variation in mesodermal and hematopoietic potential of adult skin-derived induced
pluripotent stem cell lines in mice.

Inoue T(1), Kulkeaw K, Okayama S, Tani K, Sugiyama D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, SSP Stem Cell Unit, Kyushu University 
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Station for Collaborative Research 1 4F, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-Ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are a promising tool for regenerative
medicine. Use of iPSC lines for future hematotherapy will require examination of 
their hematopoietic potential. Adult skin fibroblast somatic cells constitute a
source of iPSCs that can be accessed clinically without ethical issues. Here, we 
used different methods to compare mesodermal and hematopoietic potential by
embryoid body formation of five iPSC lines established from adult mouse tail-tip 
fibroblasts (TTFs). We observed variation in proliferation and in expression of
genes (Brachyury, Tbx1, Gata1, Klf1, Csf1r) and proteins (Flk1, Ter119 and CD45) 
among TTF-derived lines. 256H18 iPSCs showed highest proliferation and most
efficient differentiation into mesodermal and hematopoietic cells, while
expression levels of the pluripotency genes Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4 and Nanog were
lowest among lines analyzed. By contrast, the 212B2 line, transduced with c-Myc, 
showed lowest proliferation and differentiation potential, although expression
levels of Oct3/4, Sox2 and Klf4 were highest. Overall, we find that mesodermal
and hematopoietic potential varies among iPSCs from an identical tissue source
and that c-Myc expression likely underlies these differences.

PMID: 21424235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Blood. 2011 Aug 4;118(5):1274-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-331199. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

Clonal analysis of hematopoietic progenitor cells in the zebrafish.

Stachura DL(1), Svoboda O, Lau RP, Balla KM, Zon LI, Bartunek P, Traver D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California at San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0380, USA.

Identification of hematopoietic progenitor cells in the zebrafish (Danio rerio)
has been hindered by a lack of functional assays to gauge proliferative potential
and differentiation capacity. To investigate the nature of myeloerythroid
progenitor cells, we developed clonal methylcellulose assays by using recombinant
zebrafish erythropoietin and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. From adult
whole kidney marrow, erythropoietin was required to support erythroid colony
formation, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor was required to support the 
formation of colonies containing neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages. Myeloid
and erythroid colonies showed distinct morphologies and were easily visualized
and scored by their expression of lineage-specific fluorescent transgenes.
Analysis of the gene-expression profiles after isolation of colonies marked by
gata1:DsRed or mpx:eGFP transgenes confirmed our morphological erythroid and
myeloid lineage designations, respectively. The majority of progenitor activity
was contained within the precursor light scatter fraction, and more immature
precursors were present within the lymphoid fraction. Finally, we performed
kinetic analyses of progenitor activity after sublethal irradiation and
demonstrated that recovery to preirradiation levels occurred by 14 days after
irradiation. Together, these experiments provide the first report of clonal
hematopoietic progenitor assays in the zebrafish and establish the number,
characteristics, and kinetics of myeloerythroid progenitors during both
steady-state and stress hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3152495
PMID: 21415264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Jun 24;203(3):190-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.03.012. Epub
2011 Mar 23.

Phenolic metabolites of benzene inhibited the erythroid differentiation of K562
cells.

Wu XR(1), Xue M, Li XF, Wang Y, Wang J, Han QL, Yi ZC.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Ministry of Education,
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing
100191, China.

Benzene is a common occupational hazard and a ubiquitous environmental pollutant.
Benzene exposure at the levels even below 1ppm still showed hematotoxicity. It is
widely accepted that the metabolites of benzene play important roles in the
benzene toxicity to the hematopoietic system, but little is known about the
effects of benzene metabolites on erythropoiesis. In present study, erythroid
progenitor-like K562 cells were used to determine the effects of phenolic
metabolites of benzene, including phenol, hydroquinone and 1,2,4-benzenetriol, on
the erythroid differentiation. After the treatment with these benzene metabolites
at the concentrations with no obvious cytotoxicity, the hemin-induced hemoglobin 
synthesis in K562 cells decreased in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, 
and the expression of CD71 and GPA protein on the surface of K562 cells was also 
inhibited. The reverse transcription-PCR was used to determine the mRNA level of 
the erythroid related genes in the K562 cells that were treated with benzene
metabolites. The hemin-induced expression of globin genes, including a-, ß- and
<U+03B3>-globin genes, and the gene encoding the heme synthesis enzyme porphobilinogen
deaminase was inhibited by benzene metabolites. When the K562 cells were
pretreated with benzene metabolites, the hemin-induced expression of two
transcription factor genes GATA-1 and NF-E2 was distinctly reduced, and the
pre-treatment with benzene metabolites promoted the decrease of the mRNA level of
transcription factor gene GATA-2 by hemin. These results indicated that benzene
metabolites inhibited the hemin-induced erythroid differentiation through
affecting the transcription of the erythroid related genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21414390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. EMBO J. 2011 Mar 16;30(6):983-5. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.45.

The erythroid/myeloid lineage fate paradigm takes a new player.

Xu J(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2011 Mar 16;30(6):1093-103.

PMCID: PMC3061040
PMID: 21407249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 27;286(21):18834-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.221481. Epub
2011 Mar 11.

Relocalizing genetic loci into specific subnuclear neighborhoods.

Lee HY(1), Johnson KD, Boyer ME, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, Paul Carbone Cancer Center,
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

A poorly understood problem in genetics is how the three-dimensional organization
of the nucleus contributes to establishment and maintenance of transcriptional
networks. Genetic loci can reside in chromosome "territories" and undergo dynamic
changes in subnuclear positioning. Such changes appear to be important for
regulating transcription, although many questions remain regarding how loci
reversibly transit in and out of their territories and the functional
significance of subnuclear transitions. We addressed this issue using GATA-1, a
master regulator of hematopoiesis implicated in human leukemogenesis, which often
functions with the coregulator Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1). In a genetic
complementation assay in GATA-1-null cells, GATA-1 expels FOG-1-dependent target 
genes from the nuclear periphery during erythroid maturation, but the underlying 
mechanisms are unknown. We demonstrate that GATA-1 induces extrusion of the
ß-globin locus away from its chromosome territory at the nuclear periphery, and
extrusion precedes the maturation-associated transcriptional surge and
morphological transition. FOG-1 and its interactor Mi-2ß, a chromatin remodeling 
factor commonly linked to repression, were required for locus extrusion.
Erythroid Krüppel-like factor, a pivotal regulator of erythropoiesis that often
co-occupies chromatin with GATA-1, also promoted locus extrusion. Disruption of
transcriptional maintenance did not restore the locus subnuclear position that
preceded activation. These results lead to a model for how a master developmental
regulator relocalizes a locus into a new subnuclear neighborhood that is
permissive for high level transcription as an early step in establishing a cell
type-specific genetic network. Alterations in the regulatory milieu can abrogate 
maintenance without reversion of locus residency back to its original
neighborhood.

PMCID: PMC3099700
PMID: 21398517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Blood. 2011 Apr 28;117(17):4600-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325357. Epub 2011
Mar 4.

A transient definitive erythroid lineage with unique regulation of the ß-globin
locus in the mammalian embryo.

McGrath KE(1), Frame JM, Fromm GJ, Koniski AD, Kingsley PD, Little J, Bulger M,
Palis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric Biomedical Research, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.

A transient erythromyeloid wave of definitive hematopoietic progenitors
(erythroid/myeloid progenitors [EMPs]) emerges in the yolk sac beginning at
embryonic day 8.25 (E8.25) and colonizes the liver by E10.5, before
adult-repopulating hematopoietic stem cells. At E11.5, we observe all
maturational stages of erythroid precursors in the liver and the first definitive
erythrocytes in the circulation. These early fetal liver erythroblasts express
predominantly adult ß-globins and the definitive erythroid-specific
transcriptional modifiers c-myb, Sox6, and Bcl11A. Surprisingly, they also
express low levels of "embryonic" ßH1-, but not ey-, globin transcripts.
Consistent with these results, RNA polymerase and highly modified histones are
found associated with ßH1- and adult globin, but not ey-globin, genes. E11.5
definitive proerythroblasts from mice transgenic for the human ß-globin locus,
like human fetal erythroblasts, express predominately human <U+03B3>-, low ß-, and no
e-globin transcripts. Significantly, E9.5 yolk sac-derived EMPs cultured in vitro
have similar murine and human transgenic globin expression patterns. Later liver 
proerythroblasts express low levels of <U+03B3>-globin, while adult marrow
proerythroblasts express only ß-globin transcripts. We conclude that yolk
sac-derived EMPs, the first of 2 origins of definitive erythropoiesis, express a 
unique pattern of globin genes as they generate the first definitive erythrocytes
in the liver of the mammalian embryo.

PMCID: PMC3099576
PMID: 21378272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Blood. 2011 Jul 14;118(2):425-36. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-296921. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

The dominant negative ß isoform of the glucocorticoid receptor is uniquely
expressed in erythroid cells expanded from polycythemia vera patients.

Varricchio L(1), Masselli E, Alfani E, Battistini A, Migliaccio G, Vannucchi AM, 
Zhang W, Rondelli D, Godbold J, Ghinassi B, Whitsett C, Hoffman R, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)The Tisch Cancer Institute and Myeloproliferative Disease Research Consortium,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) agonists increase erythropoiesis in vivo and in
vitro. To clarify the effect of the dominant negative GRß isoform (unable to bind
STAT-5) on erythropoiesis, erythroblast (EB) expansion cultures of mononuclear
cells from 18 healthy (nondiseased) donors (NDs) and 16 patients with
polycythemia vera (PV) were studied. GRß was expressed in all PV EBs but only in 
EBs from 1 ND. The A3669G polymorphism, which stabilizes GRß mRNA, had greater
frequency in PV (55%; n = 22; P = .0028) and myelofibrosis (35%; n = 20) patients
than in NDs (9%; n = 22) or patients with essential thrombocythemia (6%; n = 15).
Dexamethasone stimulation of ND cultures increased the number of immature EBs
characterized by low GATA1 and ß-globin expression, but PV cultures generated
great numbers of immature EBs with low levels of GATA1 and ß-globin irrespective 
of dexamethasone stimulation. In ND EBs, STAT-5 was not phosphorylated after
dexamethasone and erythropoietin treatment and did not form transcriptionally
active complexes with GRa, whereas in PV EBs, STAT-5 was constitutively
phosphorylated, but the formation of GR/STAT-5 complexes was prevented by
expression of GRß. These data indicate that GRß expression and the presence of
A3669G likely contribute to development of erythrocytosis in PV and provide a
potential target for identification of novel therapeutic agents.

PMCID: PMC3138692
PMID: 21355091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Androl. 2012 Jan-Feb;33(1):81-7. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.110.012039. Epub 2011 Feb
24.

Functional cooperation between GATA factors and cJUN on the star promoter in
MA-10 Leydig cells.

Martin LJ(1), Bergeron F, Viger RS, Tremblay JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Perinatal, and Child Health, CHUQ Research Centre, 2705 Laurier 
Blvd, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada .

Steroid hormone biosynthesis requires the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
(STAR). STAR is part of a protein complex that transports cholesterol through the
mitochondrial membrane where steroidogenesis begins. Several transcription
factors participate to direct the proper spatiotemporal and hormonal regulation
of the Star gene in Leydig cells. Mechanistically, this is believed to involve
the functional interplay between many of these factors. Here we report a novel
transcriptional cooperation between GATA factors and cJUN on the mouse Star and
human STAR promoters in MA-10 Leydig cells. This cooperation was observed with
different GATA members (GATA1, 4, and 6), whereas only cJUN could cooperate with 
GATA factors. GATA/cJUN transcriptional cooperation on the Star promoter is
mediated via closely juxtaposed GATA and AP-1 binding motifs. Mutation of all
functional GATA and cJUN elements abolished GATA/cJUN cooperation, which is in
agreement with previous data reporting a direct interaction between GATA4 and
cJUN in a heterologous system. These data add valuable new insights that further 
define the molecular mechanisms that govern Star transcription in steroidogenic
cells of the testis.

PMID: 21350237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. EMBO J. 2011 Mar 16;30(6):1093-103. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.34. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

The gata1/pu.1 lineage fate paradigm varies between blood populations and is
modulated by tif1<U+03B3>.

Monteiro R(1), Pouget C, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Mar 16;30(6):983-5.

Lineage fate decisions underpin much of development as well as tissue homeostasis
in the adult. A mechanistic paradigm for such decisions is the erythroid versus
myeloid fate decision controlled by cross-antagonism between gata1 and pu.1
transcription factors. In this study, we have systematically tested this paradigm
in blood-producing populations in zebrafish embryos, including the haematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs), and found that it takes a different form in each population.
In particular, gata1 activity varies from autostimulation to autorepression. In
addition, we have added a third member to this regulatory kernel, tif1<U+03B3>
(transcription intermediate factor-1<U+03B3>). We show that tif1<U+03B3> modulates the
erythroid versus myeloid fate outcomes from HSCs by differentially controlling
the levels of gata1 and pu.1. By contrast, tif1<U+03B3> positively regulates both gata1 
and pu.1 in primitive erythroid and prodefinitive erythromyeloid progenitors. We 
therefore conclude that the gata1/pu.1 paradigm for lineage decisions takes
different forms in different cellular contexts and is modulated by tif1<U+03B3>.

PMCID: PMC3061038
PMID: 21336259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):12042-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.138966. Epub 2011 
Feb 14.

Notch1-mediated signaling induces MHC class II expression through activation of
class II transactivator promoter III in mast cells.

Nakano N(1), Nishiyama C, Yagita H, Koyanagi A, Ogawa H, Okumura K.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy Allergy Research Center, Department of Immunology, Juntendo Univesity
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. nbnakano@juntendo.ac.jp

Mast cells constitutively express Notch1 and Notch2 on the cell surface. Notch
ligand Dll1 (Delta-like 1) stimulation induces MHC class II expression in mast
cells and renders them as antigen-presenting cells. However, nothing is known
about the mechanism by which Notch signaling induces MHC class II expression in
mast cells. MHC class II genes are regulated by the class II transactivator
(CIITA). In mice, transcription of the CIITA gene is controlled by three cell
type-specific promoters (pI, pIII, and pIV). Here, we show that CIITA expression 
induced by Dll1 stimulation in mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs)
depends critically on the signal mediated by Notch1 and that the most dominant
promoter in Notch signaling-mediated CIITA expression in BMMCs is pIII, which is 
a lymphoid lineage-specific promoter. ChIP assays indicated that Notch signaling 
increased the binding of the transcription factor PU.1 to CIITA pIII in BMMCs.
The knockdown of PU.1 expression using a specific siRNA suppressed Notch
signaling-mediated CIITA expression, suggesting that PU.1 contributes to the
expression of MHC class II induced by Notch signaling in mast cells. Furthermore,
we show that a portion of freshly isolated splenic mast cells express MHC class
II and that the most dominant promoter of CIITA in mast cells is pIII. These
findings indicate that activation of CIITA pIII plays an important role in MHC
class II expression in mast cells.

PMCID: PMC3069407
PMID: 21321116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Blood. 2011 Apr 14;117(15):4106-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-293092. Epub 2011 
Feb 8.

Developmental differences in megakaryocytopoiesis are associated with
up-regulated TPO signaling through mTOR and elevated GATA-1 levels in neonatal
megakaryocytes.

Liu ZJ(1), Italiano J Jr, Ferrer-Marin F, Gutti R, Bailey M, Poterjoy B, Rimsza
L, Sola-Visner M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Apr 14;117(15):3940-1.

Multiple observations support the existence of developmental differences in
megakaryocytopoiesis. We have previously shown that neonatal megakaryocyte (MK)
progenitors are hyperproliferative and give rise to MKs smaller and of lower
ploidy than adult MKs. Based on these characteristics, neonatal MKs have been
considered immature. The molecular mechanisms underlying these differences are
unclear, but contribute to the pathogenesis of disorders of neonatal
megakaryocytopoiesis. In the present study, we demonstrate that low-ploidy
neonatal MKs, contrary to traditional belief, are more mature than adult
low-ploidy MKs. These mature MKs are generated at a 10-fold higher rate than
adult MKs, and result from a developmental uncoupling of proliferation,
polyploidization, and terminal differentiation. This pattern is associated with
up-regulated thrombopoietin (TPO) signaling through mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) and elevated levels of full-length GATA-1 and its targets. Blocking of
mTOR with rapamycin suppressed the maturation of neonatal MKs without affecting
ploidy, in contrast to the synchronous inhibition of polyploidization and
cytoplasmic maturation in adult MKs. We propose that these mechanisms allow
fetuses/neonates to populate their rapidly expanding bone marrow and
intravascular spaces while maintaining normal platelet counts, but also set the
stage for disorders restricted to fetal/neonatal MK progenitors, including the
Down syndrome-transient myeloproliferative disorder and the thrombocytopenia
absent radius syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3087534
PMID: 21304100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Indian J Pediatr. 2011 Jul;78(7):826-32. doi: 10.1007/s12098-010-0312-x. Epub
2011 Feb 2.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder and GATA1 mutation in neonates with and
without Down syndrome.

Tsai MH(1), Hou JW, Yang CP, Yang PH, Chu SM, Hsu JF, Chiang MC, Huang HR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital, 5, Fu-Shing St, Kwei-Shan, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: To report clinical experiences and cytogenetic findings of transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) in neonates with and without Down syndrome
(DS).
METHODS: GATA1 gene was screened in DNA samples from neonates presenting with TMD
during their leukemic and remission status.
RESULTS: Six neonates (2 phenotypically normal and 4 DS) born in the past 6 years
had presented with TMD; all had trisomy 21 during leukemic status. Two DS infants
died during early infancy, one of hepatic failure and one of cardiac
complication. One non-DS infant evolved into myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and
acute leukemia since 14 months old. Three other patients have not developed true 
leukemia after follow-up of 8, 9, and 70 months, respectively. The authors
detected mutations within exon 2 of GATA1 gene in 3 DS and 2 non-DS infants. All 
these mutations disappeared after remission of TMD, but an identical mutation was
detected in one non-DS patient when evolving into MDS. Trisomy 21 was confined to
leukemic clone in non-DS patients.
CONCLUSIONS: TMD should be considered in case of congenital leukemia with
megakaryoblastic features and accompanied by trisomy 21 and GATA1 mutation. Both 
DS and non-DS patients will possibly develop true leukemia within few years.

PMID: 21287369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Int J Hematol. 2011 Feb;93(2):150-5. doi: 10.1007/s12185-011-0770-6. Epub 2011
Feb 1.

Transcriptional regulation by GATA1 and GATA2 during erythropoiesis.

Suzuki M(1), Shimizu R, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA1 regulates multiple genes in erythroid lineage
cells. However, the means by which GATA1 regulates the expression of target genes
during erythropoiesis remains to be elucidated. Three mechanisms have been
postulated for the regulation of genes by GATA1. First, individual target genes
may have multiple discrete thresholds for cellular GATA1. GATA1 has a dynamic
expression profile during erythropoiesis, thus the expression of a set of GATA1
target genes may be triggered at a given stage of differentiation by cellular
GATA1. Second, the expression of GATA1 target genes may be modified, at least in 
part, by GATA2 occupying the GATA-binding motifs. GATA2 is expressed earlier in
erythropoiesis than GATA1, and prior GATA2 binding may afford GATA1 access to
GATA motifs through epigenetic remodeling and thus facilitate target gene
expression. Third, other regulatory molecules specific to each target gene may
function cooperatively with GATA1. If GATA1 is required for the expression of
such cofactors, a regulatory network will be formed and relevant gene expression 
will be delayed. We propose that the stage-specific regulation of erythroid genes
by GATA1 is tightly controlled through a combination of these mechanisms in vivo.

PMID: 21279818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Leukemia. 2011 Apr;25(4):733-6. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.317. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

In vivo expression of an aberrant MYB-GATA1 fusion induces leukemia in the
presence of GATA1 reduced levels.

Belloni E, Shing D, Tapinassi C, Viale A, Mancuso P, Malazzi O, Gerbino E,
Dall'Olio V, Egurbide I, Odero MD, Bertolini F, Pelicci PG.

Erratum in
    Leukemia. 2011 Dec;25(12):1922. Giuseppe Pelicci, P [corrected to Pelicci, P G].

PMID: 21252985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 15;186(4):2329-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002402. Epub 2011
Jan 19.

The IL1RN promoter rs4251961 correlates with IL-1 receptor antagonist
concentrations in human infection and is differentially regulated by GATA-1.

Carrol ED(1), Payton A, Payne D, Miyajima F, Chaponda M, Mankhambo LA, Banda DL, 
Molyneux EM, Cox H, Jacobson G, Carr DF, Molyneux ME, Stewart JP, Quinn JP, Hart 
CA, Ollier WE.

Author information: 
(1)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, Blantyre, Malawi.
edcarrol@liverpool.ac.uk

IL-1R antagonist (IL-1Ra) is required for adequate host defense in invasive
pneumococcal disease (IPD). The minor allele of an IL1RN gene (C/T) promoter
polymorphism (rs4251961) has been shown to be associated with decreased IL-1Ra
production in healthy adults. We genotyped 299 children with IPD, and examined 19
IL1RN haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Human embryonic kidney
HEK293(T) cells were transfected with the promoter reporter plasmid pGL3p
containing either allelic variant C (pGL3pCC) or T (pGL3pTT) with or without
cotransfection with an expression construct overexpressing the globin
transcription factor GATA-1. Plasma IL-1Ra concentrations were significantly
higher in nonsurvivors compared with survivors (p < 0.0005), and the C allele of 
rs4251961 was associated with a significant increase in plasma IL-1Ra
concentrations (p = 0.01) during the acute illness of IPD. These findings were
validated in a cohort of 276 treatment-naive HIV-infected adults, with borderline
significance (p = 0.058). Functional analyses demonstrated that the activity of
the promoter constructs containing the T allele increased ~6-fold as compared
with basal activity, and that containing the C allele by ~9-fold (p < 0.001) in
the presence of GATA-1. Our findings suggest that the IL-1Ra single-nucleotide
polymorphism rs4251961 plays a key role in the pathophysiology of IPD and in
other human infections.

PMID: 21248262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1344-56. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01010-10. Epub 2011 Jan
19.

Identification of distal cis-regulatory elements at mouse mitoferrin loci using
zebrafish transgenesis.

Amigo JD(1), Yu M, Troadec MB, Gwynn B, Cooney JD, Lambert AJ, Chi NC, Weiss MJ, 
Peters LL, Kaplan J, Cantor AB, Paw BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Brigham and Womens Hospital, 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Mitoferrin 1 (Mfrn1; Slc25a37) and mitoferrin 2 (Mfrn2; Slc25a28) function as
essential mitochondrial iron importers for heme and Fe/S cluster biogenesis. A
genetic deficiency of Mfrn1 results in a profound hypochromic anemia in
vertebrate species. To map the cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) that control
expression of the Mfrn genes, we utilized genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) datasets for the major erythroid transcription factor 
GATA-1. We identified the CRMs that faithfully drive the expression of Mfrn1
during blood and heart development and Mfrn2 ubiquitously. Through in vivo
analyses of the Mfrn-CRMs in zebrafish and mouse, we demonstrate their functional
and evolutionary conservation. Using knockdowns with morpholinos and cell sorting
analysis in transgenic zebrafish embryos, we show that GATA-1 directly regulates 
the expression of Mfrn1. Mutagenesis of individual GATA-1 binding cis elements
(GBE) demonstrated that at least two of the three GBE within this CRM are
functionally required for GATA-mediated transcription of Mfrn1. Furthermore, ChIP
assays demonstrate switching from GATA-2 to GATA-1 at these elements during
erythroid maturation. Our results provide new insights into the genetic
regulation of mitochondrial function and iron homeostasis and, more generally,
illustrate the utility of genome-wide ChIP analysis combined with zebrafish
transgenesis for identifying long-range transcriptional enhancers that regulate
tissue development.

PMCID: PMC3135305
PMID: 21248200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):3505-19. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1271. Epub 2011
Jan 17.

Ikaros interacts with P-TEFb and cooperates with GATA-1 to enhance transcription 
elongation.

Bottardi S(1), Zmiri FA, Bourgoin V, Ross J, Mavoungou L, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital
and Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, 5415 boulevard l'Assomption,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H1T 2M4.

Ikaros is associated with both gene transcriptional activation and repression in 
lymphocytes. Ikaros acts also as repressor of human <U+03B3>-globin (hu<U+03B3>-) gene
transcription in fetal and adult erythroid cells. Whether and eventually, how
Ikaros can function as a transcriptional activator in erythroid cells remains
poorly understood. Results presented herein demonstrate that Ikaros is a
developmental-specific activator of hu<U+03B3>-gene expression in yolk sac erythroid
cells. Molecular analysis in primary cells revealed that Ikaros interacts with
Gata-1 and favors Brg1 recruitment to the human ß-globin Locus Control Region and
the hu<U+03B3>-promoters, supporting long-range chromatin interactions between these
regions. Additionally, we demonstrate that Ikaros contributes to transcription
initiation and elongation of the hu<U+03B3>-genes, since it is not only required for TBP
and RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) assembly at the hu<U+03B3>-promoters but also for
conversion of Pol II into the elongation-competent phosphorylated form. In
agreement with the latter, we show that Ikaros interacts with Cyclin-dependent
kinase 9 (Cdk9), which contributes to efficient transcription elongation by
phosphorylating the C-terminal domain of the large subunit of Pol II on Serine 2,
and favours Cdk9 recruitment to hu<U+03B3>-promoters. Our results show that Ikaros
exerts dual functionality during gene activation, by promoting efficient
transcription initiation and elongation.

© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC3089448
PMID: 21245044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Haematologica. 2011 May;96(5):762-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.033738. Epub 2011
Jan 17.

Membrane-bound IL-15 stimulation on peripheral blood natural kiler progenitors
leads to the generation of an adherent subset co-expressing dendritic cells and
natural kiler functional markers.

Negrini S(1), Giuliani M, Durali D, Chouaib S, Azzarone B.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 1014 Inserm, Paul Brousse Hospital, Villejuif, France.

Human peripheral blood natural killer progenitors represent a flexible,
heterogeneous population whose phenotype and function are controlled by their
membrane-bound IL-15. Indeed, reciprocal membrane-bond IL-15 trans-presentation
commits these cells into NK differentiation, while membrane-bound IL-15
stimulation with its soluble ligand (sIL-15Ra) triggers a reverse signal (pERK1/2
and pFAK) that modifies the developmental program of at least two subsets of
PB-NKPs. This treatment generates: i) the expansion of an immature NK subset
growing in suspension; ii) the appearance of an unprecedented adherent
non-proliferative subset with a dendritic morphology co-expressing marker,
cytokines and functions typical of myeloid dendritic cells
(CD1a(+)/BDCA1(+)/IL-12(+)) and NK cells (CD3-/NKp46(+)/ CD56(+)/IFN<U+03B3>(+)). The
generation of these putative NK/DCs is associated to the rapid inhibition of
negative regulators of myelopoiesis (the transcription factors STAT6 and GATA-3) 
followed by the transient upregulation of inducers of myeloid development, such
as the transcription factors (PU.1, GATA-1) and the anti-apoptotic molecule
(MCL-1).

PMCID: PMC3084924
PMID: 21242188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Chin Med Sci J. 2010 Dec;25(4):193-8.

NF-E2: a novel regulator of alpha-hemoglobin stabilizing protein gene expression.

Guo-wei Z(1), Rui-feng Y, Xiang L, Mitchell WJ, De-pei L, Chih-chuan L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether a-hemoglobin stabilizing protein (AHSP), the
a-globin-specific molecular chaperone, is regulated by erythroid transcription
factor NF-E2.
METHODS: We established the stable cell line with NF-E2p45 (the larger subunit of
NF-E2) short hairpin RNA to silence its expression. Western blot, real-time
polymerase chain reaction, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis were
performed to detect the expression of AHSP, the histone modifications at AHSP
gene locus, and the binding of GATA-1 at the AHSP promoter with NF-E2p45
deficiency. ChIP was also carried out in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)-induced DS19
cells and estrogen-induced G1E-ER4 cells to examine NF-E2 binding to the AHSP
gene locus and its changes during cell erythroid differentiation. Finally,
luciferase assay was applied in HeLa cells transfected with AHSP promoter
fragments to examine AHSP promoter activity in the presence of exogenous
NF-E2p45.
RESULTS: We found that AHSP expression was highly dependent on NF-E2p45. NF-E2
bound to the regions across AHSP gene locus in vivo, and the transcription of
AHSP was transactivated by exogenous NF-E2p45. In addition, we observed the
decrease of H3K4 trimethylation and GATA-1 occupancy at the AHSP gene locus in
NF-E2p45-deficient cells. Restoration of GATA-1 in G1E-ER4 cells in turn led to
increased DNA binding of NF-E2p45.
CONCLUSION: NF-E2 may play an important role in AHSP gene regulation, providing
new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the erythroid-specific
expression of AHSP as well as new possibilities for ß-thalassemia treatment.

PMID: 21232177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Blood. 2011 Mar 17;117(11):3045-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-294751. Epub 2011 
Jan 10.

Recombinant erythroid Kruppel-like factor fused to GATA1 up-regulates delta- and 
gamma-globin expression in erythroid cells.

Zhu J(1), Chin K, Aerbajinai W, Trainor C, Gao P, Rodgers GP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; and.

The ß-hemoglobinopathies sickle cell disease and ß-thalassemia are among the most
common human genetic disorders worldwide. Hemoglobin A2 (HbA2, a2d2) and fetal
hemoglobin (HbF, a2<U+03B3>2) both inhibit the polymerization of hemoglobin S, which
results in erythrocyte sickling. Expression of erythroid Kruppel-like factor
(EKLF) and GATA1 is critical for transitioning hemoglobin from HbF to hemoglobin 
A (HbA, a2ß2) and HbA2. The lower levels of d-globin expression compared with
ß-globin expression seen in adulthood are likely due to the absence of an
EKLF-binding motif in the d-globin proximal promoter. In an effort to up-regulate
d-globin to increase HbA2 expression, we created a series of EKLF-GATA1 fusion
constructs composed of the transactivation domain of EKLF and the DNA-binding
domain of GATA1, and then tested their effects on hemoglobin expression.
EKLF-GATA1 fusion proteins activated d-, <U+03B3>-, and ß-globin promoters in K562
cells, and significantly up-regulated d- and <U+03B3>-globin RNA transcript and protein 
expression in K562 and/or CD34(+) cells. The binding of EKLF-GATA1 fusion
proteins at the GATA1 consensus site in the d-globin promoter was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Our studies demonstrate that EKLF-GATA1
fusion proteins can enhance d-globin expression through interaction with the
d-globin promoter, and may represent a new genetic therapeutic approach to
ß-hemoglobinopathies.

PMCID: PMC3062308
PMID: 21220744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Bull Math Biol. 2011 Sep;73(9):2132-51. doi: 10.1007/s11538-010-9615-3. Epub 2011
Jan 6.

Dynamic stabilization in the PU1-GATA1 circuit using a model with time-dependent 
kinetic change.

Michaels JL(1), Naudot V, Liebovitch LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road, Boca
Raton, FL 33431, USA. jmicha20@fau.edu

The PU.1 and GATA1 genes play an important role in the differentiation of blood
stem cells. The protein levels expressed by these genes are thought to be
regulated by a self-excitatory feedback loop for each gene and a cross-inhibitory
feedback loop between the two genes. A mathematical model that captures the
dynamical interaction between these two genes reveals that constant levels of
self-excitation and cross-inhibition allow the most self-exciting or
cross-inhibiting gene to dominate the system. However, since biological systems
rarely exist in an unchanging equilibrium, we modeled this gene circuit using
discrete time-dependent changes in the parameters in lieu of steady state
parameters. These time-dependent parameters lead to new phenomena, including the 
development of new limit cycles and basins of attraction. These phenomena are not
present in models using constant parameter values. Our findings suggest that even
small perturbations in the PU.1 and GATA1 feedback loops may substantially alter 
the gene expression and therefore the cell phenotype. These time-dependent
parameter models may also have implications for other gene systems and provide
new ways to understand the mechanisms of cellular differentiation.

© The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at
Springerlink.com

PMID: 21210243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Mar 20;29(9):e230-3. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.3634. Epub 2011 
Jan 4.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia without GATA1 mutation after transient
myeloproliferative disorder in an infant without Down syndrome.

Inaba H(1), Londero M, Maurer SH, Onciu M, Ge Y, Taub JW, Rubnitz JE, Raimondi
SC.

Author information: 
(1)St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

PMCID: PMC3527733
PMID: 21205752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Genes Cells. 2011 Feb;16(2):231-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01481.x. Epub
2011 Jan 4.

Erythropoiesis is regulated by the transcription elongation factor Foggy/Spt5
through gata1 gene regulation.

Taneda T(1), Zhu W, Cao Q, Watanabe H, Yamaguchi Y, Handa H, Wada T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Midori-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 226-8503, Japan.

Recent studies have showed that transcription elongation factors regulate early
development. Foggy/Spt5 is a subunit of DRB sensitivity-inducing factor, which
negatively and positively regulates transcription elongation. Here, we report
that the positive function of Foggy/Spt5 is required for gata1 expression during 
zebrafish embryonic hematopoiesis. Antisense morpholino oligonucleotide
(MO)-mediated knockdown of foggy/spt5 has led to a reduction in the expression of
gata1 and the gata1 target genes alas2 and hbae3 and inhibited proper hemoglobin 
production. By contrast, expression of hematopoietic stem cell and endothelial
markers, including scl, lmo2, gata2, fli-1, and flk-1, and expression of biklf,
whose product directs gata1 expression via its direct binding to the gata1
promoter, were unaltered, suggesting that gata1 is a functionally important
target gene of Foggy/Spt5. The MO-mediated gata1 repression was relieved by
forced expression of wild-type foggy/spt5, but not by a mutant lacking the
positive function. Therefore, this study provides evidence that Foggy/Spt5 plays 
an important role in gata1 gene expression and erythropoiesis through its
transcriptional activation domain.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21205096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Protein Cell. 2010 Mar;1(3):259-66. doi: 10.1007/s13238-010-0036-8. Epub 2010 Apr
17.

Nusap1 is essential for neural crest cell migration in zebrafish.

Nie J(1), Wang H, He F, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China.

Microtubules play important roles in mitotic spindle assembly and chromosome
segregation to maintain normal cell cycle progression. A number of
microtubule-associated proteins have been identified in epithelial and neural
cell cultures; however, their physiological significance is not well
characterized due to the lack of appropriate in vivo animal models. Nucleolar
spindle-associated protein (NuSAP) is a microtubule-binding protein and is
reported to be involved in mitosis by cell culture studies. In this report, we
identified the zebrafish homologue of human NuSAP and investigated its expression
profile and functions. Using in situ hybridization, we demonstrated that
transcripts of zebrafish nusap1 are specifically expressed in the retina,
forebrain, hindbrain and neural crest. When the in vivo expression of nusap1 was 
knocked down through antisense oligonucleotide morpholino technology, the
morphants of nusap1 showed impaired morphogenesis in the trunk and yolk
extension, implying the involvement of Nusap1 in cell migration. Mechanistic
studies revealed that nusap1 morphants have an altered expression pattern of
neural crest markers crestin and sox9b, but normal expression of blood vessel and
notochord markers gata1 and shh. In addition, nusap1 mRNA injection caused
serious apoptosis in retina and hindbrain tissue, and these phenotypes can be
rescued by co-injection of morpholino against nusap1. These observations not only
suggest a role for Nusap1 in connecting apoptosis with cell migration, but also
provide strong evidences that Nusap1 is potentially involved in morphogenesis in 
vertebrates.

PMID: 21203972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 13;5(12):e14296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014296.

Zebrafish numb and numblike are involved in primitive erythrocyte
differentiation.

Bresciani E(1), Confalonieri S, Cermenati S, Cimbro S, Foglia E, Beltrame M, Di
Fiore PP, Cotelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved regulatory circuitry
implicated in cell fate determination in various developmental processes
including hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and differentiation of blood
lineages. Known endogenous inhibitors of Notch activity are Numb-Nb and
Numblike-Nbl, which play partially redundant functions in specifying and
maintaining neuronal differentiation. Nb and Nbl are expressed in most tissues
including embryonic and adult hematopoietic tissues in mice and humans,
suggesting possible roles for these proteins in hematopoiesis.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We employed zebrafish to investigate the
possible functional role of Numb and Numblike during hematopoiesis, as this
system allows a detailed analysis even in embryos with severe defects that would 
be lethal in other organisms. Here we describe that nb/nbl knockdown results in
severe reduction or absence of embryonic erythrocytes in zebrafish.
Interestingly, nb/nbl knocked-down embryos present severe downregulation of the
erythroid transcription factor gata1. This results in erythroblasts which fail to
mature and undergo apoptosis. Our results indicate that Notch activity is
increased in embryos injected with nb/nbl morpholino, and we show that inhibition
of Notch activation can partially rescue the hematopoietic phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Our results provide the first in vivo evidence of
an involvement of Numb and Numblike in zebrafish erythroid differentiation during
primitive hematopoiesis. Furthermore, we found that, at least in part, the nb/nbl
morphant phenotype is due to enhanced Notch activation within hematopoietic
districts, which in turn results in primitive erythroid differentiation defects.

PMCID: PMC3001437
PMID: 21179188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;13(1):72-8. doi: 10.1038/ncb2137. Epub 2010 Dec 19.

HoxA3 is an apical regulator of haemogenic endothelium.

Iacovino M(1), Chong D, Szatmari I, Hartweck L, Rux D, Caprioli A, Cleaver O,
Kyba M.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute and Department of Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota, 312 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

During development, haemogenesis occurs invariably at sites of vasculogenesis.
Between embryonic day (E) 9.5 and E10.5 in mice, endothelial cells in the caudal 
part of the dorsal aorta generate haematopoietic stem cells and are referred to
as haemogenic endothelium. The mechanisms by which haematopoiesis is restricted
to this domain, and how the morphological transformation from endothelial to
haematopoietic is controlled are unknown. We show here that HoxA3, a gene
uniquely expressed in the embryonic but not yolk sac vasculature, restrains
haematopoietic differentiation of the earliest endothelial progenitors, and
induces reversion of the earliest haematopoietic progenitors into CD41-negative
endothelial cells. This reversible modulation of endothelial-haematopoietic state
is accomplished by targeting key haematopoietic transcription factors for
downregulation, including Runx1, Gata1, Gfi1B, Ikaros, and PU.1. Through
loss-of-function, and gain-of-function epistasis experiments, and the
identification of antipodally regulated targets, we show that among these
factors, Runx1 is uniquely able to erase the endothelial program set up by HoxA3.
These results suggest both why a frank endothelium does not precede
haematopoiesis in the yolk sac, and why haematopoietic stem cell generation
requires Runx1 expression only in endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3079247
PMID: 21170035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Platelets. 2011;22(1):28-38. doi: 10.3109/09537104.2010.515271. Epub 2010 Dec 14.

Production of functional platelet-like particles by the megakaryoblastic DAMI
cell line provides a model for platelet biogenesis.

Lev PR(1), Goette NP, Glembotsky AC, Laguens RP, Meckert PM, Salim JP, Heller PG,
Pozner RG, Marta RF, Molinas FC.

Author information: 
(1)Sección Hematología Investigación, UE IDIM-CONICET, Instituto de
Investigaciones Médicas Alfredo Lanari, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
paolalev@conicet.gov.ar

The aim of this study was to evaluate cell maturation and the platelet production
capacity of the megakaryoblastic DAMI cell line, to characterize platelet-like
particles produced and to investigate the mechanisms involved in their
production. DAMI cell maturation was induced by phorbol myristate acetate (PMA)
and thrombopoietin (TPO). Expression levels of GATA-1, Fli-1 and NF-E2 were
evaluated using real-time PCR and western blot. Platelet-like particles were
characterized by the presence of GPIb and GPIIb by flow cytometry, while the
soluble fragment of GPIb, glycocalicin, was detected by enzyme immunoassay. Dense
and alpha granules were evaluated by mepacrine staining and thrombospondin-1
detection, respectively, and by electron microscopy. Functional capacity of
platelet-like particles was studied by measuring P-selectin membrane after
thrombin stimulation by flow cytometry and actin polymerization using
phalloidin-FITC by immunofluorescence. We found that stimulation of DAMI cells
with high concentration of PMA and TPO induced the expression of transcription
factors GATA-1 and Fli-1 followed by an increase in the isoform a of NF-E2.
Mature DAMI cells give rise to extensions resembling proplatelets and later,
produce platelet-like particles expressing GPIIb and GPIb on their surface and
containing dense and alpha granules, which were confirmed by electron microscopy.
Platelet functionality was demonstrated by the increase in P-selectin membrane
expression after thrombin stimulation and by their ability to spread on
fibrinogen matrices. DAMI cell line induced to differentiate into mature
megakaryocytes is able to produce functional platelets providing a suitable model
to study the mechanisms involved in platelet generation.

PMID: 21143024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cancer Cell. 2010 Dec 14;18(6):553-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.11.015. Epub 2010 
Dec 9.

Leukemic IDH1 and IDH2 mutations result in a hypermethylation phenotype, disrupt 
TET2 function, and impair hematopoietic differentiation.

Figueroa ME(1), Abdel-Wahab O, Lu C, Ward PS, Patel J, Shih A, Li Y, Bhagwat N,
Vasanthakumar A, Fernandez HF, Tallman MS, Sun Z, Wolniak K, Peeters JK, Liu W,
Choe SE, Fantin VR, Paietta E, Löwenberg B, Licht JD, Godley LA, Delwel R, Valk
PJ, Thompson CB, Levine RL, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Cancer-associated IDH mutations are characterized by neomorphic enzyme activity
and resultant 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG) production. Mutational and epigenetic
profiling of a large acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patient cohort revealed that
IDH1/2-mutant AMLs display global DNA hypermethylation and a specific
hypermethylation signature. Furthermore, expression of 2HG-producing IDH alleles 
in cells induced global DNA hypermethylation. In the AML cohort, IDH1/2 mutations
were mutually exclusive with mutations in the a-ketoglutarate-dependent enzyme
TET2, and TET2 loss-of-function mutations were associated with similar epigenetic
defects as IDH1/2 mutants. Consistent with these genetic and epigenetic data,
expression of IDH mutants impaired TET2 catalytic function in cells. Finally,
either expression of mutant IDH1/2 or Tet2 depletion impaired hematopoietic
differentiation and increased stem/progenitor cell marker expression, suggesting 
a shared proleukemogenic effect.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4105845
PMID: 21130701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Dec 2;11:91. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-91.

Essential role for ALCAM gene silencing in megakaryocytic differentiation of K562
cells.

Tan F(1), Ghosh S, Mbeunkui F, Thomas R, Weiner JA, Ofori-Acquah SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Aflac Cancer Center, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

BACKGROUND: Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM/CD166) is expressed
by hematopoietic stem cells. However, its role in hematopoietic differentiation
has not previously been defined.
RESULTS: In this study, we show that ALCAM expression is silenced in
erythromegakaryocytic progenitor cell lines. In agreement with this finding, the 
ALCAM promoter is occupied by GATA-1 in vivo, and a cognate motif at -850
inhibited promoter activity in K562 and MEG-01 cells. Gain-of-function studies
showed that ALCAM clusters K562 cells in a process that requires PKC. Induction
of megakaryocytic differentiation in K562 clones expressing ALCAM activated PKC-d
and triggered apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a lineage-specific silencing of ALCAM in bi-potential
erythromegakaryocytic progenitor cell lines. Marked apoptosis of ALCAM-expressing
K562 clones treated with PMA suggests that aberrant ALCAM expression in
erythromegakaryocytic progenitors may contribute to megakaryocytopenia.

PMCID: PMC3003670
PMID: 21126364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Reproduction. 2011 Feb;141(2):173-81. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0376. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

GATA-like protein-1 (GLP-1) is required for normal germ cell development during
embryonic oogenesis.

Strauss TJ(1), Castrillon DH, Hammes SR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine Pathology and Simmons Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75930,
USA.

Oogenesis and primordial follicle formation are tightly linked processes,
requiring organized and precisely timed communication between somatic and germ
cells. Deviations in ovarian cell cross talk, or aberrant gene expression within 
one of the cell populations, can lead to follicle loss or dysfunction, resulting 
in infertility. Expression of GATA-like protein-1 (GLP-1) in ovarian somatic
cells is required for normal fertility in female mice, as GLP-1 deficiency leads 
to the absence of oocytes at birth. However, the timing and nature of this germ
cell loss is not well understood. In this study, we characterize the embryonic
germ cell loss in GLP-1 null mice. Quantitative PCR demonstrates that ovarian
Glp-1 mRNA is expressed in a bimodal pattern during embryogenesis, peaking at
E13.5-14.5 and again at birth. In contrast, adult ovaries express low but
detectable levels of Glp-1 mRNA. Analysis of developing GLP-1 null mouse ovaries 
shows that germ cells are appropriately specified and migrate normally to nascent
gonads. Upon arrival at the gonad, precocious loss of germ cells begins at around
E13.5. This loss is completed by birth and is accompanied by defects in the
expression of genes associated with meiotic entry. Interestingly, somatic
pregranulosa cells still form basement membranes surrounding germ line cysts and 
express mRNA encoding paracrine signaling molecules that communicate with
oocytes, albeit at lower levels than normal. Together, these data imply that the 
somatic cell protein GLP-1 is not necessary for many pregranulosa cell functions 
but is required for germ cell survival.

PMID: 21123517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Apr;38(4):2685-94. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0411-9. Epub 2010
Nov 27.

Ga13 is closely related to hematopoiesis in zebrafish.

Ye D(1), Yang Q, Li Y, Huang X, Hu J, Qian S, Tan Z, Song P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Developmental Biology, College of Life
Sciences, Wuhan University, Department of Gynaecology, South Central Hospital,
Wuhan, 430072, People's Republic of China.

Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins (G proteins)
function as signal transducers and control many different physiologic processes. 
G proteins can be grouped into four families: Gs, Gi, Gq and G12. Ga13 belongs to
the G12 family. In zebrafish, there are two isoforms of Ga13: Ga13a and Ga13b. We
show here that knockdown of Ga13b in zebrafish results in hematopoietic and
angiogenic defects. The Ga13b morphants don't show complete loss of expression of
gata1, pu.1 or flk until 35 hpf suggests that Ga13b is closely related to the
development of hematopoietic cells. Further studies reveal that blood cells and
vascular endothelial cells have undergone apoptosis through a p53-dependent
pathway in Ga13b-depleted embryos. Injection of p53 morpholino could partially
rescue the phenotype of Ga13b morphants. These data possibly demonstrate a new
role for Ga13 in cell survival.

PMID: 21113681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2011;155(1):38-51. doi: 10.1159/000318720. Epub 2010
Nov 25.

Effect of histamine H1 receptor antagonists on TARC/CCL17 and MDC/CCL22
production from CD14+ cells induced by antigenic stimulation in vitro.

Shoji N(1), Asano K, Furuta A, Hirano K, Suzaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, Showa University, Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Thymus- and activation-regulated chemokine (TARC) and
macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC) are accepted to be important molecules in the 
development and maintenance of allergic diseases. Although several types of
histamine H(1) receptor antagonist (antihistamine) have been developed and used
for the treatment of allergic diseases, the influence of antihistamines on TARC
and MDC production is not well understood.
OBJECTIVE: The present study was undertaken to examine the influence of
antihistamines on TARC and MDC production from CD14+ cells after antigenic
stimulation in vitro.
METHODS: CD14+ cells prepared from patients with pollinosis to Japanese cedar
pollen were stimulated with specific allergen extracted from Japanese cedar
pollen (Cry j 1) in the presence of azelastine (AZE), ketotifen (KET),
fexofenadine (FEX) and oxatomide (OXA) for 6 days. TARC and MDC levels in culture
supernatants were examined by ELISA. We also examined the influence of FEX on
TARC and MDC mRNA expression, phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs) and transcription factor activation in CD14+ cells after Cry j 1 
stimulation.
RESULTS: FEX at 250 ng/ml, which is almost equal to therapeutic blood levels,
caused a significant inhibition of TARC and MDC production.However, AZE, OXA and 
KET required higher concentrations than their therapeutic blood levels to
suppress production of these factors. FEX at 250 ng/ml also suppressed NF-<U+03BA>B
activation, phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and extracellular signal-regulated
kinases 1 and 2 and expression of mRNA for TARC and MDC.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that antihistamines, especially FEX, suppress 
CC chemokine production from CD14+ cells through interference with
antigen-mediated signaling and result in favorable modification of allergic
disease states or conditions.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21109747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Exp Med. 2010 Nov 22;207(12):2537-41. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102260.

Networking erythropoiesis.

Kerenyi MA(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and the Dana
Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A relatively small cadre of lineage-restricted transcription factors largely
orchestrates erythropoiesis, but how these nuclear factors interact to regulate
this complex biology is still largely unknown. However, recent technological
advances, such as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) paired with massively
parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq), gene expression profiling, and comprehensive
bioinformatic analyses, offer new insights into the intricacies of red cell
molecular circuits.

PMCID: PMC2989762
PMID: 21098097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Exp Med. 2010 Dec 20;207(13):2817-30. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100844. Epub 2010 Nov 
22.

Transient activation of c-MYC expression is critical for efficient platelet
generation from human induced pluripotent stem cells.

Takayama N(1), Nishimura S, Nakamura S, Shimizu T, Ohnishi R, Endo H, Yamaguchi
T, Otsu M, Nishimura K, Nakanishi M, Sawaguchi A, Nagai R, Takahashi K, Yamanaka 
S, Nakauchi H, Eto K.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Bank, Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, the
Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2010 Dec 20;207(13):2781-4.

Human (h) induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are a potentially abundant
source of blood cells, but how best to select iPSC clones suitable for this
purpose from among the many clones that can be simultaneously established from an
identical source is not clear. Using an in vitro culture system yielding a
hematopoietic niche that concentrates hematopoietic progenitors, we show that the
pattern of c-MYC reactivation after reprogramming influences platelet generation 
from hiPSCs. During differentiation, reduction of c-MYC expression after initial 
reactivation of c-MYC expression in selected hiPSC clones was associated with
more efficient in vitro generation of CD41a(+)CD42b(+) platelets. This effect was
recapitulated in virus integration-free hiPSCs using a doxycycline-controlled
c-MYC expression vector. In vivo imaging revealed that these CD42b(+) platelets
were present in thrombi after laser-induced vessel wall injury. In contrast,
sustained and excessive c-MYC expression in megakaryocytes was accompanied by
increased p14 (ARF) and p16 (INK4A) expression, decreased GATA1 expression, and
impaired production of functional platelets. These findings suggest that the
pattern of c-MYC expression, particularly its later decline, is key to producing 
functional platelets from selected iPSC clones.

PMCID: PMC3005234
PMID: 21098095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Expert Rev Hematol. 2010 Apr;3(2):175-86. doi: 10.1586/ehm.10.14.

Unique clinical and biological features of leukemia in Down syndrome children.

Xavier AC(1), Ge Y, Taub J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Acute leukemias in children with Down syndrome (DS) are characterized by unique
clinical and biological features. Notable among DS children with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), is the high frequency of the acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL)
subtype, which uniformly harbor somatic mutations in the transcription factor
GATA1 gene. DS patients with AML, and in particular AMkL, have event-free
survival rates of 80-100% in contrast to event-free survival rates of less than
35% for non-DS children with AMkL. DS children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
have a more heterogeneous disease, with approximately 30% of the patients having 
somatic JAK2 mutations, heightened methotrexate sensitivity and higher rates of
treatment-related toxicities. These features highlight a striking relationship
between genes localized to chromosome 21, leukemogenesis and sensitivity to
leukemia chemotherapy agents.

PMID: 21083461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Blood. 2011 Feb 17;117(7):2146-56. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-293357. Epub 2010
Nov 12.

Structure of the leukemia oncogene LMO2: implications for the assembly of a
hematopoietic transcription factor complex.

El Omari K(1), Hoosdally SJ, Tuladhar K, Karia D, Vyas P, Patient R, Porcher C,
Mancini EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Structural Biology, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The LIM only protein 2 (LMO2) is a key regulator of hematopoietic stem cell
development whose ectopic expression in T cells leads to the onset of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Through its LIM domains, LMO2 is thought to function as
the scaffold for a DNA-binding transcription regulator complex, including the
basic helix-loop-helix proteins SCL/TAL1 and E47, the zinc finger protein GATA-1,
and LIM-domain interacting protein LDB1. To understand the role of LMO2 in the
formation of this complex and ultimately to dissect its function in normal and
aberrant hematopoiesis, we solved the crystal structure of LMO2 in complex with
the LID domain of LDB1 at 2.4 Å resolution. We observe a largely unstructured
LMO2 kept in register by the LID binding both LIM domains. Comparison of
independently determined crystal structures of LMO2 reveals large movements
around a conserved hinge between the LIM domains. We demonstrate that such
conformational flexibility is necessary for binding of LMO2 to its partner
protein SCL/TAL1 in vitro and for the function of this complex in vivo. These
results, together with molecular docking and analysis of evolutionarily conserved
residues, yield the first structural model of the DNA-binding complex containing 
LMO2, LDB1, SCL/TAL1, and GATA-1.

PMID: 21076045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Placenta. 2011 Jan;32(1):70-8. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.10.004. Epub 2010 Nov
13.

Maternal gene expression profiling during pregnancy and preeclampsia in human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Rajakumar A(1), Chu T, Handley DE, Bunce KD, Burke B, Hubel CA, Jeyabalan A,
Peters DG.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Maternal Fetal Medicine and Reproductive Genetics, Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Preeclampsia is a major obstetrical complication affecting maternal and fetal
health. While it is clear that there is a substantial placental contribution to
preeclampsia pathogenesis, the maternal contribution is less well characterized. 
We therefore performed a genome-wide transcriptome analysis to explore
disease-associated changes in maternal gene expression patterns in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).METHODS: Preeclampsia was defined as gestational 
hypertension, proteinuria and hyperurecimia. Total RNA was isolated from PBMCs
obtained from women with uncomplicated pregnancies (n = 5) and women with
preeclamptic pregnancies (n = 5). Gene expression analysis was carried out using 
Agilent oligonucleotide microarrays. Biological pathway analysis was undertaken
using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. Quantitative real-time PCR (QRTPCR)
was performed to validate the gene expression changes of selected genes in
normotensive and preeclamptic patients (n = 12 each).
RESULTS: We identified a total of 368 genes that were differentially expressed in
women with preeclampsia compared to normal controls with false discovery rate
(FDR) controlled at 10%. In follow up experiments we further analyzed the
expression levels of a number of genes that were identified as altered by the
microarray data including survivin (BIRC5), caveolin (CAV1), GATA binding
protein-1 (GATA1), signal tranducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), E2F
transcription factor-1 (E2F1), fibronectin-1 (FN1), interleukin-4 (IL-4), matrix 
metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) and WAP four disulfide domain protein (WFDC-1) by
QRTPCR. Additionally we performed immuno blot analysis and zymography to verify
some of these candidate genes at the protein level. Computational analysis of
gene function identified an anti-proliferative and altered immune function
cellular phenotype in severe preeclamptic samples.
CONCLUSIONS: We have characterized the genome-wide mRNA expression changes
associated with preeclampsia-specific genes in circulating maternal blood cells
at the time of delivery. In addition to providing information relating to the
biological basis of the preeclampsia phenotype, our data provide a number of
potential biomarkers for use in the further characterization of this disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3040985
PMID: 21075447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):427-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.10.011. Epub 2010 Nov
12.

CDDO-Im, an antitumor molecule that also improves platetet production.

Sardina JL, López-Ruano G, Sánchez-Sánchez B, Hernández-Hernández A.

Comment on
    Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):534-44.

PMID: 21074266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 23;107(47):20429-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1007804107. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Building multifunctionality into a complex containing master regulators of
hematopoiesis.

Fujiwara T(1), Lee HY, Sanalkumar R, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, University of Wisconsin Carbone
Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Developmental control mechanisms often use multimeric complexes containing
transcription factors, coregulators, and additional non-DNA binding components.
It is challenging to ascertain how such components contribute to complex function
at endogenous loci. We analyzed the function of components of a complex
containing master regulators of hematopoiesis (GATA-1 and Scl/TAL1) and the
non-DNA binding components ETO2, the LIM domain protein LMO2, and the chromatin
looping factor LDB1. Surprisingly, we discovered that ETO2 and LMO2 regulate
distinct target-gene ensembles in erythroid cells. ETO2 commonly repressed GATA-1
function via suppressing histone H3 acetylation, although it also regulated
methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 at select loci. Prior studies defined
multiple modes by which GATA-1 regulates target genes with or without the
coregulator Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1). LMO2 selectively repressed genes that
GATA-1 represses in a FOG-1-independent manner. As LMO2 controls hematopoiesis,
its dysregulation is leukemogenic, and its influence on GATA factor function is
unknown, this mechanistic link has important biological and pathophysiological
implications. The demonstration that ETO2 and LMO2 exert qualitatively distinct
functions at endogenous loci illustrates how components of complexes containing
master developmental regulators can impart the capacity to regulate unique
cohorts of target genes, thereby diversifying complex function.

PMCID: PMC2996669
PMID: 21059912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 10;30(10):1252-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.495. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

A DNA-binding mutant of TAL1 cooperates with LMO2 to cause T cell leukemia in
mice.

Draheim KM(1), Hermance N, Yang Y, Arous E, Calvo J, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, UMass Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The most common translocation in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) involves the LMO2 locus, resulting in ectopic expression of the LMO2 gene
in human thymocytes. The LMO2 gene was also activated in patients with X-linked
Severe Combined Immune Deficiency treated with gene therapy because of retroviral
insertion in the LMO2 locus. The LMO2 insertions predisposed these children to
T-ALL, yet how LMO2 contributes to T cell transformation remains unclear. The LIM
(Lin 11, Isl-1, Mec-3) domain containing LMO2 protein regulates erythropoiesis as
part of a large transcriptional complex consisting of LMO2, TAL1, E47, GATA1 and 
LDB1 that recognizes bipartite E-box-GATA1 sites on target genes. Similarly, a
TAL1/E47/LMO2/LDB1 complex is observed in human T-ALL and Tal1 and Lmo2
expression in mice results in disease acceleration. To address the mechanism(s)
of Tal1/Lmo2 synergy in leukemia, we generated Lmo2 transgenic mice and mated
them with mice that express wild-type Tal1 or a DNA-binding mutant of TAL1.
Tal1/Lmo2 and MutTAL1/Lmo2 bitransgenic mice exhibit perturbations in thymocyte
development due to reduced E47/HEB transcriptional activity and develop leukemia 
with identical kinetics. These data demonstrate that the DNA-binding activity of 
Tal1 is not required to cooperate with Lmo2 to cause leukemia in mice and suggest
that Lmo2 may cooperate with Tal1 to interfere with E47/HEB function(s).

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited

PMCID: PMC3691994
PMID: 21057528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Haematologica. 2011 Feb;96(2):190-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.027698. Epub 2010
Nov 3.

The role of meis1 in primitive and definitive hematopoiesis during zebrafish
development.

Cvejic A(1), Serbanovic-Canic J, Stemple DL, Ouwehand WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Long Road, Cambridge CB2
0PT, UK.

BACKGROUND: The Meis1 protein represents an important cofactor for Hox and Pbx1
and is implicated in human and murine leukemias. Though much is known about the
role of meis1 in leukemogenesis, its function in normal hematopoiesis remains
largely unclear. Here we characterized the role of the proto-oncogene, meis1,
during zebrafish primitive and definitive hematopoiesis.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Zebrafish embryos were stained with o-dianisidine to detect
hemoglobin-containing cells and Sudan black to quantify neutrophils. The numbers 
of other cells (scl-, gata1- and alas2-positive cells) were also quantified by
measuring the corresponding stained areas of the embryos. We used anti-Meis1
antibody and whole mount immunohistochemistry to determine the pattern of
expression of Meis1 during zebrafish development and then analyzed the functional
role of Meis1 by knocking-down the meis1 gene.
RESULTS: Using antisense morpholino oligomers to interrupt meis1 expression we
found that, although primitive macrophage development could occur unhampered,
posterior erythroid differentiation required meis1, and its absence resulted in a
severe decrease in the number of mature erythrocytes. Furthermore a picture
emerged that meis1 exerts important effects on later stages of erythrocyte
maturation and that these effects are independent of gata1, but under the control
of scl. In addition, meis1 morpholino knock-down led to dramatic single
arteriovenous tube formation. We also found that knock-down of pbx1 resulted in a
phenotype that was strikingly similar to that of meis1 knock-down zebrafish.
CONCLUSIONS: These results imply that meis1, jointly with pbx1, regulates
primitive hematopoiesis as well as vascular development.

PMCID: PMC3031685
PMID: 21048033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):534-44. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.09.013. Epub 2010
Oct 29.

CDDO-Im is a stimulator of megakaryocytic differentiation.

Petronelli A(1), Pelosi E, Santoro S, Saulle E, Cerio AM, Mariani G, Labbaye C,
Testa U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Suepriore 
di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):427-8.

Although the triterpene CDDO and its potent derivatives, CDDO-Im and CDDO-Me, are
now in phase I/II studies in the treatment of some pathological conditions, their
effects on normal hematopoiesis are not known. In the present study we provide
evidence that CDDO-Im exerts in vitro a potent inhibitory effect on erythroid
cell proliferation and survival and a stimulatory action on megakaryocytic
differentiation. The effect of CDDO-Im on erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation was evaluated both on normal hemopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) 
induced to selective erythroid (E) or megakaryocytic (Mk) differentiation and on 
erythroleukemic cell lines HEL and TF1. The inhibitory effect of CDDO-Im on
erythroid cell survival and proliferation is mainly related to a reduced GATA-1
expression. This conclusion is supported by the observation that GATA-1
overexpressing TF1 cells are partially protected from the inhibitory effect of
CDDO-Im on cell proliferation and survival. The stimulatory effect of CDDO-Im on 
normal megakaryopoiesis is seemingly related to upmodulation of GATA2 expression 
and induction of mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21035854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Jan;119(1):104-15. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq330. Epub 2010 Oct
27.

Effects of the protein kinase inhibitor PKC412 on gene expression and link to
physiological effects in zebrafish Danio rerio eleuthero-embryos.

Oggier DM(1), Lenard A, Küry M, Hoeger B, Affolter M, Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland, School of Life
Sciences, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.

To identify molecular effects of the antineoplastic agent protein kinase C
inhibitor 412 (PKC412) (midostaurin), we applied gene expression profiling in
zebrafish using whole-genome microarrays. Behavioral, developmental, and
physiological effects were investigated in order to analyze for correlations
between altered gene expression profiles with effects on development and
physiology. Zebrafish blastula-stage embryos were exposed for 6 days
postfertilization to nominal levels of 2 and 40 µg/l PKC412. Among the 259 and
511 altered transcripts at both concentrations, respectively, the expressions of 
genes involved in the circadian rhythm were further investigated. Alteration of
swimming behavior was not observed. Pathways of interest affected by PKC412 were 
angiogenesis, apoptosis, DNA damage response, and response to oxidative stress.
Angiogenesis was analyzed in double-transgenic zebrafish embryos
Tg(fli1a:EGFP)y1;Tg(gata1:dsRed)sd2; no major defects were induced by PKC412
treatment at both concentrations. Apoptosis occurred in olfactory placodes of
embryos exposed to 40 µg/l, and DNA damage was induced at both PKC412
concentrations. However, there were no significant effects on reactive oxygen
species formation. This study leads to the conclusion that PKC412-induced
alterations of gene transcripts are partly paralleled by physiological effects at
high, but not at low PKC412 concentrations expected to be of environmental
relevance.

PMID: 20980353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Blood. 2011 Jan 6;117(1):e1-14. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-295113. Epub 2010 Oct 
19.

Dynamic combinatorial interactions of RUNX1 and cooperating partners regulates
megakaryocytic differentiation in cell line models.

Pencovich N(1), Jaschek R, Tanay A, Groner Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Specific interactions of transcription factors (TFs) with their targets are
crucial for specifying gene expression programs during cell differentiation. How 
specificity is maintained despite limited selectivity of individual TF-DNA
interactions is not fully understood. RUNX1 TF is among the most frequently
mutated genes in human leukemia and an important regulator of megakaryopoiesis.
We used megakaryocytic cell lines to characterize the network of RUNX1 targets
and cooperating TFs in differentiating megakaryocytes and demonstrated how
dynamic partnerships between RUNX1 and cooperating TFs facilitated regulatory
plasticity and specificity during this process. After differentiation onset,
RUNX1 directly activated a large number of genes through interaction with
preexisting and de novo binding sites. Recruitment of RUNX1 to de novo occupied
sites occurred at H3K4me1-marked preprogrammed enhancers. A significant number of
these de novo bound sites lacked RUNX motif but were occupied by AP-1 TFs.
Reciprocally, AP-1 TFs were up-regulated by RUNX1 after
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate induction and recruited to RUNX1-occupied
sites lacking AP-1 motifs. At other differentiation stages, additional
combinatorial interactions occurred between RUNX1 and its coregulators, GATA1 and
ETS. The findings suggest that in differentiating megakaryocytic cell lines,
RUNX1 cooperates with GATA1, AP-1, and ETS to orchestrate cell-specific
transcription programs through dynamic TF partnerships.

PMID: 20959602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Feb;89(2):137-50. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0689-z. Epub
2010 Oct 16.

Small Rab GTPase Rab7b promotes megakaryocytic differentiation by enhancing IL-6 
production and STAT3-GATA-1 association.

He D(1), Chen T, Yang M, Zhu X, Wang C, Cao X, Cai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, 310027, China.

Induction of the differentiation of human leukemia cells is a useful strategy in 
treatment of human leukemia. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in
leukemia cell differentiation have not been fully elucidated. Interleukin 6
(IL-6) is a pleiotropic cytokine acting on a variety of cell types, and plays
important roles in hematopoiesis. GATA binding protein 1 (GATA-1) is an important
transcription factor involved in either megakaryocytic or erythrocytic
differentiation. Herein we report that Rab7b, a late endosome/lysosome-localized 
myeloid small GTPase, promotes phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)-induced
megakaryocytic differentiation by increasing nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-dependent 
IL-6 production and subsequently enhancing the association of activated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) with GATA-1. By using
PMA-induced megakaryocytic differentiation of leukemia cells as a model, we
investigated the roles of Rab7b in megakaryocytic differentiation. We find that
Rab7b can potentiate PMA-induced upregulation of megakaryocytic markers,
production of IL-6, and activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B and neutralizing 
antibodies for IL-6 or the IL-6 signaling receptor gp130 can block the effects of
Rab7b in megakaryocytic differentiation. In Rab7b-silenced cells, PMA-induced
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, IL-6 production, and megakaryocytic differentiation are
impaired. Furthermore, we demonstrate that IL-6-induced activation of STAT3 and
the subsequent association of STAT3 with GATA-1 may contribute to PMA-induced and
Rab7b-mediated transcriptional upregulation of megakaryocytic differentiation
markers. Therefore, our data suggest that Rab7b may play important roles in
megakaryopoiesis by activating NF-<U+03BA>B and promoting IL-6 production. Our study
also indicates that the IL-6-induced association of STAT3 with GATA-1 may
regulate megakaryocytic differentiation.

PMID: 20953574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Leukemia. 2010 Dec;24(12):2090-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.206. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

A DEAB-sensitive aldehyde dehydrogenase regulates hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells development during primitive hematopoiesis in zebrafish embryos.

Ma AC(1), Chung MI, Liang R, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR.

Although aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity has become a surrogate of
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), its function during
hematopoiesis was unclear. Here, we examined its role in zebrafish hematopoiesis 
based on pharmacological inhibition and morpholino (MO) knockdown. Zebrafish
embryos were treated with diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB, 1<U+2009>µmol/l) between 0-
and 48<U+2009>hour-post-fertilization (hpf). MOs targeting aldhs were injected between 1
and 4-cell stage. The effects on hematopoiesis were evaluated at different
stages. DEAB treatment between 0 and 18<U+2009>hpf increased gene expression associated 
with HSPC (scl, lmo2), erythropoiesis (gata1, a- and ß-eHb) and myelopoiesis
(spi1) as well as gfp(+) cells in dissociated Tg(gata1:gfp) embryos. The effects 
were ameliorated by all-trans retinoic acid (1<U+2009>nmol/l). Definitive hematopoiesis 
and the erythromyeloid precursors were unaffected. In all, 14 out of 15 zebrafish
aldhs were detectable by reverse transcription PCR in 18<U+2009>hpf embryos, of which
only aldh1a2 and aldh16a1 were expressed in sites pertinent to hematopoiesis.
Molecular targeting by MOs was demonstrated for 15 aldhs, but none of them, even 
in combined aldh1a2 and aldh1a3 knockdown, recapitulated the hematopoietic
expansion in DEAB-treated embryos. In conclusion, DEAB expands HSPC population
during primitive hematopoiesis through inhibition of aldh and retinoic acid
synthesis. The specific aldh isoform(s) remains to be determined.

PMID: 20927131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Ann Hematol. 2011 Mar;90(3):301-6. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-1088-9. Epub 2010 Oct 
5.

Long-term outcome of hemizygous and heterozygous carriers of a germline GATA1
(G208R) mutation.

Dührsen U(1), Kratz CP, Flotho C, Lauenstein T, Bommer M, König E, Brittinger G, 
Heimpel H.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Hämatologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, Essen,
Germany. ulrich.duehrsen@uk-essen.de

The transcriptional regulator GATA1 is crucially involved in megakaryocytopoiesis
and erythropoiesis. Mutations of the gene which is located on the X chromosome
have been associated with platelet and red blood cell abnormalities. We
identified a family with a GATA1 (G208R) mutation in whom a low male birth rate
and frequent miscarriages among heterozygous females suggested increased fetal
death in male hemizygotes. Female mutation carriers had normal or near normal
hemoglobin levels and platelet counts ranging from normal to severely reduced,
probably reflecting skewed X chromosome inactivation. Platelets were dimorphous, 
and thrombocytopenia was associated with erythroblastosis. The only living male
mutation carrier had severe macrothrombocytopenia with life-threatening bleeding 
episodes, moderate to severe anemia, eosinopenia, skeletal abnormalities, and
abundant extramedullary hematopoiesis. Long-term sequelae in the 50-year-old
patient included unilateral nephrectomy following misinterpretation of paraspinal
hematopoiesis as renal cancer, spinal stenosis which was possibly favored by
progressive bone marrow expansion, and severe secondary gout.

PMCID: PMC3115595
PMID: 20922527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Leukemia. 2010 Nov;24(11):1920-6. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.198. Epub 2010 Sep 30.

Overexpression of survivin initiates hematologic malignancies in vivo.

Small S(1), Keerthivasan G, Huang Z, Gurbuxani S, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Northwestern University Chicago, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA.

Survivin is an inhibitor of apoptosis protein family member that has an essential
role in cellular proliferation as a component of the chromosome passenger
complex. Survivin is highly expressed in embryos and in proliferating adult
tissues, but it is not expressed in most differentiated cells. During
tumorigenesis, however, survivin expression is dramatically upregulated. Although
many studies have shown that survivin is required for cancer cells, the extent to
which survivin contributes to the initiation of tumors is unknown. Here we show
that transgenic mice that overexpress survivin in hematopoietic cells are at an
increased risk of hematologic tumors. In examining how survivin might contribute 
to tumorigenesis, we observed that hematopoietic cells engineered to overexpress 
survivin are less susceptible to apoptosis. We conclude that survivin may promote
tumorigenesis by imparting a survival advantage to cells that acquire additional 
genetic lesions.

PMCID: PMC2978276
PMID: 20882051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. An Pediatr (Barc). 2011 Jan;74(1):31-7. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2010.08.012. Epub
2010 Sep 25.

[GATA1 analysis in myeloproliferative disorders associated to trisomy 21].

[Article in Spanish]

Fuster Soler JL(1), Norton A, Galera Miñarro A, Bermúdez Cortés M, Llinares
Riestra ME, Ortuño Giner F.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Oncohematología Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la
Arrixaca, El Palmar, Murcia, Spain. igonzalezv@salud.aragon.es

INTRODUCTION: Neonatal transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute
megakaryoblastic leukaemia of Down syndrome are considered different
manifestations of the same disease. In most cases, transient myeloproliferative
disorders require no treatment, while acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia of Down's 
syndrome is characterised by an increased sensitivity to chemotherapy and its
treatment should be adapted with a reduction in dose intensity. Both entities
share specific mutations at exón 2 of the transcription factor GATA1.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analysed biological features and GATA1 mutations in 4
patients with transient abnormal myelopoiesis (2) and acute megakaryoblastic
leukaemia (2) including one phenotypically normal trisomy 21 mosaicism. We found 
abnormal GATA1 mutated clones in each case, and a specific point mutation at exón
2 was detected in three cases. Given the heterogeneous phenotype of
megakaryoblastic blasts and the low percentage of blasts at presentation, the
recognition of GATA1 mutations was helpful for diagnosis. In addition, molecular 
remission was established in 2 patients after subsequent normal mutational GATA1 
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that GATA1 mutational study is a useful tool for the
diagnosis and management of trisomy 21 associated myeloproliferative disorders.

Copyright © 2010 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 20870473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Hematol. 2010 Oct;92(3):527-30. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0646-1. Epub 2010
Sep 23.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis in a cytogenetically normal neonate.

Yanase K(1), Kato K, Katayama N, Mouri Y, Kobayashi C, Shiono J, Abe M, Yoshimi
A, Koike K, Arai J, Tsuchida M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Ibaraki Children's Hospital,
Futaba-Dai 3-3-1, Mito, Ibaraki, 311-4145, Japan.

We present a cytogenetically normal neonate who developed transient abnormal
myelopoiesis. The blasts showed trisomy 21. In contrast, fibroblasts, and
PHA-stimulated peripheral blood demonstrated normal diploid line on extensive
karyotyping. Direct sequencing of the DNA derived from the peripheral blood at
overt disease revealed splice site mutation in the boundary of GATA1 exon 2. The 
patient received three courses of chemotherapy leading to complete remission.
During the complete remission, there was neither mutation of GATA1 exon 2 nor
trisomy 21, confirming somatic nature of both abnormalities. The patient is now
free from the disease 12 months after remission. This case emphasizes the
significance of trisomy 21 as the cause of transient abnormal myelopoiesis in
Down syndrome.

PMID: 20859711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Bioinformatics. 2010 Sep 15;26(18):i504-10. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq379.

A varying threshold method for ChIP peak-calling using multiple sources of
information.

Chen KB(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

MOTIVATION: Gene regulation commonly involves interaction among DNA, proteins and
biochemical conditions. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) technologies, 
protein-DNA interactions are routinely detected in the genome scale.
Computational methods that detect weak protein-binding signals and simultaneously
maintain a high specificity yet remain to be challenging. An attractive approach 
is to incorporate biologically relevant data, such as protein co-occupancy, to
improve the power of protein-binding detection. We call the additional data
related with the target protein binding as supporting tracks.
RESULTS: We propose a novel but rigorous statistical method to identify protein
occupancy in ChIP data using multiple supporting tracks (PASS2). We demonstrate
that utilizing biologically related information can significantly increase the
discovery of true protein-binding sites, while still maintaining a desired level 
of false positive calls. Applying the method to GATA1 restoration in mouse
erythroid cell line, we detected many new GATA1-binding sites using GATA1
co-occupancy data.
AVAILABILITY: http://stat.psu.edu/ approximately yuzhang/pass2.tar.

PMCID: PMC2935431
PMID: 20823314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;30(21):5194-206. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01112-09. Epub 2010 Sep
7.

Thrombocytopenia in mice lacking the carboxy-terminal regulatory domain of the
Ets transcription factor Fli1.

Moussa O(1), LaRue AC, Abangan RS Jr, Williams CR, Zhang XK, Masuya M, Gong YZ,
Spyropoulos DD, Ogawa M, Gilkeson G, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Targeted disruption of the Fli1 gene results in embryonic lethality. To dissect
the roles of functional domains in Fli1, we recently generated mutant Fli1 mice
that express a truncated Fli1 protein (Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)) that lacks the
carboxy-terminal regulatory (CTA) domain. Heterozygous Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) mice are
viable, while homozygous mice have reduced viability. Early postnatal lethality
accounts for 30% survival of homozygotes to adulthood. The peripheral blood of
these viable Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)/Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) homozygous mice has reduced platelet numbers. 
Platelet aggregation and activation were also impaired and bleeding times
significantly prolonged in these mutant mice. Analysis of mRNA from total bone
marrow and purified megakaryocytes from Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)/Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) mice revealed
downregulation of genes associated with megakaroyctic development, including
c-mpl, gpIIb, gpIV, gpIX, PF4, NF-E2, MafG, and Rab27B. While Fli1 and GATA-1
synergistically regulate the expression of multiple megakaryocytic genes, the
level of GATA-1 present on a subset of these promoters is reduced in vivo in the 
Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)/Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) mice, providing a possible mechanism for the impared
transcription observed. Collectively, these data showed for the first time a
hemostatic defect associated with the loss of a specific functional domain of the
transcription factor Fli1 and suggest previously unknown in vivo roles in
megakaryocytic cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2953061
PMID: 20823267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Oct 1;400(4):625-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.08.116. Epub 2010 Aug 31.

Zinc finger-zinc finger interaction between the transcription factors, GATA-1 and
Sp1.

Imanishi M(1), Imamura C, Higashi C, Yan W, Negi S, Futaki S, Sugiura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan.
imiki@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In contrast to the extensive understanding of the zinc finger-DNA interactions,
less is known about zinc finger-zinc finger interactions. GATA-1 and Sp1 are
transcription factors with zinc finger domains for DNA binding. The interaction
between the GATA-1 and Sp1 zinc finger domains is important for synergistic
transcriptional effects in erythroid genes. Despite the biological importance of 
the GATA-1 and Sp1 interaction, the molecular mechanism of the interaction
remains unclear. We constructed a series of deletion mutants of the zinc finger
domains of GATA-1 and Sp1 to identify the regions within the GATA-1 and Sp1 zinc 
finger domains that interact. The zinc finger-zinc finger interaction modes were 
also estimated from calorimetric measurements. This revealed that the interaction
between the Sp1 and GATA-1 zinc finger domains was primarily electrostatic, and
that the linker region of the Sp1 zinc fingers is important for the association
with the GATA-1 zinc finger domains. We propose a new molecular mechanism for
zinc finger-zinc finger interactions that should contribute to our understanding 
of the bio-functional role of the interaction between GATA-1 and Sp1.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20807505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Blood. 2010 Nov 25;116(22):4631-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-05-282426. Epub 2010
Aug 20.

Down syndrome and GATA1 mutations in transient abnormal myeloproliferative
disorder: mutation classes correlate with progression to myeloid leukemia.

Kanezaki R(1), Toki T, Terui K, Xu G, Wang R, Shimada A, Hama A, Kanegane H,
Kawakami K, Endo M, Hasegawa D, Kogawa K, Adachi S, Ikeda Y, Iwamoto S, Taga T,
Kosaka Y, Kojima S, Hayashi Y, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.

Twenty percent to 30% of transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) observed in
newborns with Down syndrome (DS) develop myeloid leukemia of DS (ML-DS). Most
cases of TAM carry somatic GATA1 mutations resulting in the exclusive expression 
of a truncated protein (GATA1s). However, there are no reports on the expression 
levels of GATA1s in TAM blasts, and the risk factors for the progression to ML-DS
are unidentified. To test whether the spectrum of transcripts derived from the
mutant GATA1 genes affects the expression levels, we classified the mutations
according to the types of transcripts, and investigated the modalities of
expression by in vitro transfection experiments using GATA1 expression constructs
harboring mutations. We show here that the mutations affected the amount of
mutant protein. Based on our estimates of GATA1s protein expression, the
mutations were classified into GATA1s high and low groups. Phenotypic analyses of
66 TAM patients with GATA1 mutations revealed that GATA1s low mutations were
significantly associated with a risk of progression to ML-DS (P < .001) and lower
white blood cell counts (P = .004). Our study indicates that quantitative
differences in mutant protein levels have significant effects on the phenotype of
TAM and warrants further investigation in a prospective study.

PMID: 20729467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Exp Med. 2010 Aug 30;207(9):1967-79. doi: 10.1084/jem.20100222. Epub 2010 Aug
16.

A novel interaction between FlnA and Syk regulates platelet ITAM-mediated
receptor signaling and function.

Falet H(1), Pollitt AY, Begonja AJ, Weber SE, Duerschmied D, Wagner DD, Watson
SP, Hartwig JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. hfalet@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Filamin A (FlnA) cross-links actin filaments and connects the Von Willebrand
factor receptor GPIb-IX-V to the underlying cytoskeleton in platelets. Because
FlnA deficiency is embryonic lethal, mice lacking FlnA in platelets were
generated by breeding FlnA(loxP/loxP) females with GATA1-Cre males. FlnA(loxP/y) 
GATA1-Cre males have a macrothrombocytopenia and increased tail bleeding times.
FlnA-null platelets have decreased expression and altered surface distribution of
GPIbalpha because they lack the normal cytoskeletal linkage of GPIbalpha to
underlying actin filaments. This results in approximately 70% less platelet
coverage on collagen-coated surfaces at shear rates of 1,500/s, compared with
wild-type platelets. Unexpectedly, however, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motif (ITAM)- and ITAM-like-mediated signals are severely compromised 
in FlnA-null platelets. FlnA-null platelets fail to spread and have decreased
alpha-granule secretion, integrin alphaIIbbeta3 activation, and protein tyrosine 
phosphorylation, particularly that of the protein tyrosine kinase Syk and
phospholipase C-gamma2, in response to stimulation through the collagen receptor 
GPVI and the C-type lectin-like receptor 2. This signaling defect was traced to
the loss of a novel FlnA-Syk interaction, as Syk binds to FlnA at
immunoglobulin-like repeat 5. Our findings reveal that the interaction between
FlnA and Syk regulates ITAM- and ITAM-like-containing receptor signaling and
platelet function.

PMCID: PMC2931168
PMID: 20713593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(6-7):1127-37. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.093042ep.

Hematopoietic development in the zebrafish.

Paik EJ(1), Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02115,
USA.

The model organism Danio rerio, also known as the zebrafish, is an excellent
system for studying the developmental process of hematopoiesis. It is an ideal
model for in vivo imaging, and it is useful for large-scale genetic screens.
These have led to the discovery of previously unknown players in hematopoiesis,
as well as helped our understanding of hematopoietic development. In this review,
we will summarize hematopoiesis in the zebrafish and discuss how genetic
approaches using the zebrafish system have helped to build our current knowledge 
in the field of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 20711990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(6-7):1011-8. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.093056jp.

Primitive erythropoiesis in the mammalian embryo.

Palis J(1), Malik J, McGrath KE, Kingsley PD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, Center for
Pediatric Biomedical Research, New York 14642, USA.
james_palis@urmc.rochester.edu

Erythropoiesis in adult mammals is characterized by the progressive maturation of
hematopoietic stem cells to lineage-specific progenitors, to morphologically
identifiable precursors which enucleate to form mature erythrocytes. In contrast,
primitive erythropoiesis is characterized by the appearance within the yolk sac
of a transient, lineage-restricted progenitor population which generates a wave
of erythroid precursors. These precursors undergo progressive maturation in the
bloodstream, characterized by nuclear condensation and embryonic hemoglobin
accumulation. This process is dependent on erythropoietin signaling through its
cognate receptor, as well as the function of several erythroid-specific
transcription factors, including GATA1 and EKLF. Targeted disruption of genes in 
the mouse that result in failure of the emergence or maturation of the primitive 
erythroid lineage leads to early fetal death, indicating that the primitive
erythroid lineage is necessary for survival of the mammalian embryo. While it was
thought for over a century that primitive erythroid cells were uniquely nucleated
mammalian red cells, it is now recognized that they, like their definitive
erythroid counterparts, enucleate to form reticulocytes and pyrenocytes. This
surprising finding indicates that the primitive erythroid lineage is indeed
mammalian, rather than non-mammalian, in character.

PMID: 20711979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Blood. 2010 Nov 18;116(20):4328-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-272781. Epub 2010 
Aug 4.

Inhibition of erythropoiesis in malaria anemia: role of hemozoin and
hemozoin-generated 4-hydroxynonenal.

Skorokhod OA(1), Caione L, Marrocco T, Migliardi G, Barrera V, Arese P,
Piacibello W, Schwarzer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology, and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Cell Therapy,
University of Torino Medical School, Torino, Italy.

Severe malaria anemia is characterized by inhibited/altered erythropoiesis and
presence of hemozoin-(HZ)-laden bone-marrow macrophages. HZ mediates peroxidation
of unsaturated fatty acids and production of bioactive aldehydes such as
4-hydroxynonenal (HNE). HZ-laden human monocytes inhibited growth of cocultivated
human erythroid cells and produced HNE that diffused to adjacent cells generating
HNE-protein adducts. Cocultivation with HZ or treatment with low micromolar HNE
inhibited growth of erythroid cells interfering with cell cycle without
apoptosis. After HZ/HNE treatment, 2 critical proteins in cell-cycle regulation, 
p53 and p21, were increased and the retinoblastoma protein, central regulator of 
G1-to-S-phase transition, was consequently hypophosphorylated, while GATA-1,
master transcription factor in erythropoiesis was reduced. The resultant
decreased expression of cyclin A and D2 retarded cell-cycle progression in
erythroid cells and the K562 cell line. As a second major effect, HZ and HNE
inhibited protein expression of crucial receptors (R): transferrinR1, stem cell
factorR, interleukin-3R, and erythropoietinR. The reduced receptor expression and
the impaired cell-cycle activity decreased the production of cells expressing
glycophorin-A and hemoglobin. Present data confirm the inhibitory role of HZ,
identify HNE as one HZ-generated inhibitory molecule and describe molecular
targets of HNE in erythroid progenitors possibly involved in erythropoiesis
inhibition in malaria anemia.

PMID: 20686121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genes Dev. 2010 Aug 1;24(15):1659-72. doi: 10.1101/gad.1903410.

Developmental stage-specific interplay of GATA1 and IGF signaling in fetal
megakaryopoiesis and leukemogenesis.

Klusmann JH(1), Godinho FJ, Heitmann K, Maroz A, Koch ML, Reinhardt D, Orkin SH, 
Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Oncogene-mediated transformation of hematopoietic cells has been studied
extensively, but little is known about the molecular basis for restriction of
oncogenes to certain target cells and differential cellular context-specific
requirements for oncogenic transformation between infant and adult leukemias.
Understanding cell type-specific interplay of signaling pathways and oncogenes is
essential for developing targeted cancer therapies. Here, we address the vexing
issue of how developmental restriction is achieved in Down syndrome acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL), characterized by the triad of fetal origin, 
mutated GATA1 (GATA1s), and trisomy 21. We demonstrate overactivity of
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling in authentic human DS-AMKL and in a
DS-AMKL mouse model generated through retroviral insertional mutagenesis. Fetal
but not adult megakaryocytic progenitors are dependent on this pathway. GATA1
restricts IGF-mediated activation of the E2F transcription network to coordinate 
proliferation and differentiation. Failure of a direct GATA1-E2F interaction in
mutated GATA1s converges with overactive IGF signaling to promote cellular
transformation of DS fetal progenitors, revealing a complex, fetal stage-specific
regulatory network. Our study underscores context-dependent requirements during
oncogenesis, and explains resistance to transformation of ostensibly similar
adult progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2912563
PMID: 20679399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 8;285(41):31087-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R110.159079. Epub 2010
Jul 29.

GATA switches as developmental drivers.

Bresnick EH(1), Lee HY, Fujiwara T, Johnson KD, Keles S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pharmacology, Paul Carbone
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA. ehbresni@wisc.edu

Transcriptional networks orchestrate complex developmental processes. Such
networks are commonly instigated by master regulators of development.
Considerable progress has been made in elucidating GATA factor-dependent genetic 
networks that control blood cell development. GATA-2 is required for the genesis 
and/or function of hematopoietic stem cells, whereas GATA-1 drives the
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors into a subset of the blood cell
lineages. GATA-1 directly represses Gata2 transcription, and this involves
GATA-1-mediated displacement of GATA-2 from chromatin, a process termed a GATA
switch. GATA switches occur at numerous loci with critical functions, indicating 
that they are widely utilized developmental control tools.

PMCID: PMC2951181
PMID: 20670937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 10;107(32):14199-204. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002494107. Epub 2010 Jul 26.

Immune-related zinc finger gene ZFAT is an essential transcriptional regulator
for hematopoietic differentiation in blood islands.

Tsunoda T(1), Takashima Y, Tanaka Y, Fujimoto T, Doi K, Hirose Y, Koyanagi M,
Yoshida Y, Okamura T, Kuroki M, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, and Center for Advanced
Molecular Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.

TAL1 plays pivotal roles in vascular and hematopoietic developments through the
complex with LMO2 and GATA1. Hemangioblasts, which have a differentiation
potential for both endothelial and hematopoietic lineages, arise in the primitive
streak and migrate into the yolk sac to form blood islands, where primitive
hematopoiesis occurs. ZFAT (a zinc-finger gene in autoimmune thyroid disease
susceptibility region/an immune-related transcriptional regulator containing 18
C(2)H(2)-type zinc-finger domains and one AT-hook) was originally identified as
an immune-related transcriptional regulator containing 18 C(2)H(2)-type
zinc-finger domains and one AT-hook, and is highly conserved among species. ZFAT 
is thought to be a critical transcription factor involved in immune-regulation
and apoptosis; however, developmental roles for ZFAT remain unknown. Here we show
that Zfat-deficient (Zfat(-/-)) mice are embryonic-lethal, with impaired
differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells in blood islands, where ZFAT is
exactly expressed. Expression levels of Tal1, Lmo2, and Gata1 in Zfat(-/-) yolk
sacs are much reduced compared with those of wild-type mice, and ChIP-PCR
analysis revealed that ZFAT binds promoter regions for these genes in vivo.
Furthermore, profound reduction in TAL1, LMO2, and GATA1 protein expressions are 
observed in Zfat(-/-) blood islands. Taken together, these results suggest that
ZFAT is indispensable for mouse embryonic development and functions as a critical
transcription factor for primitive hematopoiesis through direct-regulation of
Tal1, Lmo2, and Gata1. Elucidation of ZFAT functions in hematopoiesis might lead 
to a better understanding of transcriptional networks in differentiation and
cellular programs of hematopoietic lineage and provide useful information for
applied medicine in stem cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC2922575
PMID: 20660741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Exp Med. 2010 Aug 2;207(8):1647-60. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091022. Epub 2010 Jul
19.

Sulfatase modifying factor 1-mediated fibroblast growth factor signaling primes
hematopoietic multilineage development.

Buono M(1), Visigalli I, Bergamasco R, Biffi A, Cosma MP.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, 80134 Naples, Italy.

Self-renewal and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are balanced 
by the concerted activities of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF), Wnt, and Notch
pathways, which are tuned by enzyme-mediated remodeling of heparan sulfate
proteoglycans (HSPGs). Sulfatase modifying factor 1 (SUMF1) activates the Sulf1
and Sulf2 sulfatases that remodel the HSPGs, and is mutated in patients with
multiple sulfatase deficiency. Here, we show that the FGF signaling pathway is
constitutively activated in Sumf1(-/-) HSCs and hematopoietic stem progenitor
cells (HSPCs). These cells show increased p-extracellular signal-regulated kinase
levels, which in turn promote beta-catenin accumulation. Constitutive activation 
of FGF signaling results in a block in erythroid differentiation at the
chromatophilic erythroblast stage, and of B lymphocyte differentiation at the
pro-B cell stage. A reduction in mature myeloid cells and an aberrant development
of T lymphocytes are also seen. These defects are rescued in vivo by blocking the
FGF pathway in Sumf1(-/-) mice. Transplantation of Sumf1(-/-) HSPCs into
wild-type mice reconstituted the phenotype of the donors, suggesting a cell
autonomous defect. These data indicate that Sumf1 controls HSPC differentiation
and hematopoietic lineage development through FGF and Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC2916128
PMID: 20643830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Immunogenetics. 2010 Aug;62(8):543-59. doi: 10.1007/s00251-010-0460-1. Epub 2010 
Jul 8.

A molecule in teleost fish, related with human MHC-encoded G6F, has a cytoplasmic
tail with ITAM and marks the surface of thrombocytes and in some fishes also of
erythrocytes.

Ohashi K(1), Takizawa F, Tokumaru N, Nakayasu C, Toda H, Fischer U, Moritomo T,
Hashimoto K, Nakanishi T, Dijkstra JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa,
Japan.

In teleost fish, a novel gene G6F-like was identified, encoding a type I
transmembrane molecule with four extracellular Ig-like domains and a cytoplasmic 
tail with putative tyrosine phosphorylation motifs including YxN and an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM). G6F-like maps to a teleost
genomic region where stretches corresponding to human chromosomes 6p (with the
MHC), 12p (with CD4 and LAG-3), and 19q are tightly linked. This genomic
organization resembles the ancestral "Ur-MHC" proposed for the jawed vertebrate
ancestor. The deduced G6F-like molecule shows sequence similarity with members of
the CD4/LAG-3 family and with the human major histocompatibility complex-encoded 
thrombocyte marker G6F. Despite some differences in molecular organization,
teleost G6F-like and tetrapod G6F seem orthologous as they map to similar genomic
location, share typical motifs in transmembrane and cytoplasmic regions, and are 
both expressed by thrombocytes/platelets. In the crucian carps goldfish
(Carassius auratus auratus) and ginbuna (Carassius auratus langsdorfii), G6F-like
was found expressed not only by thrombocytes but also by erythrocytes, supporting
that erythroid and thromboid cells in teleost fish form a hematopoietic lineage
like they do in mammals. The ITAM-bearing of G6F-like suggests that the molecule 
plays an important role in cell activation, and G6F-like expression by
erythrocytes suggests that these cells have functional overlap potential with
thrombocytes.

PMID: 20614118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Genet Metab. 2010 Sep;101(1):81-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.05.014. Epub
2010 Jun 9.

Novel transcriptional regulatory element in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene
intron 8.

Stojiljkovic M(1), Zukic B, Tosic N, Karan-Djurasevic T, Spasovski V, Nikcevic G,
Pavlovic S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of
Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe 444a, Belgrade, Serbia. maja.stojiljkovic@imgge.bg.ac.rs

We present the first transcriptional regulatory element found in a PAH gene
intron. The element is located in the PAH gene intron 8, acts as an enhancer
specifically in the hepatoma cell line, and binds GATA-1 transcription factor.
Herein the presented data could unlock a new area for the analysis of PAH gene
expression and could contribute to refining genotype-phenotype correlation.

PMID: 20599406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 3;285(36):28064-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.096909. Epub 2010
Jun 28.

Sumoylation regulates interaction of FOG1 with C-terminal-binding protein (CTBP).

Snow JW(1), Kim J, Currie CR, Xu J, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Erythropoietic and megakaryocytic programs are specified from multipotential
progenitors by the transcription factor GATA1. FOG1, a GATA1-interaction partner,
is critical for GATA1 function in several contexts by bringing multiple complexes
into association with GATA1 to facilitate activation or repression of target
genes. To further elucidate regulation of these associations by cellular and
extracellular cues, we examined FOG1 for post-translational modifications. We
found that FOG1 is SUMOylated and phosphorylated in erythroid cells in a
differentiation-dependent manner. Removal of the SUMOylation sites in FOG1 does
not impair nuclear localization, protein stability, or chromatin occupancy.
However, SUMOylation of FOG1 modulates interactions with C-terminal binding
protein family members, specifically promoting CTBP1 binding. Phosphorylation of 
FOG1 modulates SUMOylation and, therefore, indirectly regulates the CTBP
interaction. Post-translational modification of FOG1 may contribute to control of
co-occupancy by CTBP family members, the NuRD complex, and GATA1 at
differentially regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC2934671
PMID: 20587419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Thromb Haemost. 2010 Oct;8(10):2252-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.03970.x.

Anagrelide represses GATA-1 and FOG-1 expression without interfering with
thrombopoietin receptor signal transduction.

Ahluwalia M(1), Donovan H, Singh N, Butcher L, Erusalimsky JD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wales Institute, Cardiff School of Health Sciences, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND:  Anagrelide is a selective inhibitor of megakaryocytopoiesis used to 
treat thrombocytosis in patients with chronic myeloproliferative disorders. The
effectiveness of anagrelide in lowering platelet counts is firmly established,
but its primary mechanism of action remains elusive.
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS:  Here, we have evaluated whether anagrelide interferes
with the major signal transduction cascades stimulated by thrombopoietin in the
hematopoietic cell line UT-7/mpl and in cultured CD34(+) -derived human
hematopoietic cells. In addition, we have used quantitative mRNA expression
analysis to assess whether the drug affects the levels of known transcription
factors that control megakaryocytopoiesis.
RESULTS:  In UT-7/mpl cells, anagrelide (1µm) did not interfere with MPL-mediated
signaling as monitored by its lack of effect on JAK2 phosphorylation. Similarly, 
the drug did not affect the phosphorylation of STAT3, ERK1/2 or AKT in either
UT-7/mpl cells or primary hematopoietic cells. In contrast, during
thrombopoietin-induced megakaryocytic differentiation of normal hematopoietic
cultures, anagrelide (0.3µm) reduced the rise in the mRNA levels of the
transcription factors GATA-1 and FOG-1 as well as those of the downstream genes
encoding FLI-1, NF-E2, glycoprotein IIb and MPL. However, the drug showed no
effect on GATA-2 or RUNX-1 mRNA expression. Furthermore, anagrelide did not
diminish the rise in GATA-1 and FOG-1 expression during erythropoietin-stimulated
erythroid differentiation. Cilostamide, an exclusive and equipotent
phosphodiesterase III (PDEIII) inhibitor, did not alter the expression of these
genes.
CONCLUSIONS:  Anagrelide suppresses megakaryocytopoiesis by reducing the
expression levels of GATA-1 and FOG-1 via a PDEIII-independent mechanism that is 
differentiation context-specific and does not involve inhibition of MPL-mediated 
early signal transduction events.

© 2010 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 20586925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Blood. 2010 Sep 30;116(13):2356-64. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-272252. Epub 2010 
Jun 22.

Multiple functions of Ldb1 required for beta-globin activation during erythroid
differentiation.

Song SH(1), Kim A, Ragoczy T, Bender MA, Groudine M, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Ldb1 and erythroid partners SCL, GATA-1, and LMO2 form a complex that is required
to establish spatial proximity between the ß-globin locus control region and gene
and for transcription activation during erythroid differentiation. Here we show
that Ldb1 controls gene expression at multiple levels. Ldb1 stabilizes its
erythroid complex partners on ß-globin chromatin, even though it is not one of
the DNA-binding components. In addition, Ldb1 is necessary for enrichment of key 
transcriptional components in the locus, including P-TEFb, which phosphorylates
Ser2 of the RNA polymerase C-terminal domain for efficient elongation.
Furthermore, reduction of Ldb1 results in the inability of the locus to migrate
away from the nuclear periphery, which is necessary to achieve robust
transcription of ß-globin in nuclear transcription factories. Ldb1 contributes
these critical functions at both embryonic and adult stages of globin gene
expression. These results implicate Ldb1 as a factor that facilitates nuclear
relocation for transcription activation.

PMCID: PMC2953839
PMID: 20570862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genome Res. 2010 Aug;20(8):1064-83. doi: 10.1101/gr.104935.110. Epub 2010 Jun 21.

Genome-wide identification of TAL1's functional targets: insights into its
mechanisms of action in primary erythroid cells.

Kassouf MT(1), Hughes JR, Taylor S, McGowan SJ, Soneji S, Green AL, Vyas P,
Porcher C.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Coordination of cellular processes through the establishment of tissue-specific
gene expression programs is essential for lineage maturation. The basic
helix-loop-helix hemopoietic transcriptional regulator TAL1 (formerly SCL) is
required for terminal differentiation of red blood cells. To gain insight into
TAL1 function and mechanisms of action in erythropoiesis, we performed
ChIP-sequencing and gene expression analyses from primary fetal liver erythroid
cells. We show that TAL1 coordinates expression of genes in most known red
cell-specific processes. The majority of TAL1's genomic targets require direct
DNA-binding activity. However, one-fifth of TAL1's target sequences, mainly among
those showing high affinity for TAL1, can recruit the factor independently of its
DNA binding activity. An unbiased DNA motif search of sequences bound by TAL1
identified CAGNTG as TAL1-preferred E-box motif in erythroid cells. Novel motifs 
were also characterized that may help distinguish activated from repressed genes 
and suggest a new mechanism by which TAL1 may be recruited to DNA. Finally,
analysis of recruitment of GATA1, a protein partner of TAL1, to sequences
occupied by TAL1 suggests that TAL1's binding is necessary prior or simultaneous 
to that of GATA1. This work provides the framework to study regulatory networks
leading to erythroid terminal maturation and to model mechanisms of action of
tissue-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2909570
PMID: 20566737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Jul 1;110(4):866-74. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22597.

Over-expression of EDAG in the myeloid cell line 32D: induction of GATA-1
expression and erythroid/megakaryocytic phenotype.

Ding YL(1), Xu CW, Wang ZD, Zhan YQ, Li W, Xu WX, Yu M, Ge CH, Li CY, Yang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

Erythroid differentiation-associated gene (EDAG), a hematopoietic tissue-specific
transcription regulator, plays a key role in maintaining the homeostasis of
hematopoietic lineage commitment. However, the mechanism and genes regulated by
EDAG remain unknown. In this study, we showed that overexpression of EDAG in a
myeloid cell line 32D led to an erythroid phenotype with increased number of
benzidine-positive cells and up-regulation of erythroid specific surface marker
TER119. The megakaryocytic specific marker CD61 was also induced significantly.
Using a genome-wide microarray analysis and a twofold change cutoff, we
identified 332 genes with reduced expression and 288 genes with increased
expression. Among up-regulation genes, transcription factor GATA-1 and its target
genes including EKLF, NF-E2, Gfi-1b, hemogen, SCL, hemoglobin alpha, beta and
megakaryocytic gene GPIX were increased. Silencing of EDAG by RNA interference in
K562 cells resulted in down-regulation of these genes. Taken together, EDAG
functions as a positive regulator of erythroid/megakaryocytic differentiation in 
32D cells associated with the induction of GATA-1 and its target genes.

J. Cell. Biochem. 110: 866-874, 2010. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20564185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jun 1;9(11):2061. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Coordinating red cell differentiation with cell cycle arrest: GATA-1 activation
of p21.

Goldfarb AN.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 May 15;9(10):1972-80.

PMID: 20559028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Blood. 2010 Sep 23;116(12):2141-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-264143. Epub 2010 
Jun 16.

Vegf regulates embryonic erythroid development through Gata1 modulation.

Drogat B(1), Kalucka J, Gutiérrez L, Hammad H, Goossens S, Farhang Ghahremani M, 
Bartunkova S, Haigh K, Deswarte K, Nyabi O, Naessens M, Ferrara N, Klingmüller U,
Lambrecht BN, Nagy A, Philipsen S, Haigh JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Cell Biology Unit, Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB,
Ghent, Belgium.

To determine the role of vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf) in embryonic
erythroid development we have deleted or overexpressed Vegf specifically in the
erythroid lineage using the EpoR-iCre transgenic line in combination with
Cre/loxP conditional gain and loss of function Vegf alleles. ROSA26
promoter-based expression of the Vegf(164) isoform in the early erythroid lineage
resulted in a differentiation block of primitive erythroid progenitor (EryP)
development and a partial block in definitive erythropoiesis between the
erythroid burst-forming unit and erythroid colony-forming unit stages. Decreased 
mRNA expression levels of the key erythroid transcription factor Gata1 were
causally linked to this phenotype. Conditional deletion of Vegf within the
erythroid lineage was associated with increased Gata1 levels and increased
erythroid differentiation. Expression of a ROSA26-based GATA2 transgene rescued
Gata1 mRNA levels and target genes and restored erythroid differentiation in our 
Vegf gain of function model. These results demonstrate that Vegf modulates Gata1 
expression levels in vivo and provides new molecular insight into Vegf's ability 
to modulate erythropoiesis.

PMID: 20554972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Aug 15;45(2):140-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2010.05.006.
Epub 2010 Jun 12.

Binding patterns of BCL11A in the globin and GATA1 loci and characterization of
the BCL11A fetal hemoglobin locus.

Jawaid K(1), Wahlberg K, Thein SL, Best S.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, The James Black Centre, UK.

BCL11A is a major regulator of fetal hemoglobin production. Reduced levels of
BCL11A have been shown to delay switching from fetal to adult hemoglobin,
suggesting that it acts as a stage-specific repressor of gamma globin expression.
We have carried out a survey of BCL11A binding in the globin, BCL11A and GATA1
loci by ChIP-on-chip analysis in primary human erythroid cells. We found strong
occupancy in both alpha and beta globin upstream regulatory regions as well as in
regions involved in switching and hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin.
Genetic studies have identified a restricted 14kb region in BCL11A intron 2 as
being highly associated with HbF levels. Strong GATA-1 binding and acetylated
histone H3 was found in this area, which could be indicative of a regulatory
element, changes in which might be responsible for the overall regulation of
BCL11A. We also observed BCL11A and GATA-1 binding in a known auto-regulatory
promoter element of the GATA1 locus.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20542454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2010;152 Suppl 1:79-82. doi: 10.1159/000312130. Epub
2010 Jun 4.

Eosinophils are required for the induction of bronchial hyperresponsiveness in a 
Th transfer model of BALB/c background.

Ohtomo T(1), Kaminuma O, Yamada J, Kitamura N, Abe A, Kobayashi N, Suko M, Mori
A.

Author information: 
(1)National Hospital Organization, Sagamihara National Hospital, Clinical
Research Center for Allergy and Rheumatology, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Helper T (Th) cells are deeply involved in the pathophysiology of
bronchial asthma, such as eosinophilic inflammation, bronchial
hyperresponsiveness (BHR), airflow limitation and remodeling. It is still unclear
whether Th cells contribute to BHR independently of eosinophilic inflammation.
The double GATA (dblGATA) site is a high-affinity GATA-binding site in the GATA-1
promoter. dblGATA site-deficient (Delta dblGATA) mice lack eosinophils.
METHOD: Ovalbumin (OVA)-reactive Th clones were transferred into Delta dblGATA
and wild-type (WT) mice of BALB/c background. The number of eosinophils in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and bronchial responsiveness to methacholine 
were examined after OVA challenge.
RESULTS: The number of BALF eosinophils was significantly increased in WT mice,
but not detectable in Delta dblGATA mice. BHR was also induced in WT mice, but
significantly attenuated in Delta dblGATA mice.
CONCLUSION: Eosinophils are involved in T-cell-mediated BHR.

(c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20523068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genome Res. 2010 Aug;20(8):1052-63. doi: 10.1101/gr.106575.110. Epub 2010 May 27.

A global role for KLF1 in erythropoiesis revealed by ChIP-seq in primary
erythroid cells.

Tallack MR(1), Whitington T, Yuen WS, Wainwright EN, Keys JR, Gardiner BB,
Nourbakhsh E, Cloonan N, Grimmond SM, Bailey TL, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia.

Erratum in
    Genome Res. 2010 Dec;20(12):1748.

KLF1 regulates a diverse suite of genes to direct erythroid cell differentiation 
from bipotent progenitors. To determine the local cis-regulatory contexts and
transcription factor networks in which KLF1 operates, we performed KLF1 ChIP-seq 
in the mouse. We found at least 945 sites in the genome of E14.5 fetal liver
erythroid cells which are occupied by endogenous KLF1. Many of these recovered
sites reside in erythroid gene promoters such as Hbb-b1, but the majority are
distant to any known gene. Our data suggests KLF1 directly regulates most aspects
of terminal erythroid differentiation including production of alpha- and
beta-globin protein chains, heme biosynthesis, coordination of proliferation and 
anti-apoptotic pathways, and construction of the red cell membrane and
cytoskeleton by functioning primarily as a transcriptional activator.
Additionally, we suggest new mechanisms for KLF1 cooperation with other
transcription factors, in particular the erythroid transcription factor GATA1, to
maintain homeostasis in the erythroid compartment.

PMCID: PMC2909569
PMID: 20508144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Apr;44(4):439-47. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0307OC. 
Epub 2010 May 27.

Hypoxia up-regulates expression of hemoglobin in alveolar epithelial cells.

Grek CL(1), Newton DA, Spyropoulos DD, Baatz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. baatzje@musc.edu

Alveolar epithelial cells are directly exposed to acute and chronic fluctuations 
in alveolar oxygen tension. Previously, we found that the oxygen-binding protein 
hemoglobin is expressed in alveolar Type II cells (ATII). Here, we report that
ATII cells also express a number of highly specific transcription factors and
other genes normally associated with hemoglobin biosynthesis in erythroid
precursors. Because hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) were shown to play a role in
hypoxia-induced changes in ATII homeostasis, we hypothesized that the
hypoxia-induced increase in intracellular HIF exerts a concomitant effect on ATII
hemoglobin expression. Treatment of cells from the ATII-like immortalized mouse
lung epithelial cell line-15 (MLE-15) with hypoxia for 20 hours resulted in
dramatic increases in cellular levels of HIF-2a protein and parallel significant 
increases in hemoglobin messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression, as compared 
with that of control cells cultured in normoxia. Significant increases in the
mRNA of globin-associated transcription factors were also observed, and RNA
interference (RNAi) experiments demonstrated that the expression of hemoglobin is
at least partially dependent on the cellular levels of globin-associated
transcription factor isoform 1 (GATA-1). Conversely, levels of prosurfactant
proteins B and C significantly decreased in the same cells after exposure to
hypoxia. The treatment of MLE-15 cells cultured in normoxia with prolyl
4-hydroxylase inhibitors, which mimic the effects of hypoxia, resulted in
increases of hemoglobin and decreases of surfactant proteins. Taken together,
these results suggest a relationship between hypoxia, HIFs, and the expression of
hemoglobin, and imply that hemoglobin may be involved in the oxygen-sensing
pathway in alveolar epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3095918
PMID: 20508070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Cycle. 2010 May 15;9(10):1877. Epub 2010 May 15.

Erythroid maturation and proliferation arrest: the GATA-1 connection: comment on:
Papetti M. Cell cycle 2010; 9:1972-80.

Friedman AD.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 May 15;9(10):1972-80.

PMID: 20505326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cell Cycle. 2010 May 15;9(10):1972-80. Epub 2010 May 15.

GATA-1 directly regulates p21 gene expression during erythroid differentiation.

Papetti M(1), Wontakal SN, Stopka T, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Cell Biology, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Jun 1;9(11):2061.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 May 15;9(10):1877.

Lineage-determination transcription factors coordinate cell differentiation and
proliferation by controlling the synthesis of lineage-specific gene products as
well as cell cycle regulators. GATA-1 is a master regulator of erythropoiesis.
Its role in regulating erythroid-specific genes has been extensively studied,
whereas its role in controlling genes that regulate cell proliferation is less
understood. Ectopic expression of GATA-1 in erythroleukemia cells releases the
block to their differentiation and leads to terminal cell division. An early
event in reprogramming the erythroleukemia cells is induction of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21. Remarkably, ectopic expression of p21 also
induces the erythroleukemia cells to differentiate. We now report that GATA-1
directly regulates transcription of the p21 gene in both erythroleukemia cells
and normal erythroid progenitors. Using reporter, electrophoretic mobility shift,
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show that GATA-1 stimulates p21 gene
transcription by binding to consensus binding sites in the upstream region of the
p21 gene promoter. This activity is also dependent on a binding site for
Sp1/KLF-like factors near the transcription start site. Our findings indicate
that p21 is a crucial downstream gene target and effector of GATA-1 during red
blood cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3019278
PMID: 20495378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 May 20;11:38. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-38.

The leukemia associated ETO nuclear repressor gene is regulated by the GATA-1
transcription factor in erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.

Ajore R(1), Dhanda RS, Gullberg U, Olsson I.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Hematology, C14, BMC, S-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) nuclear co-repressor gene belongs to the
ETO homologue family also containing Myeloid Translocation Gene on chromosome 16 
(MTG16) and myeloid translocation Gene-Related protein 1 (MTGR1). By chromosomal 
translocations ETO and MTG16 become parts of fusion proteins characteristic of
morphological variants of acute myeloid leukemia. Normal functions of ETO
homologues have as yet not been examined. The goal of this work was to identify
structural and functional promoter elements upstream of the coding sequence of
the ETO gene in order to explore lineage-specific hematopoietic expression and
get hints to function.
RESULTS: A putative proximal ETO promoter was identified within 411 bp upstream
of the transcription start site. Strong ETO promoter activity was specifically
observed upon transfection of a promoter reporter construct into
erythroid/megakaryocytic cells, which have endogeneous ETO gene activity. An
evolutionary conserved region of 228 bp revealed potential cis-elements involved 
in transcription of ETO. Disruption of the evolutionary conserved GATA -636
consensus binding site repressed transactivation and disruption of the ETS1 -705 
consensus binding site enhanced activity of the ETO promoter. The promoter was
stimulated by overexpression of GATA-1 into erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay with erythroid/megakaryocytic cells showed
specific binding of GATA-1 to the GATA -636 site. Furthermore, results from
chromatin immunoprecipitation showed GATA-1 binding in vivo to the conserved
region of the ETO promoter containing the -636 site. The results suggest that the
GATA -636 site may have a role in activation of the ETO gene activity in cells
with erythroid/megakaryocytic potential. Leukemia associated AML1-ETO strongly
suppressed an ETO promoter reporter in erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that the GATA-1 transcription factor binds and
transactivates the ETO proximal promoter in an erythroid/megakaryocytic-specific 
manner. Thus, trans-acting factors that are essential in erythroid/megakaryocytic
differentiation govern ETO expression.

PMCID: PMC2882371
PMID: 20487545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 May 6;6(5):e1000771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000771.

Modeling reveals bistability and low-pass filtering in the network module
determining blood stem cell fate.

Narula J(1), Smith AM, Gottgens B, Igoshin OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.

Combinatorial regulation of gene expression is ubiquitous in eukaryotes with
multiple inputs converging on regulatory control elements. The dynamic properties
of these elements determine the functionality of genetic networks regulating
differentiation and development. Here we propose a method to quantitatively
characterize the regulatory output of distant enhancers with a biophysical
approach that recursively determines free energies of protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions from experimental analysis of transcriptional reporter
libraries. We apply this method to model the Scl-Gata2-Fli1 triad-a network
module important for cell fate specification of hematopoietic stem cells. We show
that this triad module is inherently bistable with irreversible transitions in
response to physiologically relevant signals such as Notch, Bmp4 and Gata1 and we
use the model to predict the sensitivity of the network to mutations. We also
show that the triad acts as a low-pass filter by switching between steady states 
only in response to signals that persist for longer than a minimum duration
threshold. We have found that the auto-regulation loops connecting the
slow-degrading Scl to Gata2 and Fli1 are crucial for this low-pass filtering
property. Taken together our analysis not only reveals new insights into
hematopoietic stem cell regulatory network functionality but also provides a
novel and widely applicable strategy to incorporate experimental measurements
into dynamical network models.

PMCID: PMC2865510
PMID: 20463872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Nov;225(2):490-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22228.

CXCR4-independent rescue of the myeloproliferative defect of the Gata1low
myelofibrosis mouse model by Aplidin.

Verrucci M(1), Pancrazzi A, Aracil M, Martelli F, Guglielmelli P, Zingariello M, 
Ghinassi B, D'Amore E, Jimeno J, Vannucchi AM, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

The discovery of JAK2 mutations in Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative
neoplasms has prompted investigators to evaluate mutation-targeted treatments to 
restore hematopoietic cell functions in these diseases. However, the results of
the first clinical trials with JAK2 inhibitors are not as promising as expected, 
prompting a search for additional drugable targets to treat these disorders. In
this paper, we used the hypomorphic Gata1(low) mouse model of primary
myelofibrosis (PMF), the most severe of these neoplasms, to test the hypothesis
that defective marrow hemopoiesis and development of extramedullary hematopoiesis
in myelofibrosis is due to insufficient p27(Kip1) activity and is treatable by
Aplidin, a cyclic depsipeptide that activates p27(Kip1) in several cancer cells. 
Aplidin restored expression of Gata1 and p27(Kip1) in Gata1(low) hematopoietic
cells, proliferation of marrow progenitor cells in vitro and maturation of
megakaryocytes in vivo (reducing TGF-beta/VEGF levels released in the
microenvironment by immature Gata1(low) megakaryocytes). Microvessel density,
fibrosis, bone growth, and marrow cellularity were normal in Aplidin-treated mice
and extramedullary hematopoiesis did not develop in liver although CXCR4
expression in Gata1(low) progenitor cells remained low. These results indicate
that Aplidin effectively alters the natural history of myelofibrosis in
Gata1(low) mice and suggest this drug as candidate for clinical evaluation in
PMF.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3780594
PMID: 20458749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Exp Med. 2010 Jun 7;207(6):1183-95. doi: 10.1084/jem.20092215. Epub 2010 May
10.

SENP1-mediated GATA1 deSUMOylation is critical for definitive erythropoiesis.

Yu L(1), Ji W, Zhang H, Renda MJ, He Y, Lin S, Cheng EC, Chen H, Krause DS, Min
W.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Vascular Biology and Therapeutics, Stem Cell
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) modification of proteins (SUMOylation) and
deSUMOylation have emerged as important regulatory mechanisms for protein
function. SENP1 (SUMO-specific protease) deconjugates SUMOs from modified
proteins. We have created SENP1 knockout (KO) mice based on a Cre-loxP system.
Global deletion of SENP1 (SENP1 KO) causes anemia and embryonic lethality between
embryonic day 13.5 and postnatal day 1, correlating with erythropoiesis defects
in the fetal liver. Bone marrow transplantation of SENP1 KO fetal liver cells to 
irradiated adult recipients confers erythropoiesis defects. Protein analyses show
that the GATA1 and GATA1-dependent genes are down-regulated in fetal liver of
SENP1 KO mice. This down-regulation correlates with accumulation of a SUMOylated 
form of GATA1. We further show that SENP1 can directly deSUMOylate GATA1,
regulating GATA1-dependent gene expression and erythropoiesis by in vitro assays.
Moreover, we demonstrate that GATA1 SUMOylation alters its DNA binding, reducing 
its recruitment to the GATA1-responsive gene promoter. Collectively, we conclude 
that SENP1 promotes GATA1 activation and subsequent erythropoiesis by
deSUMOylating GATA1.

PMCID: PMC2882842
PMID: 20457756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 25;107(21):9783-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004297107. Epub 2010 May 6.

Methylation and silencing of miRNA-124 by EVI1 and self-renewal exhaustion of
hematopoietic stem cells in murine myelodysplastic syndrome.

Dickstein J(1), Senyuk V, Premanand K, Laricchia-Robbio L, Xu P, Cattaneo F,
Fazzina R, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Jerome.Dickstein@uchospitals.edu

By expressing EVI1 in murine bone marrow (BM), we previously described a
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) model characterized by pancytopenia,
dysmegakaryopoiesis, dyserythropoiesis, and BM failure. The mice invariably died 
11-14 months after BM transplantation (BMT). Here, we show that a double point
mutant EVI1-(1+6Mut), unable to bind Gata1, abrogates the onset of MDS in the
mouse and re-establishes normal megakaryopoiesis, erythropoiesis, BM function,
and peripheral blood profiles. These normal features were maintained in the
reconstituted mice until the study was ended at 21 months after BMT. We also
report that EVI1 deregulates several genes that control cell division and cell
self-renewal. In striking contrast, these genes are normalized in the presence of
the EVI1 mutant. Moreover, EVI1, but not the EVI1 mutant, seemingly deregulates
these cellular processes by altering miRNA expression. In particular, the
silencing of miRNA-124 by DNA methylation is associated with EVI1 expression, but
not that of the EVI1 mutant, and appears to play a key role in the up-regulation 
of cell division in murine BM cells and in the hematopoietic cell line 32Dcl3.
The results presented here demonstrate that EVI1 induces MDS in the mouse through
two major pathways, both of which require the interaction of EVI1 with other
factors: one, results from EVI1-Gata1 interaction, which deregulates
erythropoiesis and leads to fatal anemia, whereas the other occurs by interaction
of EVI1 with unidentified factors causing perturbation of the cell cycle and
self-renewal, as a consequence of silencing miRNA-124 by EVI1 and, ultimately,
ensues in BM failure.

PMCID: PMC2906858
PMID: 20448201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;30(14):3460-70. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00001-10. Epub 2010 May 
3.

Role of the GATA-1/FOG-1/NuRD pathway in the expression of human beta-like globin
genes.

Miccio A(1), Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The human beta-globin genes are expressed in a developmentally controlled
fashion. Studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying the stage-specific
regulation of globin genes have been fueled by the clinical benefit of elevated
fetal gamma-globin expression in patients with sickle cell anemia and
thalassemia. Recent reports suggested a role of the hematopoietic transcription
factor GATA-1, its cofactor FOG-1, and the associated chromatin remodeling
complex NuRD in the developmental silencing of HBG1 and HBG2 gene expression. To 
examine whether FOG-1 via NuRD controls HBG1 and HBG2 silencing in vivo, we
created mice in which the FOG-1/NuRD complex is disrupted (A. Miccio et al., EMBO
J. 29:442-456, 2010) and crossed these with animals carrying the entire human
beta-globin gene locus as a transgene. We found that the FOG-1/NuRD interaction
is dispensable for the silencing of human HBG1 and HBG2 expression. In addition, 
mutant animals displayed normal silencing of the endogenous embryonic globin
genes. In contrast, a significant reduction of adult-type human and murine globin
gene expression was found in adult bone marrows of mutant animals. These results 
suggest that, unexpectedly, NuRD is required for FOG-1-dependent activation of
adult-type globin gene expression but is dispensable for human gamma-globin
silencing in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2897567
PMID: 20439494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2010 Sep-Oct;13(5):423-6. doi: 10.2350/09-11-0743-CR.1. Epub 
2010 Apr 29.

Myeloid proliferation without GATA1 mutations in a fetus with Down syndrome
presenting in utero as a pericardial effusion.

Rougemont AL(1), Makrythanasis P, Finci V, Billieux MH, Epiney M, McKee TA,
Nizetic D, Fokstuen S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pathology, Geneva University Hospitals, 1211 Geneva,
Switzerland. anne-laure.rougemont@hcuge.ch

An isolated pericardial effusion was observed during a routine prenatal
ultrasound in a fetus of 30 and 3/7 weeks gestation. Amniocentesis was performed 
and revealed a trisomy 21. After prenatal counseling, the parents opted for
termination of the pregnancy at 32 weeks. Postmortem examination confirmed the
presence of a pericardial effusion, without structural cardiac anomalies, and
showed the development of ascites and subcutaneous edema. Histological
examination showed an infiltrate of megakaryoblasts and irregular, dysplastic
megakaryocytes confined to the epicardium, the pericardial lymph nodes, and the
pancreas, consistent with a myeloid proliferation related to Down syndrome.
Sequencing of exons 2 and 3 of the GATA1 gene from the umbilical cord blood and
from megakaryoblast infiltrate showed no mutation. A high incidence of
chromosomal abnormalities, in particular trisomy 21, has been described in
fetuses with pericardial effusion. However, myeloid proliferation related to Down
syndrome without GATA1 mutations is extremely rare. To our knowledge, only one
such case has been reported to date. We present here a 2nd case, which further
supports the hypothesis that hyperproliferation of megakaryocytes in a subset of 
Down syndrome patients may be initiated by events other than GATA1 mutations.

PMID: 20429643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biotech Histochem. 2010 Apr 28;85(3):157-70. doi: 10.3109/10520290903149612.

Differential localization of P-selectin and von Willebrand factor during
megakaryocyte maturation.

Zingariello M(1), Fabucci ME, Bosco D, Migliaccio AR, Martelli F, Rana RA,
Zetterberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomorphology, University of Chieti, Chieti, Italy.

An important step in megakaryocyte maturation is the appropriate assembly of at
least two distinct subsets of alpha-granules. The mechanism that sorts the
alpha-granule components into distinct structures and mediates their release in
response to specific stimuli is now emerging. P-selectin and von Willebrand
factor are two proteins present in the alpha-granules that recognize P-selectin
glycoprotein ligand on neutrophils and collagen in the subendothelial matrix.
These proteins may play an important role in determining the differential release
of the alpha-granule contents in response to external stimuli. If P-selectin and 
von Willebrand factor are localized in the same or different alpha-granules is
not known. To clarify this question, we analyzed by immunoelectron microscopy the
localization of von Willebrand factor and P-selectin during the maturation of
wild-type and Gata1(low) megakaryocytes induced in vivo by treating animals with 
thrombopoietin. Gata1(low) is a hypomorphic mutation that blocks megakaryocyte
maturation, reduces the levels of von Willebrand factor expression and displaces 
P-selectin on the demarcation membrane system. The maturation block induced by
this mutation is partially rescued by treatment in vivo with thrombopoietin. In
immature megakaryocytes, both wild-type and Gata1(low), the two receptors were
co-localized in the same cytoplasmic structures. By contrast, the two proteins
were segregated to separate alpha-granule subsets as the megakaryocytes matured. 
These observations support the hypothesis that P-selectin and von Willebrand
factor may ensure differential release of the alpha-granule content in response
to external stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3700322
PMID: 20426698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Clin Pathol. 2010 May;63(5):471-2. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.075382.

GATA1 mutations are not a hallmark of acute myeloid leukaemia with t(8;21).

Hoeller S, Bihl MP, Arber C, Dirnhofer S, Tzankov A.

PMID: 20418238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Zebrafish. 2010 Mar;7(1):61-8. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2009.0643.

A chemical genetic screen in zebrafish for pathways interacting with cdx4 in
primitive hematopoiesis.

Paik EJ(1), de Jong JL, Pugach E, Opara P, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

cdx4, a caudal-related homeodomain-containing transcription factor, functions as 
a regulator of hox genes, thereby playing a critical role in anterior-posterior
(A-P) patterning during embryogenesis. In zebrafish, homozygous deletion of the
cdx4 gene results in a mutant phenotype known as kugelig, with aberrant A-P
patterning and severe anemia characterized by decreased gata1 expression in the
posterior lateral mesoderm. To identify pathways that interact with cdx4 during
primitive hematopoiesis, we conducted a chemical genetic screen in the cdx4
mutant background for compounds that increase gata1 expression in cdx4 mutants.
Among 2640 compounds that were tested, we discovered two compounds that rescued
gata1 expression in the cdx4-mutant embryos. The strongest rescue was observed
with bergapten, a psoralen compound found in bergamont oil. Another member of the
psoralen family, 8-methoxypsoralen, was also found to rescue gata1 expression in 
cdx4-mutant embryos. The psoralen compounds also disrupted normal A-P patterning 
of embryos. These compounds modify the cdx4-mutant phenotype and will help
elucidate signaling pathways that act downstream or parallel to the cdx4-hox
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2897134
PMID: 20415644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Blood. 2010 Apr 22;115(16):3415-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-267930.

Role of GATA-1s in early hematopoiesis and differences between alternative
splicing in human and murine GATA-1.

Halsey C, Tunstall O, Gibson B, Roberts I, Graham G.

Comment on
    Blood. 2009 Oct 22;114(17):3717-8.

PMID: 20413665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Blood. 2010 Jul 15;116(2):201-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-249557. Epub 2010 Apr
21.

Interaction of retinoic acid and scl controls primitive blood development.

de Jong JL(1), Davidson AJ, Wang Y, Palis J, Opara P, Pugach E, Daley GQ, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Hematopoietic development during embryogenesis involves the interaction of
extrinsic signaling pathways coupled to an intrinsic cell fate that is regulated 
by cell-specific transcription factors. Retinoic acid (RA) has been linked to
stem cell self-renewal in adults and also participates in yolk sac blood island
formation. Here, we demonstrate that RA decreases gata1 expression and blocks
primitive hematopoiesis in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos, while increasing
expression of the vascular marker, fli1. Treatment with an inhibitor of RA
biosynthesis or a retinoic acid receptor antagonist increases gata1(+) erythroid 
progenitors in the posterior mesoderm of wild-type embryos and anemic cdx4(-/-)
mutants, indicating a link between the cdx-hox signaling pathway and RA.
Overexpression of scl, a DNA binding protein necessary for hematopoietic
development, rescues the block of hematopoiesis induced by RA. We show that these
effects of RA and RA pathway inhibitors are conserved during primitive
hematopoiesis in murine yolk sac explant cultures and embryonic stem cell assays.
Taken together, these data indicate that RA inhibits the commitment of mesodermal
cells to hematopoietic fates, functioning downstream of cdx4 and upstream of scl.
Our studies establish a new connection between RA and scl during development that
may participate in stem cell self-renewal and hematopoietic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2910607
PMID: 20410509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Blood. 2010 Jul 8;116(1):85-96. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-241778. Epub 2010 Apr 
21.

HSP27 controls GATA-1 protein level during erythroid cell differentiation.

de Thonel A(1), Vandekerckhove J, Lanneau D, Selvakumar S, Courtois G, Hazoume A,
Brunet M, Maurel S, Hammann A, Ribeil JA, Zermati Y, Gabet AS, Boyes J, Solary E,
Hermine O, Garrido C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U866, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Burgundy, 7
boulevard Jeanne d'Arc,Dijon, France.

Heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) is a chaperone whose cellular expression increases 
in response to various stresses and protects the cell either by inhibiting
apoptotic cell death or by promoting the ubiquitination and proteasomal
degradation of specific proteins. Here, we show that globin transcription factor 
1 (GATA-1) is a client protein of HSP27. In 2 models of erythroid
differentiation; that is, in the human erythroleukemia cell line, K562 induced to
differentiate into erythroid cells on hemin exposure and CD34(+) human cells ex
vivo driven to erythroid differentiation in liquid culture, depletion of HSP27
provokes an accumulation of GATA-1 and impairs terminal maturation. More
specifically, we demonstrate that, in the late stages of the erythroid
differentiation program, HSP27 is phosphorylated in a p38-dependent manner,
enters the nucleus, binds to GATA-1, and induces its ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation, provided that the transcription factor is acetylated. We
conclude that HSP27 plays a role in the fine-tuning of terminal erythroid
differentiation through regulation of GATA-1 content and activity.

PMID: 20410505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Immunogenetics. 2010 Jul;62(7):421-9. doi: 10.1007/s00251-010-0444-1. Epub 2010
Apr 20.

Suppressive effects of transcription factor GATA-1 on cell type-specific gene
expression in dendritic cells.

Shimokawa N(1), Nishiyama C, Nakano N, Maeda K, Suzuki R, Hara M, Fukai T, Tokura
T, Miyajima H, Nakao A, Ogawa H, Okumura K.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.

To evaluate the effects of the transcription factor GATA-1 on determining cell
fate between dendritic cell (DC) and mast cell (MC) lineages, GATA-1 was
exogenously expressed in bone marrow-derived (BM) DCs. Exogenous expression of
GATA-1 by a retrovirus in BMDCs inhibited expression of CD11c, CD80, CD86, and
major histocompatibility complex class II with suppression of antigen-presenting 
ability and morphological changes toward granulocyte-like cells. Transcription of
MC proteases and c-kit was markedly upregulated by GATA-1. Expression of IRF-4
and -8 was markedly suppressed, whereas PU.1 mRNA level was not affected by
GATA-1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that recruitment of PU.1 on
the IRF-8 promoter was reduced in GATA-1-expressing DCs. These results indicate
that GATA-1 suppresses PU.1 function but not PU.1 transcription. Thus, GATA-1
appears to determine cell fate by regulating several cell-specific transcription 
factors.

PMID: 20405120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genes Dev. 2010 Apr 15;24(8):783-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.1897310.

Transcriptional silencing of {gamma}-globin by BCL11A involves long-range
interactions and cooperation with SOX6.

Xu J(1), Sankaran VG, Ni M, Menne TF, Puram RV, Kim W, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The developmental switch from human fetal (gamma) to adult (beta) hemoglobin
represents a clinically important example of developmental gene regulation. The
transcription factor BCL11A is a central mediator of gamma-globin silencing and
hemoglobin switching. Here we determine chromatin occupancy of BCL11A at the
human beta-globin locus and other genomic regions in vivo by high-resolution
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-chip analysis. BCL11A binds the upstream
locus control region (LCR), epsilon-globin, and the intergenic regions between
gamma-globin and delta-globin genes. A chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay
shows that BCL11A reconfigures the beta-globin cluster by modulating chromosomal 
loop formation. We also show that BCL11A and the HMG-box-containing transcription
factor SOX6 interact physically and functionally during erythroid maturation.
BCL11A and SOX6 co-occupy the human beta-globin cluster along with GATA1, and
cooperate in silencing gamma-globin transcription in adult human erythroid
progenitors. These findings collectively demonstrate that transcriptional
silencing of gamma-globin genes by BCL11A involves long-range interactions and
cooperation with SOX6. Our findings provide insight into the mechanism of BCL11A 
action and new clues for the developmental gene regulatory programs that function
at the beta-globin locus.

PMCID: PMC2854393
PMID: 20395365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2010;73(7):520-8. doi: 10.1080/15287390903523501.

Proteomic alterations in progeny of irradiated human liver cells.

Zuo YH(1), Wang XL, Li JG, Dang XH, Wang ZW, Zhang SP, Tong J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Radiation Medicine and Public Health, Medical College of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China.

This study was designed to characterize the differential protein expression in
the progeny of human liver cells surviving exposure to ionizing radiation. The
progeny of irradiated cells were derived from a human liver cell line exposed to 
0, 2, 4, or 6 Gy of (60)Co gamma-irradiation. Total protein of the cells was
extracted by two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) and analyzed with ImageMaster
2D Platinum software. In total, 42 differentially expressed proteins from the
progeny of irradiated cells were screened, of which 17 were identified by matrix 
assistant laser desorption ion-top flight-mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS)
analysis. There were 4 upregulated and 13 downregulated proteins detected. The
upregulated expression of two proteins, mitochondrial heat-shock 60-kD protein
(HSP60) and globin transcription factor 1 (GATA-1), was further confirmed by
immunoblotting. Database search revealed that these differentially expressed
proteins may function in cell cycle regulation, cytoskeleton maintenance, stress 
response, and tumor metastasis, indicating an effect of radiation-induced genomic
instability (RIGI) in the progeny of irradiated cells. Analysis on functional
roles of the screened proteins may provide insight into further mechanistic
investigations underlying molecular events induced by RIGI.

PMID: 20391132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Exp Hematol. 2010 Aug;38(8):685-95. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.03.019. Epub 2010 
Apr 8.

A potential activity of valproic acid in the stimulation of
interleukin-3-mediated megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis.

Liu B(1), Ohishi K, Yamamura K, Suzuki K, Monma F, Ino K, Nishii K, Masuya M,
Sekine T, Heike Y, Takaue Y, Katayama N.

Author information: 
(1)Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

Erratum in
    Exp Hematol. 2010 Sep;38(9):845. Nishii, Kazuhiro [added].

OBJECTIVE: Although the anticancer activities of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors have been studied, a role for HDAC in normal hematopoiesis has not
been clearly defined. Previous studies have shown that the potent HDAC inhibitor 
FK228 stimulates interleukin (IL)-3-mediated erythropoiesis. Here, we examined
whether the widely used valproic acid (VPA) affects megakaryopoiesis as well as
erythropoiesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CD34(+) cells were incubated in serum-free or
serum-containing cultures with cytokines, with or without VPA.
RESULTS: In the serum-free cultures containing IL-3+stem cell factor (SCF), VPA
significantly increased generation of CD61(+)GPA(-) megakaryocytic and a
CD61(+)GPA(+) mixture of megakaryocytic and erythroid precursors from CD34(+)
hematopoietic precursors at a pharmacological concentration (100 microg/mL). The 
increase in generation of megakaryocytic and erythroid precursors by VPA was
confirmed by replating cultured cells with thrombopoietin+SCF and
erythropoietin+SCF, respectively. VPA was as potent as FK228. In cultures with
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor+SCF, where CD61(-)GPA(+)
erythroid precursors were mostly developed, VPA mainly enhanced the generation of
CD61(-)GPA(+) erythroid precursors. In serum-containing cultures, only low
numbers of CD61(+) or GPA(+) cells were developed with IL-3+SCF. Nevertheless, a 
substantial number of these cells were generated with VPA. Furthermore, these
stimulating effects of VPA were observed by incubating CD34(+) cells from
patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. Quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction showed that VPA enhanced GATA-2, but not GATA-1,
messenger RNA expression with IL-3+SCF.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate a novel role for VPA in enhancing the
potential of IL-3 to stimulate megakaryopoiesis as well as erythropoiesis and
suggest a new therapeutic approach of epigenetic therapy for hematological
disease.

2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20381581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010 Apr;27(3):233-6. doi: 10.3109/08880010903536193.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder with trisomy 12.

Basu B(1), Gupta V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, India. basuv3000@yahoo.co.in

The authors report the first case of transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) 
in a neonate with trisomy 12. The clinical course consisted of respiratory
distress since birth with probability of transient tachypnea of newborn, but
routine investigation revealed total leukocyte count of 56000/microL with 91%
blasts, which returned to normal spontaneously during the subsequent 3 weeks.
GTG-banded karyotype from peripheral blood was done to detect any mutation,
specifically trisomy 21, but the proband revealed trisomy 12 and denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) detected mutation in exon 2 of GATA1.
The condition has been described in association with Down syndrome (trisomy 21)
but never with trisomy 12. This case demonstrates the importance of knowing this 
entity so that it is not erroneously diagnosed as a leukemic process. This is
extremely important because most cases of TMD resolve spontaneously within a few 
weeks to months and do not require treatment other than supportive measures. A
search of the literature did not reveal any similar case.

PMID: 20367267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Jun 25;636(1-3):42-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.02.056.
Epub 2010 Mar 29.

Murine erythropoietic impairment induced by paclitaxel: interactions of GATA-1
and erythroid Krüppel-like transcription factors, apoptotic related proteins and 
erythropoietin receptor.

Aguirre MV(1), Todaro JS, Juaristi JA, Brandan NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, National Northeast
University, Moreno 1240 (3400), Corrientes, Argentina. mvaguirre@med.unne.edu.ar

Paclitaxel, an antitumoral drug, was used in a single dose (29 mg/kg i.p.) as an 
injury agent for inducing transient suppression of hematopoiesis in a murine
experimental model during 10days. The aim of this study focuses on erythropoietin
(EPO) receptor, GATA binding protein 1 (globin transcription factor 1) (GATA-1)
and erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) expressions related to the apoptotic
events triggered by paclitaxel in bone marrow and the subsequent in vivo
erythropoietic recovery. Results showed a massive impairment of erythropoiesis
early post paclitaxel administration (1-2 days), which involved induction of high
Bax/Bcl-x(L) ratio, caspase-3 activation, disruptions of the medullar niche and
cell death by both apoptosis and necrosis. EPO receptor over-expression was
noticed from day 3 onwards. It prompted the subsequent up-regulations of GATA-1
and EKLF transcription factors as well as of the anti apoptotic protein Bcl-x(L),
crucial proteins in driving erythropoiesis. This study suggests that EPO receptor
recovery is necessary for the subsequent bone marrow ability to accomplish the
erythroid program through the modulation of apoptotic and survival events after a
single paclitaxel insult. These findings contribute to new insights into the
molecular mechanisms involved during in vivo erythropoiesis post paclitaxel
administration. Therefore, the detailed knowledge of the injury elicited by this 
drug on red blood cell production may have clinical relevance to explore new
therapeutic approaches.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20353770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Expert Rev Hematol. 2009 Jun 1;2(3):315-334.

Pathological interactions between hematopoietic stem cells and their niche
revealed by mouse models of primary myelofibrosis.

Varricchio L(1), Mancini A, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1079, New York, NY 10029, USA Tel.: +1
212 241 6974 lilian.varricchio@mssm.edu.

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) belongs to the Philadelphia-negative
myeloproliferative neoplasms and is a hematological disorder caused by abnormal
function of the hematopoietic stem cells. The disease manifests itself with a
plethora of alterations, including anemia, splenomegaly and extramedullary
hematopoiesis. Its hallmarks are progressive marrow fibrosis and atypical
megakaryocytic hyperplasia, two distinctive features used to clinically monitor
disease progression. In an attempt to investigate the role of abnormal
megakaryocytopoiesis in the pathogenesis of PMF, several transgenic mouse models 
have been generated. These models are based either on mutations that interfere
with the extrinsic (thrombopoietin and its receptor, MPL) and intrinsic (the
GATA1 transcription factor) control of normal megakaryocytopoiesis, or on known
genetic lesions associated with the human disease. Here we provide an up-to-date 
review on the insights into the pathobiology of human PMF achieved by studying
these animal models, with particular emphasis on results obtained with Gata1(low)
mice.

PMCID: PMC2845468
PMID: 20352017  [PubMed]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;30(11):2668-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01304-09. Epub 2010 Mar 
29.

Genetic analysis of hierarchical regulation for Gata1 and NF-E2 p45 gene
expression in megakaryopoiesis.

Takayama M(1), Fujita R, Suzuki M, Okuyama R, Aiba S, Motohashi H, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Radioisotope Science, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

GATA1 and NF-E2 p45 are two important regulators of megakaryopoiesis. Whereas
GATA1 is known to regulate the p45 gene, details of the GATA1 contribution to the
spatiotemporal expression of the p45 gene remain to be elucidated. To clarify the
relationship between GATA1 and p45, we performed genetic complementation rescue
analysis of p45 function in megakaryocytes utilizing the hematopoietic regulatory
domain of the Gata1 gene (G1HRD). We established transgenic mouse lines
expressing p45 under G1HRD regulation and crossed the mice with p45-null mice.
Compound mutant mice displayed normal platelet counts and no sign of hemorrhage, 
indicating that G1HRD has the ability to express p45 in a spatiotemporally
correct manner. However, deletion of 38 amino acids from the N-terminal region of
p45 abrogated the p45 rescue function, suggesting the presence of an essential
transactivation activity in the region. We then crossed the G1HRD-p45 transgenic 
mice with megakaryocyte-specific Gata1 gene knockdown
(Gata1(Delta)(neo)(Delta)(HS)) mice. The G1HRD-p45 transgene was insufficient for
complete rescue of the Gata1(Delta)(neo)(Delta)(HS) megakaryocytes, suggesting
that GATA1 or other factors regulated by GATA1 are required to cooperate with p45
for normal megakaryopoiesis. This study thus provides a unique in vivo validation
of the hierarchical relationship between GATA1 and p45 in megakaryocytes.

PMCID: PMC2876514
PMID: 20351175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Blood. 2010 Jun 3;115(22):4367-76. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-250894. Epub 2010
Mar 25.

Down-regulation of GATA1 uncouples STAT5-induced erythroid differentiation from
stem/progenitor cell proliferation.

Wierenga AT(1), Vellenga E, Schuringa JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Previously, we have shown that overexpression of an activated mutant of signal
transducer and activator of transcription-5 (STAT5) induces erythropoiesis,
impaired myelopoiesis, and an increase in long-term proliferation of human
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. Because GATA1 is a key transcription factor 
involved in erythropoiesis, the involvement of GATA1 in STAT5-induced phenotypes 
was studied by shRNA-mediated knockdown of GATA1. CD34(+) cord blood cells were
double transduced with a conditionally active STAT5 mutant and a lentiviral
vector expressing a short hairpin against GATA1. Erythropoiesis was completely
abolished in the absence of GATA1, indicating that STAT5-induced erythropoiesis
is GATA1-dependent. Furthermore, the impaired myelopoiesis in STAT5-transduced
cells was restored by GATA1 knockdown. Interestingly, early cobblestone formation
was only modestly affected, and long-term growth of STAT5-positive cells was
increased in the absence of GATA1, whereby high progenitor numbers were
maintained. Thus, GATA1 down-regulation allowed the dissection of STAT5-induced
differentiation phenotypes from the effects on long-term expansion of
stem/progenitor cells. Gene expression profiling allowed the identification of
GATA1-dependent and GATA1-independent STAT5 target genes, and these studies
revealed that several proliferation-related genes were up-regulated by STAT5
independent of GATA1, whereas several erythroid differentiation-related genes
were found to be GATA1 as well as STAT5 dependent.

PMID: 20339093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2010 Jun;21(4 Pt 1):640-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2010.01003.x. Epub 2010 Mar 19.

Cord blood molecular biomarkers of eosinophilopoiesis: kinetic analysis of
GATA-1, MBP1 and IL-5R alpha mRNA expression.

Ellis AK(1), Ackerman SJ, Crawford L, Du J, Bedi R, Denburg JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Eosinophil/basophil (Eo/B) progenitor phenotype and function in cord blood (CB)
are associated with atopic risk at birth and infant clinical outcomes. Molecular 
analyses of eosinophil-basophil differentiation events could identify clinically 
predictive biomarkers. To determine CB kinetic patterns of Eo/B
lineage-associated gene expression (GATA-1, MBP1 and IL-5R alpha) after IL-5
stimulation, CB non-adherent mononuclear cells were isolated from random fresh
and frozen samples and incubated in the presence of recombinant human
interleukin-5. Some underwent CD34+ positive selection using magnetic cell
separation. At various time-points, mRNA expression of GATA-1, MBP1 and IL-5R
alpha (total transcripts) was determined utilizing multiplex quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR). Relative expression levels of the IL-5R alpha 
soluble vs. transmembrane isoforms were also analyzed. Stimulation of the
non-adherent mononuclear cells with IL-5 resulted in early up-regulation of
GATA-1, peaking at 48 h, followed by decreasing expression and down-regulation by
96 h. The CD34+ enriched population demonstrated an equivalent expression pattern
(r = 0.963, p = 0.0349). MBP1 mRNA expression [non-adherent mononuclear cells
(NAMNCs) and CD34+ alike; r = 0.988, p = 0.012] was slowly up-regulated in
response to IL-5, maximal at 96 h. Total IL-5R alpha expression appeared stable
over the time-course, mediated by differential expression of the soluble and
transmembrane isoforms (i.e., initial increase in the transmembrane contribution 
followed by a predominance of the soluble isoform by 48-72 h). Multiplex Q-PCR
analysis of mRNA from CB demonstrates expression of critical eosinophil-basophil 
lineage-specific events that are consistent with current understanding of
eosinophil differentiation and maturation. The non-adherent mononuclear cell
population provides a surrogate signal for the CD34+ progenitor population.

PMID: 20337967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 15;184(8):4349-61. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900927. Epub 2010
Mar 19.

PU.1 positively regulates GATA-1 expression in mast cells.

Takemoto CM(1), Brandal S, Jegga AG, Lee YN, Shahlaee A, Ying Y, Dekoter R,
McDevitt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA. ctakemot@jhmi.edu

Coexpression of PU.1 and GATA-1 is required for proper specification of the mast 
cell lineage; however, in the myeloid and erythroid lineages, PU.1 and GATA-1 are
functionally antagonistic. In this study, we report a transcriptional network in 
which PU.1 positively regulates GATA-1 expression in mast cell development. We
isolated a variant mRNA isoform of GATA-1 in murine mast cells that is
significantly upregulated during mast cell differentiation. This isoform contains
an alternatively spliced first exon (IB) that is distinct from the first exon
(IE) incorporated in the major erythroid mRNA transcript. In contrast to
erythroid and megakaryocyte cells, in mast cells we show that PU.1 and GATA-2
predominantly occupy potential cis-regulatory elements in the IB exon region in
vivo. Using reporter assays, we identify an enhancer flanking the IB exon that is
activated by PU.1. Furthermore, we observe that in PU.1(-/-) fetal liver cells,
low levels of the IE GATA-1 isoform is expressed, but the variant IB isoform is
absent. Reintroduction of PU.1 restores variant IB isoform and upregulates total 
GATA-1 protein expression, which is concurrent with mast cell differentiation.
Our results are consistent with a transcriptional hierarchy in which PU.1,
possibly in concert with GATA-2, activates GATA-1 expression in mast cells in a
pathway distinct from that seen in the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages.

PMID: 20304827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Exp Hematol. 2010 Jun;38(6):489-503.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.03.006. Epub
2010 Mar 18.

Dynamic regulation of Gata1 expression during the maturation of conventional
dendritic cells.

Kozma GT(1), Martelli F, Verrucci M, Gutiérrez L, Migliaccio G, Sanchez M, Alfani
E, Philipsen S, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To identify the regulatory sequences driving Gata1 expression in
conventional dendritic cells (cDC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The number and expression levels of Gata1, Gata1-target
genes and hypersensitive site (HS) 2 (the eosinophil-specific enhancer)-driven
green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter of cDCs from mice lacking HS1 (the
erythroid/megakaryocytic-specific enhancer, Gata1(low) mutation) and wild-type
littermates, as well as the response to lipopolysaccharide of ex vivo-generated
wild-type and Gata1(low) DCs were investigated.
RESULTS: cDC maturation was associated with bell-shaped changes in Gata1
expression that peaked in cDCs precursors from blood. The Gata1(low) mutation did
not affect Gata1 expression in cDC precursors and these cells expressed the
HS2-driven reporter, indicating that Gata1 expression is HS2-driven in these
cells. By contrast, the Gata1(low) mutation reduced Gata1 expression in mature
cDCs and these cells did not express GFP, indicating that mature cDCs express
Gata1 driven by HS1. In blood, the number of cDC precursors expressing CD40/CD80 
was reduced in Gata1(low) mice, while CD40(pos)/CD80(pos) cDC precursors from
wild-type mice expressed the HS2-GFP reporter, suggesting that Gata1 expression
in these cells is both HS1- and HS2-driven. In addition, the antigen and
accessory molecules presentation process induced by lipopolysaccharide in ex
vivo-generated wild-type DC was associated with increased acetylated histone 4
occupancy of HS1, while ex vivo-generated Gata1(low) cDCs failed to respond to
lipopolysaccharide, suggesting that HS1 activation is required for cDC
maturation.
CONCLUSION: These results identify a dynamic pattern of Gata1 regulation that
switches from an HS1 to an HS2-dependent phase during the maturation of cDCs
associated with the antigen-presentation process in the blood.

Copyright 2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2872687
PMID: 20303380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Diamond-Blackfan Anemia.

Clinton C, Gazda HT.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2009 Jun 25.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) in its classic form is
characterized by a profound isolated normochromic and usually macrocytic anemia
with normal leukocytes and platelets, congenital malformations in approximately
50% of affected individuals, and growth retardation in 30% of affected
individuals. The hematologic complications occur in 90% of affected individuals
during the first year of life (median age of onset: 2 months). Eventually, 40% of
affected individuals are corticosteroid dependent, 40% are transfusion dependent,
and 20% go into remission. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from a mild form (e.g.,
mild anemia; no anemia with only subtle erythroid abnormalities; physical
malformations without anemia) to a severe form of fetal anemia resulting in
nonimmune hydrops fetalis. DBA is associated with an increased risk for acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and solid tumors
including osteogenic sarcoma.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is based on the presence of: normochromic
(usually macrocytic) anemia, reticulocytopenia, normal or slightly decreased
leukocyte counts, normal or increased platelet counts, and normocellular bone
marrow with selective deficiency of red cell precursors. Other genetic forms of
anemia, such as Fanconi anemia, need to be considered and ruled out as
appropriate. DBA has been associated with pathogenic variants in twelve genes
that encode ribosomal proteins and in GATA1. A pathogenic variant in one of these
thirteen genes is identified in approximately 55% of individuals with DBA.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Corticosteroid treatment, recommended in
children over age twelve months, can initially improve the red blood count in
approximately 80% of affected individuals. Chronic transfusion with packed red
blood cells is initially necessary while the diagnosis is made and in those not
responsive to corticosteroids. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT),
the only curative therapy for the hematologic manifestations of DBA, is often
recommended for those who are transfusion dependent or develop other cytopenias. 
Treatment of malignancies should be coordinated by an oncologist. Chemotherapy
must be given cautiously as it may lead to prolonged cytopenia and subsequent
toxicities. Prevention of secondary complications: Transfusion-related iron
overload is the most common complication in transfusion-dependent individuals.
Iron chelation therapy with deferasirox orally or desferrioxamine subcutaneously 
is recommended after 10-20 transfusions. Steroid-related side effects must also
be closely monitored, especially as related to risk for infection, growth
retardation, and loss of bone density in growing children. Often patients will be
placed on transfusion therapy if these side effects are intolerable.
Surveillance: Complete blood counts several times a year; bone marrow
aspirate/biopsy to evaluate morphology and cellularity in the event of another
cytopenia or a change in response to treatment. In steroid-dependent individuals:
monitor blood pressure and growth (in children). Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Infection (especially those on corticosteroids); deferiprone for the treatment of
iron overload has lead to severe neutropenia in a few individuals with DBA.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives
of a proband with a known pathogenic variant allows for early diagnosis and
appropriate monitoring for bone marrow failure, physical abnormalities, and
related cancers.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DBA is most often inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; 
GATA1 pathogenic variants are inherited in an X-linked manner. Approximately 40% 
to 45% of individuals with autosomal dominant DBA have inherited the variant from
a parent; approximately 55% to 60% have a de novo variant. Each child of an
individual with autosomal dominant DBA has a 50% chance of inheriting the
pathogenic variant. Males with mutation of GATA1 variant pass the pathogenic
variant to all of their daughters and none of their sons. Women who are carriers 
of a GATA1 pathogenic variant have a 50% chance of transmitting the variant in
each pregnancy: males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected;
females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be carriers and will usually not 
be affected. Carrier testing of at-risk female relatives is possible if the
variant has been identified in the family. If the variant has been identified in 
a family member, prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk is possible
either through a clinical laboratory or a laboratory offering custom prenatal
testing.

PMID: 20301769  [PubMed]


59. GATA1-Related X-Linked Cytopenia.

Chou ST, Kacena MA, Weiss MJ, Raskind WH.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2006 Nov 22.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: GATA1-related cytopenia is characterized by
thrombocytopenia and/or anemia ranging from mild to severe. One or more of the
following may also be present: platelet dysfunction, mild ß-thalassemia,
neutropenia, and congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) in males.
Thrombocytopenia typically presents in infancy as a bleeding disorder with easy
bruising and mucosal bleeding (e.g., epistaxis). Anemia ranges from minimal (mild
dyserythropoiesis) to severe (hydrops fetalis requiring in utero transfusion). At
the extreme end of the clinical spectrum, severe hemorrhage and/or erythrocyte
transfusion dependence are life long; at the milder end, anemia and the risk for 
bleeding decrease spontaneously with age. Female carriers may have mild to
moderate symptoms, such as menorrhagia.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Diagnostic laboratory findings usually include
macrothrombocytopenia (low number of platelets that are larger than normal)
and/or anemia with red cell indices that may be micro-, normo- or macrocytic.
Defects in platelet aggregation in response to agonists may be seen. In some
cases electron microscopy reveals reduced numbers of platelet alpha granules and 
dysplastic features in platelets and megakaryocytes. GATA1 is the only gene in
which pathogenic variants are known to cause GATA1-related cytopenia.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Platelet transfusions for moderate to
severe epistaxis, gingival bleeding, or gastrointestinal bleeding; no specific
treatment for mild symptoms (easy bruisability); erythrocyte transfusions when
anemia is symptomatic (fatigue, tachycardia). Prevention of primary
manifestations: For severe cases, bone marrow transplantation (BMT) can be
curative. Surveillance: monitoring complete blood counts (with frequency
depending on disease severity) to inform supportive care; monitoring those
undergoing repeated erythrocyte transfusions for iron overload.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Those with thrombocytopenia should avoid
antiplatelet agents including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
(NSAIDs) (e.g., ibuprofen). Those with thrombocytopenia and/or platelet
aggregation defects should avoid contact sports or activities with a high risk of
trauma. Evaluation of relatives at risk: If a GATA1 pathogenic variant has been
identified in the family, complete blood counts and molecular genetic testing of 
at-risk relatives can be offered. At-risk relatives who choose not to have
molecular genetic testing should have complete blood counts to evaluate for
thrombocytopenia, anemia, or neutropenia. Pregnancy management: For pregnancies
in which a male fetus is known to be affected: monitoring by a high-risk
obstetric practice; serial specialized ultrasounds to screen for signs of fetal
anemia or bleeding; in utero transfusion if the affected fetus is severely
anemic.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GATA1-related cytopenia is inherited in an X-linked manner.
If the mother of an affected male has a GATA1 pathogenic variant, the chance of
transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. Affected males pass the pathogenic
variant to all of their daughters and none of their sons. Carrier testing for
at-risk family members and prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk are
possible once the pathogenic variant has been identified in the family.

PMID: 20301538  [PubMed]


60. Int J Hematol. 2010 May;91(4):630-5. doi: 10.1007/s12185-010-0549-1. Epub 2010
Mar 18.

Mosaic Down syndrome-associated acute myeloid leukemia does not require high-dose
cytarabine treatment for induction and consolidation therapy.

Kudo K(1), Hama A, Kojima S, Ishii R, Morimoto A, Bessho F, Sunami S, Kobayashi
N, Kinoshita A, Okimoto Y, Tawa A, Tsukimoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, Aoi-ku,
Shizuoka, Japan. kazukok@sch.pref.shizuoka.jp

The present study aimed to identify optimal treatment intensity in children with 
mosaic Down syndrome (DS) and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). A
retrospective review of AMKL patients was undertaken to identify mosaic DS
children. Between November 1992 and November 2007, seven children were diagnosed 
as mosaic DS and AMKL. The median age at diagnosis was 29 months (range 4-34
months). Three patients had a past history of transient abnormal myelopoiesis.
UPN1-4 were treated with intermediate-dose cytarabine and UPN4 received
additional one course of high-dose cytarabine. All of these patients were
remained in first CR. UPN5-7 were treated with high-dose cytarabine according to 
the AML99 protocol. UPN5 with GATA1 mutation suffered from acute pneumonia and
pancreatitis and discontinued chemotherapy. UPN7 relapsed after cessation of
chemotherapy and was rescued with allo-PBSCT. The cumulative doses of cytarabine 
were 3.5-10.65 g/m(2) in the UPN1-4 and 40.4-78.4 g/m(2) in the UPN5-7. The
8-year overall survival was 100% and the 8-year event-free survival 85.7%,
respectively. Our retrospective study reveals that patients with mosaic DS and
AMKL have a good prognosis. Reduction in intensity may work in patients with
mosaic DS as well as with AML-DS.

PMID: 20237876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14495-503. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.116525. Epub
2010 Mar 15.

DNase I hypersensitivity and epsilon-globin transcriptional enhancement are
separable in locus control region (LCR) HS1 mutant human beta-globin YAC
transgenic mice.

Shimotsuma M(1), Okamura E, Matsuzaki H, Fukamizu A, Tanimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.

Expression of the five beta-like globin genes (epsilon, Ggamma, Agamma, delta,
beta) in the human beta-globin locus depends on enhancement by the locus control 
region, which consists of five DNase I hypersensitive sites (5'HS1 through
5'HS5). We report here a novel enhancer activity in 5'HS1 that appears to be
potent in transfected K562 cells. Deletion analyses identified a core activating 
element that bound to GATA-1, and a two-nucleotide mutation that disrupted GATA-1
binding in vitro abrogated 5'HS1 enhancer activity in transfection experiments.
To determine the in vivo role of this GATA site, we generated multiple lines of
human beta-globin YAC transgenic mice bearing the same two-nucleotide mutation.
In the mutant mice, epsilon-, but not gamma-globin, gene expression in primitive 
erythroid cells was severely attenuated, while adult beta-globin gene expression 
in definitive erythroid cells was unaffected. Interestingly, DNaseI
hypersensitivity near the 5'HS1 mutant sequence was eliminated in definitive
erythroid cells, whereas it was only mildly affected in primitive erythroid
cells. We therefore conclude that, although the GATA site in 5'HS1 is critical
for efficient epsilon-globin gene expression, hypersensitive site formation per
se is independent of 5'HS1 function, if any, in definitive erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC2863201
PMID: 20231293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Leukemia. 2010 May;24(5):1012-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.30. Epub 2010 Mar 11.

Functional differences between myeloid leukemia-initiating and transient leukemia
cells in Down's syndrome.

Chen J(1), Li Y, Doedens M, Wang P, Shago M, Dick JE, Hitzler JK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children Research
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    Leukemia. 2010 Aug;24(8):1542. Dick, J [corrected to Dick, J E].

Children with constitutional trisomy 21 or Down's syndrome (DS) are predisposed
to develop myeloid leukemia (ML) at a young age. DS-ML is frequently preceded by 
transient leukemia (TL), a spontaneously resolving accumulation of blasts during 
the newborn period. Somatic mutations of GATA1 in the blasts of TL and DS-ML
likely function as an initiating event. We hypothesized that the phenotypic
difference between TL and DS-ML is due to a divergent functional repertoire of
the leukemia-initiating cells. Using an NOD/SCID model, we found that cells
initiating DS-ML engrafted, disseminated to distant bone marrow sites, and
propagated the leukemic clone in secondary recipients. In contrast, TL cells
lacked the ability to expand and to migrate, but were able to persist in the
recipient bone marrow. We found some evidence of genomic progression with 1 of 9 
DS-ML samples and none of 11 TL samples harboring a mutation of N-RAS. The
findings of this pilot study provide evidence for the functional impact of second
events underlying the transformation of TL into DS-ML and a needed experimental
tool for the functional testing of these promoting events.

PMID: 20220775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Curr Opin Hematol. 2010 May;17(3):163-8. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e32833800b8.

GATA factor switching during erythroid differentiation.

Kaneko H(1), Shimizu R, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Efforts have been made to understand how erythroid
differentiation is regulated, and recent discoveries have clarified that
lineage-specific transcription factor networks are essential for proper
differentiation of erythroid cells. The transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 are
involved in such networks that regulate erythroid gene expression. Importantly,
expression of Gata1 and Gata2 genes is also under the control of such regulatory 
networks. The present review is focused on the mechanism of Gata1 and Gata2 gene 
regulation during erythropoiesis and the physiological significance of their
dynamic regulation.
RECENT FINDINGS: Gata1 and Gata2 genes are regulated by multiple transcription
factors, including their own products GATA1 and GATA2. GATA1 and GATA2 recognize 
specific regulatory GATA motifs, and their expression levels change dynamically
during erythroid differentiation, leading to diversified gene expression during
erythropoiesis.
SUMMARY: Strict regulations of the Gata1 and Gata2 genes are critical for proper 
lineage commitment and development of erythroid cells. It has been shown in
transgenic mouse analyses that cis-acting GATA binding motifs are critical for
the expression of Gata1 and Gata2 genes. Furthermore, expression of Gata1 and
Gata2 genes along with a set of erythroid genes appeared to be regulated by GATA 
factor switching.

PMID: 20216212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genes Dev. 2010 Mar 1;24(5):478-90. doi: 10.1101/gad.1856210.

miR-125b-2 is a potential oncomiR on human chromosome 21 in megakaryoblastic
leukemia.

Klusmann JH(1), Li Z, Böhmer K, Maroz A, Koch ML, Emmrich S, Godinho FJ, Orkin
SH, Reinhardt D.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Children with trisomy 21/Down syndrome (DS) are at high risk to develop acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL) and the related transient leukemia (DS-TL).
The factors on human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) that confer this predisposing effect, 
especially in synergy with consistently mutated transcription factor GATA1
(GATA1s), remain poorly understood. Here, we investigated the role of
Hsa21-encoded miR-125b-2, a microRNA (miRNA) overexpressed in DS-AMKL/TL, in
hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. We identified a function of miR-125b-2 in
increasing proliferation and self-renewal of human and mouse megakaryocytic
progenitors (MPs) and megakaryocytic/erythroid progenitors (MEPs). miR-125b-2
overexpression did not affect megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation, but
severely perturbed myeloid differentiation. The proproliferative effect of
miR-125b-2 on MEPs accentuated the Gata1s mutation, whereas growth of DS-AMKL/TL 
cells was impaired upon miR-125b repression, suggesting synergism during leukemic
transformation in GATA1s-mutated DS-AMKL/TL. Integrative transcriptome analysis
of hematopoietic cells upon modulation of miR-125b expression levels uncovered a 
set of miR-125b target genes, including DICER1 and ST18 as direct targets. Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis revealed that this target gene set is down-regulated in
DS-AMKL patients highly expressing miR-125b. Thus, we propose miR-125b-2 as a
positive regulator of megakaryopoiesis and an oncomiR involved in the
pathogenesis of trisomy 21-associated megakaryoblastic leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2827843
PMID: 20194440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 23;107(12):5681-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911515107. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Computational identification of gene-social environment interaction at the human 
IL6 locus.

Cole SW(1), Arevalo JM, Takahashi R, Sloan EK, Lutgendorf SK, Sood AK, Sheridan
JF, Seeman TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Norman Cousins Center, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. coles@ucla.edu

To identify genetic factors that interact with social environments to impact
human health, we used a bioinformatic strategy that couples expression
array-based detection of environmentally responsive transcription factors with in
silico discovery of regulatory polymorphisms to predict genetic loci that
modulate transcriptional responses to stressful environments. Tests of one
predicted interaction locus in the human IL6 promoter (SNP rs1800795) verified
that it modulates transcriptional response to beta-adrenergic activation of the
GATA1 transcription factor in vitro. In vivo validation studies confirmed links
between adverse social conditions and increased transcription of GATA1 target
genes in primary neural, immune, and cancer cells. Epidemiologic analyses
verified the health significance of those molecular interactions by documenting
increased 10-year mortality risk associated with late-life depressive symptoms
that occurred solely for homozygous carriers of the GATA1-sensitive G allele of
rs1800795. Gating of depression-related mortality risk by IL6 genotype pertained 
only to inflammation-related causes of death and was associated with increased
chronic inflammation as indexed by plasma C-reactive protein. Computational
modeling of molecular interactions, in vitro biochemical analyses, in vivo animal
modeling, and human molecular epidemiologic analyses thus converge in identifying
beta-adrenergic activation of GATA1 as a molecular pathway by which social
adversity can alter human health risk selectively depending on individual genetic
status at the IL6 locus.

PMCID: PMC2851818
PMID: 20176930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Blood. 2010 Apr 8;115(14):2928-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-227629. Epub 2010
Feb 12.

Perturbed hematopoiesis in the Tc1 mouse model of Down syndrome.

Alford KA(1), Slender A, Vanes L, Li Z, Fisher EM, Nizetic D, Orkin SH, Roberts
I, Tybulewicz VL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immune Cell Biology, Medical Research Council National Institute
for Medical Research, London, UK.

Trisomy of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) results in Down syndrome (DS), a disorder 
that affects many aspects of physiology, including hematopoiesis. DS children
have greatly increased rates of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL); DS newborns present with transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD), a preleukemic form of AMKL. TMD and DS-AMKL
almost always carry an acquired mutation in GATA1 resulting in exclusive
synthesis of a truncated protein (GATA1s), suggesting that both trisomy 21 and
GATA1 mutations are required for leukemogenesis. To gain further understanding of
how Hsa21 contributes to hematopoietic abnormalities, we examined the Tc1 mouse
model of DS, which carries an almost complete freely segregating copy of Hsa21,
and is the most complete model of DS available. We show that although Tc1 mice do
not develop leukemia, they have macrocytic anemia and increased extramedullary
hematopoiesis. Introduction of GATA1s into Tc1 mice resulted in a synergistic
increase in megakaryopoiesis, but did not result in leukemia or a TMD-like
phenotype, demonstrating that GATA1s and trisomy of approximately 80% of Hsa21
perturb megakaryopoiesis but are insufficient to induce leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2854435
PMID: 20154221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood. 2010 Apr 29;115(17):3463-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-232876. Epub 2010 
Feb 12.

Lineage-specific combinatorial action of enhancers regulates mouse erythroid
Gata1 expression.

Drissen R(1), Guyot B, Zhang L, Atzberger A, Sloane-Stanley J, Wood B, Porcher C,
Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Haematology Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, UK.

Precise spatiotemporal control of Gata1 expression is required in both early
hematopoietic progenitors to determine erythroid/megakaryocyte versus
granulocyte/monocyte lineage output and in the subsequent differentiation of
erythroid cells and megakaryocytes. An enhancer element upstream of the mouse
Gata1 IE (1st exon erythroid) promoter, mHS-3.5, can direct both erythroid and
megakaryocytic expression. However, loss of this element ablates only
megakaryocytes, implying that an additional element has erythroid specificity.
Here, we identify a double DNaseI hypersensitive site, mHS-25/6, as having
erythroid but not megakaryocytic activity in primary cells. It binds an
activating transcription factor complex in erythroid cells where it also makes
physical contact with the Gata1 promoter. Deletion of mHS-25/6 or mHS-3.5 in
embryonic stem cells has only a modest effect on in vitro erythroid
differentiation, whereas loss of both elements ablates both primitive and
definitive erythropoiesis with an almost complete loss of Gata1 expression.
Surprisingly, Gata2 expression was also concomitantly low, suggesting a more
complex interaction between these 2 factors than currently envisaged. Thus,
whereas mHS-3.5 alone is sufficient for megakaryocytic development, mHS-3.5 and
mHS-25/6 collectively regulate erythroid Gata1 expression, demonstrating
lineage-specific differences in Gata1 cis-element use important for development
of these 2 cell types.

PMCID: PMC2918365
PMID: 20154211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. FASEB J. 2010 Jun;24(6):1947-57. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-147033. Epub 2010 Feb 9.

The midregion, nuclear localization sequence, and C terminus of PTHrP regulate
skeletal development, hematopoiesis, and survival in mice.

Toribio RE(1), Brown HA, Novince CM, Marlow B, Hernon K, Lanigan LG, Hildreth BE 
3rd, Werbeck JL, Shu ST, Lorch G, Carlton M, Foley J, Boyaka P, McCauley LK,
Rosol TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, The Ohio State University, 601
Vernon Tharp St., Columbus, OH 43210, USA. toribio.1@osu.edu

The functions of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) on morphogenesis,
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and calcium homeostasis have been attributed to
its N terminus. Evidence suggests that many of these effects are not mediated by 
the N terminus but by the midregion, a nuclear localization sequence (NLS), and C
terminus of the protein. A knock-in mouse lacking the midregion, NLS, and C
terminus of PTHrP (Pthrp(Delta/Delta)) was developed. Pthrp(Delta/Delta) mice had
craniofacial dysplasia, chondrodysplasia, and kyphosis, with most mice dying by d
5 of age. In bone, there were fewer chondrocytes and osteoblasts per area, bone
mass was decreased, and the marrow was less cellular, with erythroid hypoplasia. 
Cellular proliferation was impaired, and apoptosis was increased. Runx2, Ocn,
Sox9, Crtl1, beta-catenin, Runx1, ephrin B2, cyclin D1, and Gata1 were
underexpressed while P16/Ink4a, P21, GSK-3beta, Il-6, Ffg3, and Ihh were
overexpressed. Mammary gland development was aberrant, and energy metabolism was 
deregulated. These results establish that the midregion, NLS, and C terminus of
PTHrP are crucial for the commitment of osteogenic and hematopoietic precursors
to their lineages, and for survival, and many of the effects of PTHrP on
development are not mediated by its N terminus. The down-regulation of Runx1,
Runx2, and Sox9 indicates that PTHrP is a modulator of transcriptional activation
during stem cell commitment.

PMCID: PMC3140789
PMID: 20145205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Ann Hematol. 2010 Aug;89(8):759-65. doi: 10.1007/s00277-009-0900-x. Epub 2010 Feb
9.

Human promoter mutations unveil Oct-1 and GATA-1 opposite action on Gfi1b
regulation.

Hernández A(1), Villegas A, Anguita E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Department, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, University Complutense,
Madrid, Spain.

Growth factor-independence 1b (Gfi1b) is a zinc finger transcription factor
essential for erythroid and megakaryocytic development. To better understand
Gfi1b regulation and to know the implication of the level of expression of this
gene in human pathology, we have searched for promoter punctual sequence
variations in 214 patients with different hematological diseases. We found two
previously unknown congenital mutations at evolutionary conserved GATA and
octamer-binding (Oct) transcription factor sites. The Oct site mutation was also 
found in five relatives of the patient. The GATA motif mutation reduced promoter 
activity by 50% in vitro, while homozygous patients with the octamer site
mutation showed a four-to-five times increase of Gfi1b RNA in platelets.
Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses demonstrated that different protein
complexes bind to both sites and that binding is reduced by the mutations.
Finally, we found that GATA-1 and Oct-1 are the main components of each complex. 
This study provides evidences of a new mechanism for Gfi1b repression. This is
also the first report of Gfi1b mutations with a functional implication; further
investigation and follow-up will clarify the involvement of these mutations in
hematological disease.

PMID: 20143233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 5;5(2):e9059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009059.

Genomic approaches uncover increasing complexities in the regulatory landscape at
the human SCL (TAL1) locus.

Dhami P(1), Bruce AW, Jim JH, Dillon SC, Hall A, Cooper JL, Bonhoure N, Chiang K,
Ellis PD, Langford C, Andrews RM, Vetrie D.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.

The SCL (TAL1) transcription factor is a critical regulator of haematopoiesis and
its expression is tightly controlled by multiple cis-acting regulatory elements. 
To elaborate further the DNA elements which control its regulation, we used
genomic tiling microarrays covering 256 kb of the human SCL locus to perform a
concerted analysis of chromatin structure and binding of regulatory proteins in
human haematopoietic cell lines. This approach allowed us to characterise further
or redefine known human SCL regulatory elements and led to the identification of 
six novel elements with putative regulatory function both up and downstream of
the SCL gene. They bind a number of haematopoietic transcription factors (GATA1, 
E2A LMO2, SCL, LDB1), CTCF or components of the transcriptional machinery and are
associated with relevant histone modifications, accessible chromatin and low
nucleosomal density. Functional characterisation shows that these novel elements 
are able to enhance or repress SCL promoter activity, have endogenous promoter
function or enhancer-blocking insulator function. Our analysis opens up several
areas for further investigation and adds new layers of complexity to our
understanding of the regulation of SCL expression.

PMCID: PMC2816701
PMID: 20140202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Feb;220(2):127-38.

Fractionation of mature eosinophils in GATA-reporter transgenic mice.

Kim K(1), Suzuki N, Ohneda K, Minegishi N, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

Eosinophils contribute to the pathophysiology of allergic and infectious
diseases, albeit their molecular functions remain unknown. Mature eosinophils are
identified by their unique morphology and staining characteristics. However, it
is difficult to fractionate living eosinophils by flow cytometry because these
granulocytes express multiple cell surface markers that are shared by other cells
of hematopoietic or non-hematopoietic origin. In this study, we describe a flow
cytometry-based method to enumerate and fractionate eosinophils by developmental 
stages. To fractionate these cell types, we used transgenic mouse lines that
express fluorescent proteins under control of the Gata1 gene hematopoietic
regulatory region (Gata1-HRD), which is exclusively active in Gata1-expressing
hematopoietic cells, including eosinophils. As expected, mature eosinophils were 
highly enriched in the fluorescent reporter-expressing subfraction of bone marrow
myeloid cells that were negatively selected by using multiple antibodies against 
B220, CD4, CD8, Ter119, c-Kit and CD71. Cytochemical analyses of flow-sorted
cells identified the cells in this fraction as eosinophils harboring eosinophilic
granules. Additionally, expression of eosinophil-specific genes, for instance
eosinophil enzymes and the IL-5 receptor alpha gene, were specifically detected
in this fraction. The expression of these eosinophil-specific genes increased as 
the cells differentiated. This method for enrichment of bone marrow eosinophils
is applicable to fractionation of eosinophils and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
from transgenic mice with atopic asthma. Thus, both pathological and
developmental stages of eosinophils are efficiently fractionated by this flow
cytometry-based method using Gata1-HRD transgenic reporter mice. This study,
therefore, proposes a useful means to study the experimental allergic and
inflammatory systems.

PMID: 20139664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Dev. 2010 Feb 1;24(3):277-89. doi: 10.1101/gad.551810.

The genome-wide dynamics of the binding of Ldb1 complexes during erythroid
differentiation.

Soler E(1), Andrieu-Soler C, de Boer E, Bryne JC, Thongjuea S, Stadhouders R,
Palstra RJ, Stevens M, Kockx C, van Ijcken W, Hou J, Steinhoff C, Rijkers E,
Lenhard B, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015GE Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. e.soler@erasmusmc.nl

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2010 Mar 15;24(6):623.

One of the complexes formed by the hematopoietic transcription factor Gata1 is a 
complex with the Ldb1 (LIM domain-binding protein 1) and Tal1 proteins. It is
known to be important for the development and differentiation of the erythroid
cell lineage and is thought to be implicated in long-range interactions. Here,
the dynamics of the composition of the complex-in particular, the binding of the 
negative regulators Eto2 and Mtgr1-are studied, in the context of their
genome-wide targets. This shows that the complex acts almost exclusively as an
activator, binding a very specific combination of sequences, with a positioning
relative to transcription start site, depending on the type of the core promoter.
The activation is accompanied by a net decrease in the relative binding of Eto2
and Mtgr1. A Chromosome Conformation Capture sequencing (3C-seq) assay also shows
that the binding of the Ldb1 complex marks genomic interaction sites in vivo.
This establishes the Ldb1 complex as a positive regulator of the final steps of
erythroid differentiation that acts through the shedding of negative regulators
and the active interaction between regulatory sequences.

PMCID: PMC2811829
PMID: 20123907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 15;340(2):306-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.01.033. Epub 2010 
Feb 1.

The Hox cofactors Meis1 and Pbx act upstream of gata1 to regulate primitive
hematopoiesis.

Pillay LM(1), Forrester AM, Erickson T, Berman JN, Waskiewicz AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

During vertebrate development, the initial wave of hematopoiesis produces cells
that help to shape the developing circulatory system and oxygenate the early
embryo. The differentiation of primitive erythroid and myeloid cells occurs
within a short transitory period, and is subject to precise molecular regulation 
by a hierarchical cascade of transcription factors. The TALE-class homeodomain
transcription factors Meis and Pbx function to regulate embryonic hematopoiesis, 
but it is not known where Meis and Pbx proteins participate in the hematopoietic 
transcription factor cascade. To address these questions, we have ablated Meis1
and Pbx proteins in zebrafish, and characterized their molecular effects on known
markers of primitive hematopoiesis. Embryos lacking Meis1 and Pbx exhibit a
severe reduction in the expression of gata1, the earliest marker of erythroid
cell fate, and fail to produce visible circulating blood cells. Concomitant with 
a loss of gata1, Meis1- and Pbx-depleted embryos exhibit downregulated embryonic 
hemoglobin (hbae3) expression, and possess increased numbers of pu.1-positive
myeloid cells. gata1-overexpression rescues hbae3 expression in Pbx-depleted;
meis1-morphant embryos, placing Pbx and Meis1 upstream of gata1 in the
erythropoietic transcription factor hierarchy. Our study conclusively
demonstrates that Meis1 and Pbx act to specify the erythropoietic cell lineage
and inhibit myelopoiesis.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20123093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Cell Physiol. 2010 May;223(2):460-70. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22055.

Evidence for organ-specific stem cell microenvironments.

Ghinassi B(1), Martelli F, Verrucci M, D'Amore E, Migliaccio G, Vannucchi AM,
Hoffman R, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tish Cancer Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
The Myeloproliferative Disease Consortium, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The X-linked Gata1(low) mutation in mice induces strain-restricted
myeloproliferative disorders characterized by extramedullary hematopoiesis in
spleen (CD1 and DBA/2) and liver (CD1 only). To assess the role of the
microenvironment in establishing this myeloproliferative trait, progenitor cell
compartments of spleen and marrow from wild-type and Gata1(low) mice were
compared. Phenotype and clonal assay of non-fractionated cells indicated that
Gata1(low) mice contain progenitor cell numbers 4-fold lower and 10-fold higher
than normal in marrow and spleen, respectively. However, progenitor cells
prospectively isolated from spleen, but not from marrow, of Gata1(low) mice
expressed colony-forming function in vitro. Therefore, calculation of cloning
activity of purified cells demonstrated that the total number of Gata1(low)
progenitor cells was 10- to 100-fold lower than normal in marrow and >1,000 times
higher than normal in spleen. This observation indicates that Gata1(low)
hematopoiesis is favored by the spleen and is in agreement with our previous
report that removal of this organ induces wild-type hematopoiesis in heterozygous
Gata1(low/+) females (Migliaccio et al., 2009, Blood 114:2107). To clarify if
rescue of wild-type hematopoiesis by splenectomy prevented extramedullary
hematopoiesis in liver, marrow cytokine expression profile and liver
histopathology of splenectomized Gata1(low/+) females were investigated. After
splenectomy, the marrow expression levels of TGF-beta, VEGF, osteocalcin,
PDGF-alpha, and SDF-1 remained abnormally high while Gata1(low) hematopoiesis was
detectable in liver of both CD1 and DBA/2 mutants. Therefore, in the absence of
the spleen, Gata1(low) hematopoiesis is supported by the liver suggesting that
treatment of myelofibrosis in these animals requires the rescue of both stem cell
and microenvironmental functions.

PMCID: PMC2886205
PMID: 20112287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Mar 15;44(3):175-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.12.012.
Epub 2010 Jan 27.

Loss of GATA1 and gain of FLI1 expression during thrombocyte maturation.

Jagadeeswaran P(1), Lin S, Weinstein B, Hutson A, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton, 76203,
USA. jag@unt.edu

In this paper, we characterized expression of GATA1 and FLI1 gene promoters in
thrombocytes of zebrafish transgenic lines, G1-GM2 and TG(fli1:EGFP)y1 that carry
transgenes of GATA1 and FLI1 gene promoters driving GFP. We found two discrete
populations of thrombocytes verified by morphology, labeled with GFP in both
G1-GM2 and TG(fli1:EGFP)y1 lines: (1) the more intensely labeled GFP+
thrombocyte, and (2) the less intensely labeled GFP+ thrombocytes. The more
intensely labeled GFP+ thrombocyte in G1-GM2 line and the less intensely labeled 
GFP+ thrombocytes in the TG(fli1:EGFP)y1 line corresponded to young thrombocytes.
These results showed that young thrombocytes have higher GATA1 promoter activity,
while mature thrombocytes have more FLI1 gene promoter transcription. This
finding suggests that there is a gradual loss of GATA1 and gain of FLI1
expression as the thrombocytes mature, and this overexpression of FLI1 may help
maintain the thrombocyte lineage. Furthermore, the presence of transcriptional
factors similar to those found in megakaryocytes raises the possibility that
vertebrate thrombocytes may be the forerunners of mammalian megakaryocytes and,
therefore, could serve as a model to study megakaryocyte maturation.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2829368
PMID: 20110178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Jul 1;54(7):1048-9. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22331.

A rare case of GATA1 negative chemoresistant acute megakaryocytic leukemia in an 
8-month-old infant with trisomy 21.

Stepensky P(1), Brooks R, Waldman E, Revel-Vilk S, Izraeli S, Resnick I,
Weintraub M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Hadassah Hebrew University
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. polina@hadassah.org.il

Children with Down syndrome (DS) have a unique form of acute megakaryocytic
leukemia (AMKL) characterized by the presence of mutations in the GATA1 gene
leading to increased chemosensitivity and a favorable outcome. We describe an
8-month-old male with DS who was diagnosed with AMKL without a mutation in the
GATA1 gene. The patient was treated according to the DS-AML-regimen but his
disease progressed and he succumbed 9 months later. This rare case of DS AMKL
without a GATA1 mutation with an unfavorable outcome suggests that GATA1 testing 
may play a useful role in initial stratification.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20108342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 29;29(17):2577-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.525. Epub 2010 Jan
25.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is overexpressed in breast carcinomas and
contributes to survivin upregulation via a promoter polymorphism.

Boidot R(1), Végran F, Jacob D, Chevrier S, Cadouot M, Feron O, Solary E,
Lizard-Nacol S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Georges-François Leclerc, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Dijon, France.

Expression of survivin, a member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family, is
elevated in human cancers and considered as a new therapeutic target. Mechanism
upregulating survivin expression in tumour cells is poorly understood. In this
study, we show that breast cancer patients harbouring a polymorphism G235A in the
survivin promoter present a higher level of survivin expression. This
polymorphism creates a binding site for the transcription factor GATA-1 inducing 
a second GATA-1-binding site in survivin promoter. At the mRNA level, GATA-1 was 
present in breast carcinomas and adjacent normal tissues, whereas the protein was
only detected in carcinomas by western blot and immunohistochemistry.
Transfection of wild-type and different constitutively active GATA-1 mutants
(serine 26, 178 or 310) showed that only phospho-serine 26 GATA-1 was able to
increase survivin expression. This increase was higher in G235A than in G235G
cell lines. Phospho-serine 26 GATA-1 bound directly survivin promoter, with a
stronger interaction in G235A than in G235G polymorphism indicating that both
GATA-1-binding sites are functional. These data identify GATA-1 as a key feature 
in tumour aggressiveness by enhancing survivin expression and delineate its
targeting as a possible new therapeutic strategy in breast carcinomas.

PMID: 20101202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Growth Differ. 2010 Feb;52(2):245-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2009.01168.x. 
Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Efficient transient rescue of hematopoietic mutant phenotypes in zebrafish using 
Tol2-mediated transgenesis.

Takeuchi M(1), Kaneko H, Nishikawa K, Kawakami K, Yamamoto M, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan.

Phenotypic rescue experiments have been commonly used in zebrafish since it is
convenient to study the causality of mutant phenotypes just by injecting mRNA
into embryos. However, this strategy is only effective for phenotypes at early
embryonic stages due to mRNA instability. For later developmental stages, DNA
constructs are used to express exogenous genes, while it is usually ineffective
owing to the problem of mosaicism. This study attempted to solve the problem by
using Tol2-mediated transgenesis. As a model case, we used vlad tepes (vlt), a
zebrafish gata1 mutant, whose phenotypes have never been able to be rescued at
later stages by transient rescue experiments. Blood cell-specific transgenic
expression of gata1 was driven by its own promoter/enhancer elements. The
co-injection of a Tol2-donor plasmid containing gata1 cDNA and transposase mRNA
efficiently rescued the bloodless phenotypes of vlt even in day 12 larvae when
definitive erythropoiesis took place with primitive erythropoiesis. This
Tol2-mediated rescue is therefore considered to be a quick and easy method for
analyzing the mutant phenotypes in zebrafish.

PMID: 20100247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Blood. 2010 Mar 18;115(11):2156-66. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-251280. Epub 2010 
Jan 11.

FOG1 requires NuRD to promote hematopoiesis and maintain lineage fidelity within 
the megakaryocytic-erythroid compartment.

Gregory GD(1), Miccio A, Bersenev A, Wang Y, Hong W, Zhang Z, Poncz M, Tong W,
Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Nuclear factors regulate the development of complex tissues by promoting the
formation of one cell lineage over another. The cofactor FOG1 interacts with
transcription factors GATA1 and GATA2 to control erythroid and megakaryocyte (MK)
differentiation. In contrast, FOG1 antagonizes the ability of GATA factors to
promote mast cell (MC) development. Normal FOG1 function in late-stage erythroid 
cells and MK requires interaction with the chromatin remodeling complex NuRD.
Here, we report that mice in which the FOG1/NuRD interaction is disrupted
(Fog(ki/ki)) produce MK-erythroid progenitors that give rise to significantly
fewer and less mature MK and erythroid colonies in vitro while retaining
multilineage capacity, capable of generating MCs and other myeloid lineage cells.
Gene expression profiling of Fog(ki/ki) MK-erythroid progenitors revealed
inappropriate expression of several MC-specific genes. Strikingly, aberrant MC
gene expression persisted in mature Fog(ki/ki) MK and erythroid progeny. Using a 
GATA1-dependent committed erythroid cell line, select MC genes were found to be
occupied by NuRD, suggesting a direct mechanism of repression. Together, these
observations suggest that a simple heritable silencing mechanism is insufficient 
to permanently repress MC genes. Instead, the continuous presence of GATA1, FOG1,
and NuRD is required to maintain lineage fidelity throughout MK-erythroid
ontogeny.

PMCID: PMC2844012
PMID: 20065294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell. 2009 Dec 25;36(6):984-95. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.005.

Controlling hematopoiesis through sumoylation-dependent regulation of a GATA
factor.

Lee HY(1), Johnson KD, Fujiwara T, Boyer ME, Kim SI, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin
Institutes for Medical Research, Madison, 53705, USA.

GATA factors establish transcriptional networks that control fundamental
developmental processes. Whereas the regulator of hematopoiesis GATA-1 is subject
to multiple posttranslational modifications, how these modifications influence
GATA-1 function at endogenous loci is unknown. We demonstrate that sumoylation of
GATA-1 K137 promotes transcriptional activation only at target genes requiring
the coregulator Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1). A mutation of GATA-1 V205G that
disrupts FOG-1 binding and K137 mutations yielded similar phenotypes, although
sumoylation was FOG-1 independent, and FOG-1 binding did not require sumoylation.
Both mutations dysregulated GATA-1 chromatin occupancy at select sites,
FOG-1-dependent gene expression, and were rescued by tethering SUMO-1. While
FOG-1- and SUMO-1-dependent genes migrated away from the nuclear periphery upon
erythroid maturation, FOG-1- and SUMO-1-independent genes persisted at the
periphery. These results illustrate a mechanism that controls trans-acting factor
function in a locus-specific manner, and differentially regulated members of the 
target gene ensemble reside in distinct subnuclear compartments.

2009 Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2807411
PMID: 20064464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Br J Haematol. 2010 Mar;148(6):898-909. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.08038.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 11.

Blasts in transient leukaemia in neonates with Down syndrome differentiate into
basophil/mast-cell and megakaryocyte lineages in vitro in association with
down-regulation of truncated form of GATA1.

Miyauchi J(1), Ito Y, Tsukamoto K, Takahashi H, Ishikura K, Sugita K, Miyashita
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tokyo Dental College Ichikawa
General Hospital, 5-11-13 Sugano, Ichikawa, Chiba-ken, Japan. jmiyauchi@tdc.ac.jp

Mutations of GATA1, leading to aberrant expression of a truncated form of GATA1
(called GATA1s), are present in transient leukaemia (TL) in neonates with Down
syndrome. Using these molecular markers of TL, we investigated the growth and
differentiation potential of TL blasts in the presence of hematopoietic growth
factors (HGFs). Interleukin-3, stem cell factor and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor potently stimulated the growth of TL blast progenitors 
and induced differentiation towards basophil/mast cell lineages, whereas
thrombopoietin induced differentiation towards megakaryocytes. GATA1s was
expressed in TL blasts in all five patients examined but was down-regulated
during differentiation induced by these HGFs, while full-length GATA1 was not
expressed throughout the culture. GATA1 mutations were detected in TL blasts in
four patients, including one patient with two distinct mutations. The cells of
this patient exhibited identical and only mutated sequences both before and after
culture with HGFs, confirming the leukemic cell origin of these differentiated
cells. Erythroid differentiation of TL blasts was not evident with any HGFs.
These data indicate that TL blasts have the potential to grow and differentiate
towards particular hematopoietic lineages in the presence of specific HGFs and
that the down-regulation of GATA1s might be involved in blast cell
differentiation.

PMID: 20064153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Mar 1;109(4):774-81. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22456.

Immature and mature megakaryocytes enhance osteoblast proliferation and inhibit
osteoclast formation.

Ciovacco WA(1), Cheng YH, Horowitz MC, Kacena MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Recent data suggest that megakaryocytes (MKs) play a role in skeletal
homeostasis. In vitro and in vivo data show that MKs stimulate osteoblast (OB)
proliferation and inhibit osteoclast (OC) formation, thus favoring net bone
deposition. There are several mouse models with dysregulated megakaryopoiesis and
resultant high bone mass phenotypes. One such model that our group has
extensively studied is GATA-1 deficient mice. GATA-1 is a transcription factor
required for normal megakaryopoiesis, and mice deficient in GATA-1 have increases
in immature MK number and a striking increase in bone mass. While the increased
bone mass could simply be a result of increased MK number, here we take a more in
depth look at the MKs of these mice to see if there is a unique factor inherent
to GATA-1 deficient MKs that favors increased bone deposition. We show that
increased MK number does correspond with increased OB proliferation and decreased
OC formation that stage of maturation does not alter the effect of MKs on bone
cell lineages beyond the megakaryoblast stage, and that GATA-1 deficient MKs
survive longer than wild-type controls. So while increased MK number in GATA-1
deficient mice likely contributes to the high bone mass phenotype, we propose
that the increased longevity of this lineage also plays a role. Since GATA-1
deficient MKs live longer they are able to exert both more proliferative
influence on OBs and more inhibitory influence on OCs.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3095430
PMID: 20052670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Apr;38(7):2190-200. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1159. Epub 2010
Jan 4.

Differential coregulator requirements for function of the hematopoietic
transcription factor GATA-1 at endogenous loci.

Pope NJ(1), Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin
Institute for Medical Research, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

The critical regulator of hematopoiesis GATA-1 recruits diverse coregulators to
chromatin, which mediate transcriptional activation and repression. These
coregulators include the cell-type-specific multi-zinc finger protein Friend of
GATA-1 (FOG-1), the histone acetyltransferase CREB binding protein (CBP), and the
key component of the Mediator complex Med1. While FOG-1 is an established GATA-1 
coregulator, the importance of interactions between GATA-1 and other coregulators
is poorly understood. Furthermore, whether GATA-1 utilizes multiple coregulators 
at all loci, or if certain coregulators are dedicated to specific loci is
unknown. We compared the capacity of GATA-1 to recruit and utilize FOG-1 and Med1
at activated and repressed target genes. Similar to FOG-1, GATA-1 recruited Med1 
to activated genes, and the kinetics of FOG-1 and Med1 recruitment were similar. 
GATA-1 recruited Med1 in Fog1(-/-) cells, indicating that GATA-1-mediated Med1
recruitment is FOG-1-independent. In contrast to FOG-1, GATA-1 evicted Med1
during transcriptional repression. Whereas knocking-down FOG-1 had catastrophic
effects on GATA-1-mediated activation and repression, knocking-down Med1 modestly
impaired GATA-1 activity only at select loci. These results illustrate both
similarities and differences between GATA-1-mediated recruitment of FOG-1 and
Med1 to chromatin, with a fundamental difference being the quantitatively greater
requirement for FOG-1.

PMCID: PMC2853107
PMID: 20047963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Pediatr Oncol Nurs. 2009 Nov-Dec;26(6):362-8. doi: 10.1177/1043454209340321.

A comparison of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Down syndrome and non-Down
syndrome children: the role of trisomy 21.

Tigay JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Flint Michigan, 6550 Heritage, West Bloomfield, MI 48322, USA.
judykay1229@aol.com

Down syndrome (DS), which occurs once in every 800 births, is associated with a
trisomy on locus 21. Among the many aberrations caused by DS, including shortened
stature and distorted facies, are several blood dyscrasias, including childhood
leukemias-namely, acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic, or
lymphocytic, leukemia (ALL). One focus of the diagnosis of ALL is to distinguish 
it from AML.The benefits of immunophenotyping extend to treatment as well. ALL is
associated with an inherited trisomy 21 in DS children (ALL-DS) and with acquired
trisomies, +21, 8, and 13, in non-DS children (ALL-NDS). The differences in
treatment, outcome, and prognosis between ALL-DS and ALL-NDS can be attributed to
the interaction of their respective trisomies with several genetic mutations,
including one on the GATA1 growth factor transcription gene. Other mutations are 
the gene fusion at TEL/AML1, and a new mutation found, which labels the Janus
Kinase gene or JAK2 as on oncogenic precursor, which when associated with the
B-cell precursor gene or BCP is highly leukomogenic. The treatments for the 2
groups have been based on quality of risk, with ALL-DS children having the
highest risk along with the poorest prognosis, but alterations in medication
regimens have brought treatment outcomes to near equality. It is worthwhile to
study the trisomy 21 because in the future it may provide an understanding of all
blood dyscrasias.

PMID: 20032297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2010 Dec;36(4):945-51. doi: 10.1007/s10695-009-9371-1. Epub
2009 Dec 18.

Critical role of connexin43 in zebrafish late primitive and definitive
hematopoiesis.

Jiang Q(1), Liu D, Sun S, Hu J, Tan L, Wang Y, Gui Y, Yu M, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical College and
Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Children's Hospital,
Fudan University, 200032, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

In vitro studies have suggested that connexin43 (cx43) expression is of
particular importance during establishment and regeneration of the mammalian
hematopoietic system. However, little is known about its in vivo functions during
hematopoiesis due to the embryonic lethality of mammalian knockout models. In
this study, we observed that zebrafish cx43 is not only expressed in the eyes,
cerebellum, heart, and vasculature, but also expressed, albeit at low levels, in 
intermediate cell mass (ICM, the primitive hematopoietic site). Knockdown of cx43
leads to vacuolization in the wedge of the ICM and an apparent reduction in the
number of circulating blood cells, but does not affect their cellular morphology.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization analysis revealed that the hemangioblastic
marker flk-1 and the primitive hematopoietic markers lmo2 and scl are basically
maintained at normal levels in cx43 morphant embryos at 12-13 h postfertilization
(hpf) compared with the con-MO injected embryos. However, subsequent expression
of the definitive hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) marker c-myb was severely
downregulated in the ventral wall of the dorsal aorta of cx43-depleted embryos at
36 hpf. Furthermore, we confirmed this phenotype by injection of cx43-MO into
Tg(gata1:EGFP) embryos. Together, our results show that cx43 contributes to late 
primitive and definitive hematopoiesis in zebrafish embryos.

PMID: 20020200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 20;29(2):457-68. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.368. Epub 2009 Dec 10.

FOG-1-mediated recruitment of NuRD is required for cell lineage re-enforcement
during haematopoiesis.

Gao Z(1), Huang Z, Olivey HE, Gurbuxani S, Crispino JD, Svensson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The transcriptional co-factor Friend of GATA1 (FOG-1) has been shown to interact 
with subunits of the nucleosome remodelling and histone deacetylase (NuRD)
complex through a specific motif located at its N-terminus. To test the
importance of FOG-1/NuRD interaction for haematopoiesis in vivo, we generated
mice with a mutation that specifically disrupts FOG-1/NuRD interaction
(FOG-1(R3K5A)). Homozygous FOG-1(R3K5A) mice were found to have splenomegaly,
extramedullary erythropoiesis, granulocytosis and thrombocytopaenia secondary to 
a block in megakaryocyte maturation. FOG-1(R3K5A/R3K5A) megakaryocytes and
erythroid progenitors expressed increased levels of GATA2, showing that
FOG-1/NuRD interaction is required for the earlier described 'GATA Switch'. In
addition, ablation of FOG-1/NuRD interaction led to inappropriate expression of
mast cell and eosinophil-specific genes in the megakaryocyte and erythroid
lineages. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that the NuRD
complex was not properly recruited to a mast cell gene promoter in
FOG-1(R3K5A/R3K5A) megakaryocytes, suggesting that FOG-1/NuRD interaction is
required for the direct suppression of mast cell gene expression. Taken together,
these results underscore the importance of the FOG-1/NuRD interaction for the
re-enforcement of lineage commitment during erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2824465
PMID: 20010697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Blood. 2010 May 13;115(19):3966-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-242107. Epub 2009
Dec 9.

Trisomy of Erg is required for myeloproliferation in a mouse model of Down
syndrome.

Ng AP(1), Hyland CD, Metcalf D, Carmichael CL, Loughran SJ, Di Rago L, Kile BT,
Alexander WS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 May 13;115(19):3859-60.

Down syndrome is characterized by multiple phenotypic manifestations associated
with trisomy of chromosome 21. The transient myeloproliferative disorder and
acute megakaryocytic leukemia associated with Down syndrome are uniquely
associated with mutations in the transcription factor GATA1; however, the
identity of trisomic genes on chromosome 21 that predispose to these hematologic 
disorders remains unknown. Using a loss-of-function allele, we show that specific
reduction to functional disomy of the Erg gene corrects the pathologic and
hematologic features of myeloproliferation in the Ts(17(16))65Dn mouse model of
Down syndrome, including megakaryocytosis and progenitor cell expansion. Our data
provide genetic evidence establishing the need for Erg trisomy for
myeloproliferation in Ts(17(16))65Dn mice and imply that increased ERG gene
dosage may be a key consequence of trisomy 21 that can predispose to malignant
hematologic disorders in Down syndrome.

PMID: 20007548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Blood. 2010 Feb 11;115(6):1194-203. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216184. Epub 2009 
Dec 9.

Retroviral insertional mutagenesis identifies Zeb2 activation as a novel
leukemogenic collaborating event in CALM-AF10 transgenic mice.

Caudell D(1), Harper DP, Novak RL, Pierce RM, Slape C, Wolff L, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Center for Molecular
Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Virginia-Maryland Regional College of
Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

The t(10;11) translocation results in a CALM-AF10 fusion gene in a subset of
leukemia patients. Expression of a CALM-AF10 transgene results in leukemia, with 
prolonged latency and incomplete penetrance, suggesting that additional events
are necessary for leukemic transformation. CALM-AF10 mice infected with the
MOL4070LTR retrovirus developed acute leukemia, and ligation-mediated polymerase 
chain reaction was used to identify retroviral insertions at 19 common insertion 
sites, including Zeb2, Nf1, Mn1, Evi1, Ift57, Mpl, Plag1, Kras, Erg, Vav1, and
Gata1. A total of 26% (11 of 42) of the mice had retroviral integrations near
Zeb2, a transcriptional corepressor leading to overexpression of the
Zeb2-transcript. A total of 91% (10 of 11) of mice with Zeb2 insertions developed
B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia, suggesting that Zeb2 activation promotes 
the transformation of CALM-AF10 hematopoietic precursors toward B-lineage
leukemias. More than half of the mice with Zeb2 integrations also had Nf1
integrations, suggesting cooperativity among CALM-AF10, Zeb2, and Ras pathway
mutations. We searched for Nras, Kras, and Ptpn11 point mutations in the
CALM-AF10 leukemic mice. Three mutations were identified, all of which occurred
in mice with Zeb2 integrations, consistent with the hypothesis that Zeb2 and Ras 
pathway activation promotes B-lineage leukemic transformation in concert with
CALM-AF10.

PMCID: PMC2826231
PMID: 20007546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hear Res. 2010 Mar;261(1-2):9-21. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2009.12.017. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Expression of prestin and Gata-3,-2,-1 mRNA in the rat organ of Corti during the 
postnatal period and in culture.

Gross J(1), Stute K, Moller R, Fuchs J, Amarjargal N, Pohl EE, Angerstein M,
Smorodchenko A, Mazurek B.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
Institute of Cell- and Neurobiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117
Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, Germany. johann.gross@charite.de

Based on observations that mutations of GATA-3 are responsible for the
HDR-syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, deafness, renal defects) and that
GATA-transcription factors have an important role to play in inner ear
development, we hypothesized that these transcription factors may be involved in 
regulatory changes of prestin transcription. To prove this, we examined in
parallel the expression of mRNA of prestin and Gata-3,-2 and Gata-1 in the organ 
of Corti during early postnatal development of rats and in organotypic cultures. 
Remarkable relations are observed between prestin and Gata-3,-2 expression in
organ of Corti preparations in vivo and in vitro: (i) Gata-3,-2 expression
display similar apical-basal gradients as prestin mRNA levels. (ii) The prestin
expression increases between postnatal day two and postnatal day eight by a
factor of about four in the apical and middle segments and by a factor of two in 
the basal part. Highly significant Pearson correlation coefficients were observed
between Gata-3,-2 mRNA and prestin levels when the data were evaluated by
regression analyses. (iii) Parallel changes of prestin mRNA and Gata-3,-2 mRNA
levels were observed in response to thyroid hormone and to gemfibrozil
application. These observations suggest a regulatory role played by the Gata-3,-2
transcription factors in prestin expression.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20006695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Blood. 2010 Jan 21;115(3):687-95. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-230094. Epub 2009
Nov 24.

High-mobility group protein HMGB2 regulates human erythroid differentiation
through trans-activation of GFI1B transcription.

Laurent B(1), Randrianarison-Huetz V, Maréchal V, Mayeux P, Dusanter-Fourt I,
Duménil D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS; Unité Mixte de Recherche [UMR] 8104), Paris, France.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2010 Sep 2;116(9):1627. Marchal, Vincent [corrected to Maréchal, Vincent].

Gfi-1B is a transcriptional repressor that is crucial for erythroid
differentiation: inactivation of the GFI1B gene in mice leads to embryonic death 
due to failure to produce differentiated red cells. Accordingly, GFI1B expression
is tightly regulated during erythropoiesis, but the mechanisms involved in such
regulation remain partially understood. We here identify HMGB2, a high-mobility
group HMG protein, as a key regulator of GFI1B transcription. HMGB2 binds to the 
GFI1B promoter in vivo and up-regulates its trans-activation most likely by
enhancing the binding of Oct-1 and, to a lesser extent, of GATA-1 and NF-Y to the
GFI1B promoter. HMGB2 expression increases during erythroid differentiation
concomitantly to the increase of GfI1B transcription. Importantly, knockdown of
HMGB2 in immature hematopoietic progenitor cells leads to decreased Gfi-1B
expression and impairs their erythroid differentiation. We propose that HMGB2
potentiates GATA-1-dependent transcription of GFI1B by Oct-1 and thereby controls
erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 19965638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 29;285(5):3044-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.077727. Epub 2009 
Dec 2.

PU.1 directly regulates cdk6 gene expression, linking the cell proliferation and 
differentiation programs in erythroid cells.

Choe KS(1), Ujhelly O, Wontakal SN, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

Cell proliferation and differentiation are highly coordinated processes during
normal development. Most leukemia cells are blocked from undergoing terminal
differentiation and also exhibit uncontrolled proliferation. Dysregulated
expression of transcription factor PU.1 is strongly associated with Friend
virus-induced erythroleukemia. PU.1 inhibits erythroid differentiation by binding
to and inhibiting GATA-1. PU.1 also may be involved in controlling proliferation 
of erythroid cells. We reported previously that the G(1) phase-specific
cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) also blocks erythroid differentiation. We now
report that PU.1 directly stimulates transcription of the cdk6 gene in both
normal erythroid progenitors and erythroleukemia cells, as well as in
macrophages. We propose that PU.1 coordinates proliferation and differentiation
in immature erythroid cells by inhibiting the GATA-1-mediated gene expression
program and also by regulating expression of genes that control progression
through the G(1) phase of the cell cycle, the period during which the decision to
differentiate is made.

PMCID: PMC2823399
PMID: 19955566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell. 2009 Nov 25;36(4):682-95. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.002.

Insights into GATA-1-mediated gene activation versus repression via genome-wide
chromatin occupancy analysis.

Yu M(1), Riva L, Xie H, Schindler Y, Moran TB, Cheng Y, Yu D, Hardison R, Weiss
MJ, Orkin SH, Bernstein BE, Fraenkel E, Cantor AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is required for terminal erythroid maturation and
functions as an activator or repressor depending on gene context. Yet its in vivo
site selectivity and ability to distinguish between activated versus repressed
genes remain incompletely understood. In this study, we performed GATA-1 ChIP-seq
in erythroid cells and compared it to GATA-1-induced gene expression changes.
Bound and differentially expressed genes contain a greater number of GATA-binding
motifs, a higher frequency of palindromic GATA sites, and closer occupancy to the
transcriptional start site versus nondifferentially expressed genes. Moreover, we
show that the transcription factor Zbtb7a occupies GATA-1-bound regions of some
direct GATA-1 target genes, that the presence of SCL/TAL1 helps distinguish
transcriptional activation versus repression, and that polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) is involved in epigenetic silencing of a subset of
GATA-1-repressed genes. These data provide insights into GATA-1-mediated gene
regulation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2800995
PMID: 19941827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Cell. 2009 Nov 25;36(4):667-81. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.001.

Discovering hematopoietic mechanisms through genome-wide analysis of GATA factor 
chromatin occupancy.

Fujiwara T(1), O'Geen H, Keles S, Blahnik K, Linnemann AK, Kang YA, Choi K,
Farnham PJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin
Institutes for Medical Research, Madison, 53705, USA.

GATA factors interact with simple DNA motifs (WGATAR) to regulate critical
processes, including hematopoiesis, but very few WGATAR motifs are occupied in
genomes. Given the rudimentary knowledge of mechanisms underlying this
restriction and how GATA factors establish genetic networks, we used ChIP-seq to 
define GATA-1 and GATA-2 occupancy genome-wide in erythroid cells. Coupled with
genetic complementation analysis and transcriptional profiling, these studies
revealed a rich collection of targets containing a characteristic binding motif
of greater complexity than WGATAR. GATA factors occupied loci encoding multiple
components of the Scl/TAL1 complex, a master regulator of hematopoiesis and
leukemogenic target. Mechanistic analyses provided evidence for crossregulatory
and autoregulatory interactions among components of this complex, including
GATA-2 induction of the hematopoietic corepressor ETO-2 and an ETO-2-negative
autoregulatory loop. These results establish fundamental principles underlying
GATA factor mechanisms in chromatin and illustrate a complex network of
considerable importance for the control of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2784893
PMID: 19941826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 20;29(2):442-56. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.336. Epub 2009 Nov 19.

NuRD mediates activating and repressive functions of GATA-1 and FOG-1 during
blood development.

Miccio A(1), Wang Y, Hong W, Gregory GD, Wang H, Yu X, Choi JK, Shelat S, Tong W,
Poncz M, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

GATA transcription factors interact with FOG proteins to regulate tissue
development by activating and repressing transcription. FOG-1 (ZFPM1), a
co-factor for the haematopoietic factor GATA-1, binds to the NuRD co-repressor
complex through a conserved N-terminal motif. Surprisingly, we detected NuRD
components at both repressed and active GATA-1/FOG-1 target genes in vivo. In
addition, while NuRD is required for transcriptional repression in certain
contexts, we show a direct requirement of NuRD also for FOG-1-dependent
transcriptional activation. Mice in which the FOG-1/NuRD interaction is disrupted
display defects similar to germline mutations in the Gata1 and Fog1 genes,
including anaemia and macrothrombocytopaenia. Gene expression analysis in primary
mutant erythroid cells and megakaryocytes (MKs) revealed an essential function
for NuRD during both the repression and activation of select GATA-1/FOG-1 target 
genes. These results show that NuRD is a critical co-factor for FOG-1 and
underscore the versatile use of NuRD by lineage-specific transcription factors to
activate and repress gene transcription in the appropriate cellular and genetic
context.

PMCID: PMC2824460
PMID: 19927129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov 19;7:130. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-130.

Gene expression profiles of mouse spermatogenesis during recovery from
irradiation.

Shah FJ(1), Tanaka M, Nielsen JE, Iwamoto T, Kobayashi S, Skakkebaek NE, Leffers 
H, Almstrup K.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction GR-5064, Rigshospitalet,
Blegdamsvej 9, DK-2100 Copenhagen O, Denmark. fozzi.shah@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Irradiation or chemotherapy that suspend normal spermatogenesis is
commonly used to treat various cancers. Fortunately, spermatogenesis in many
cases can be restored after such treatments but knowledge is limited about the
re-initiation process. Earlier studies have described the cellular changes that
happen during recovery from irradiation by means of histology. We have earlier
generated gene expression profiles during induction of spermatogenesis in mouse
postnatal developing testes and found a correlation between profiles and the
expressing cell types. The aim of the present work was to utilize the link
between expression profile and cell types to follow the cellular changes that
occur during post-irradiation recovery of spermatogenesis in order to describe
recovery by means of gene expression.
METHODS: Adult mouse testes were subjected to irradiation with 1 Gy or a
fractionated radiation of two times 1 Gy. Testes were sampled every third or
fourth day to follow the recovery of spermatogenesis and gene expression profiles
generated by means of differential display RT-PCR. In situ hybridization was in
addition performed to verify cell-type specific gene expression patterns.
RESULTS: Irradiation of mice testis created a gap in spermatogenesis, which was
initiated by loss of A1 to B-spermatogonia and lasted for approximately 10 days. 
Irradiation with 2 times 1 Gy showed a more pronounced effect on germ cell
elimination than with 1 Gy, but spermatogenesis was in both cases completely
reconstituted 42 days after irradiation. Comparison of expression profiles
indicated that the cellular reconstitution appeared equivalent to what is
observed during induction of normal spermatogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The data indicates that recovery of spermatogenesis can be monitored 
by means of gene expression, which could aid in designing radiation treatment
regimes for cancer patients leading to better restoration of spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2784772
PMID: 19925657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Pediatr Res. 2010 Mar;67(3):314-9. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181caafd2.

Severe gastrointestinal bleeding and thrombocytopenia in a child with an
anti-GATA1 autoantibody.

de Waele L(1), Freson K, Louwette S, Thys C, Wittevrongel C, de Vos R, Debeer A, 
van Geet C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

We describe a patient, who developed during the first week of life petechiae and 
hematomas caused by severe thrombocytopenia and gastrointestinal bleeding due to 
multiple small gastric hemangiomata. Bone marrow examination showed
hypermegakaryocytosis and dysmegakaryopoiesis. Alloimmune thrombocytopenia was
excluded. Only 3 y later, platelet counts normalized and bleedings disappeared
but small skin hemangiomata remained. Electron microscopy showed enlarged round
platelets with a paucity of alpha granules similar as in GATA1-deficient patients
but no GATA1 mutation was found. Immunoblot analysis showed a strong interaction 
between patient Igs and recombinant GATA1, GATA2, and the N finger (Nf) of GATA1.
The lymphocyte transformation test with recombinant GATA1Nf was positive. In
vitro culturing of normal CD34 cells with purified patient Igs showed a decreased
number of megakaryocyte colonies but an increased overall size of the colonies
compared with control Igs. Mice injected with patient Igs showed a reduced
platelet count compared with mice injected with control Igs. Thrombopoiesis was
also reduced after injection of patient Igs in transgenic zebrafish compared with
control Igs. In conclusion, this study is the first report of an anti-GATA1
autoantibody leading to severe thrombocytopenia and gastrointestinal bleeding
from multiple pinpoint hemangiomata.

PMID: 19924028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 15;285(3):1765-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038539. Epub 2009 
Nov 4.

Gata4 and Gata5 cooperatively regulate cardiac myocyte proliferation in mice.

Singh MK(1), Li Y, Li S, Cobb RM, Zhou D, Lu MM, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE, Gruber 
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

GATA5 is a member of the zinc finger transcription factor GATA family (GATA1-6)
that plays a wide variety of roles in embryonic and adult development.
Experiments in multiple model systems have emphasized the importance of the GATA 
family members 4-6 in the development of the endoderm and mesoderm. Yet despite
overlapping expression patterns, there is little evidence of an important role
for GATA5 in mammalian cardiac development. We have generated a new Gata5 mutant 
allele lacking exons 2 and 3 that encodes both zinc finger domains
(Gata5(tm)(2)(Eem)), and we show that although Gata5(-/-) mice are viable,
Gata4(+/-)5(-/-) mutants die at mid-gestation and exhibit profound cardiovascular
defects, including abnormalities of cardiomyocyte proliferation and cardiac
chamber maturation. These results demonstrate functional redundancy between Gata4
and Gata5 during cardiac development and implicate Gata5 as a candidate modifier 
gene for congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2804334
PMID: 19889636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Genome Res. 2009 Dec;19(12):2172-84. doi: 10.1101/gr.098921.109. Epub 2009 Nov 3.

Erythroid GATA1 function revealed by genome-wide analysis of transcription factor
occupancy, histone modifications, and mRNA expression.

Cheng Y(1), Wu W, Kumar SA, Yu D, Deng W, Tripic T, King DC, Chen KB, Zhang Y,
Drautz D, Giardine B, Schuster SC, Miller W, Chiaromonte F, Zhang Y, Blobel GA,
Weiss MJ, Hardison RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics of the Huck Institutes of
Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, USA.

The transcription factor GATA1 regulates an extensive program of gene activation 
and repression during erythroid development. However, the associated mechanisms, 
including the contributions of distal versus proximal cis-regulatory modules,
co-occupancy with other transcription factors, and the effects of histone
modifications, are poorly understood. We studied these problems genome-wide in a 
Gata1 knockout erythroblast cell line that undergoes GATA1-dependent terminal
maturation, identifying 2616 GATA1-responsive genes and 15,360 GATA1-occupied DNA
segments after restoration of GATA1. Virtually all occupied DNA segments have
high levels of H3K4 monomethylation and low levels of H3K27me3 around the
canonical GATA binding motif, regardless of whether the nearby gene is induced or
repressed. Induced genes tend to be bound by GATA1 close to the transcription
start site (most frequently in the first intron), have multiple GATA1-occupied
segments that are also bound by TAL1, and show evolutionary constraint on the
GATA1-binding site motif. In contrast, repressed genes are further away from
GATA1-occupied segments, and a subset shows reduced TAL1 occupancy and increased 
H3K27me3 at the transcription start site. Our data expand the repertoire of GATA1
action in erythropoiesis by defining a new cohort of target genes and determining
the spatial distribution of cis-regulatory modules throughout the genome. In
addition, we begin to establish functional criteria and mechanisms that
distinguish GATA1 activation from repression at specific target genes. More
broadly, these studies illustrate how a "master regulator" transcription factor
coordinates tissue differentiation through a panoply of DNA and protein
interactions.

PMCID: PMC2792182
PMID: 19887574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 1;285(1):773-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.030726. Epub 2009
Oct 23.

Loss of the Gata1 gene IE exon leads to variant transcript expression and the
production of a GATA1 protein lacking the N-terminal domain.

Kobayashi E(1), Shimizu R, Kikuchi Y, Takahashi S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

GATA1 is essential for the differentiation of erythroid cells and megakaryocytes.
The Gata1 gene is composed of multiple untranslated first exons and five common
coding exons. The erythroid first exon (IE exon) is important for Gata1 gene
expression in hematopoietic lineages. Because previous IE exon knockdown analyses
resulted in embryonic lethality, less is understood about the contribution of the
IE exon to adult hematopoiesis. Here, we achieved specific deletion of the floxed
IE exon in adulthood using an inducible Cre expression system. In this
conditional knock-out mouse line, the Gata1 mRNA level was significantly
down-regulated in the megakaryocyte lineage, resulting in thrombocytopenia with a
marked proliferation of megakaryocytes. By contrast, in the erythroid lineage,
Gata1 mRNA was expressed abundantly utilizing alternative first exons.
Especially, the IEb/c and newly identified IEd exons were transcribed at a level 
comparable with that of the IE exon in control mice. Surprisingly, in the IE-null
mouse, these transcripts failed to produce full-length GATA1 protein, but instead
yielded GATA1 lacking the N-terminal domain inefficiently. With low level
expression of the short form of GATA1, IE-null mice showed severe anemia with
skewed erythroid maturation. Notably, the hematological phenotypes of adult
IE-null mice substantially differ from those observed in mice harboring
conditional ablation of the entire Gata1 gene. The present study demonstrates
that the IE exon is instrumental to adult erythropoiesis by regulating the proper
level of transcription and selecting the correct transcription start site of the 
Gata1 gene.

PMCID: PMC2804226
PMID: 19854837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Dev Cell. 2009 Oct;17(4):527-40. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.09.005.

LRF is an essential downstream target of GATA1 in erythroid development and
regulates BIM-dependent apoptosis.

Maeda T(1), Ito K, Merghoub T, Poliseno L, Hobbs RM, Wang G, Dong L, Maeda M,
Dore LC, Zelent A, Luzzatto L, Teruya-Feldstein J, Weiss MJ, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

GATA-1-dependent transcription is essential for erythroid differentiation and
maturation. Suppression of programmed cell death is also thought to be critical
for this process; however, the link between these two features of erythropoiesis 
has remained elusive. Here, we show that the POZ-Krüppel family transcription
factor, LRF (also known as Zbtb7a/Pokemon), is a direct target of GATA1 and plays
an essential antiapoptotic role during terminal erythroid differentiation. We
find that loss of Lrf leads to lethal anemia in embryos, due to increased
apoptosis of late-stage erythroblasts. This programmed cell death is Arf and p53 
independent and is instead mediated by upregulation of the proapoptotic factor
Bim. We identify Lrf as a direct repressor of Bim transcription. In strong
support of this mechanism, genetic Bim loss delays the lethality of Lrf-deficient
embryos and rescues their anemia phenotype. Thus, our data define a key
transcriptional cascade for effective erythropoiesis, whereby GATA-1 suppresses
BIM-mediated apoptosis via LRF.

PMCID: PMC3134301
PMID: 19853566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Blood. 2009 Oct 22;114(17):3717-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-233833.

New GATA1 mutation in codon 2 leads to the earliest known premature stop codon in
transient myeloproliferative disorder.

Hoeller S, Bihl MP, Tzankov A, Kuehne T, Potthoff C, Bruder E.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Apr 22;115(16):3415-6.

Comment on
    Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3337-47.

PMID: 19850750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Blood. 2009 Dec 10;114(25):5162-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-224709.

Differential requirement for Gata1 DNA binding and transactivation between
primitive and definitive stages of hematopoiesis in zebrafish.

Belele CL(1), English MA, Chahal J, Burnetti A, Finckbeiner SM, Gibney G, Kirby
M, Sood R, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The transcription factor Gata1 is required for the development of erythrocytes
and megakaryocytes. Previous studies with a complementation rescue approach
showed that the zinc finger domains are required for both primitive and
definitive hematopoiesis. Here we report a novel zebrafish gata1 mutant with an
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced point mutation in the C-finger (gata1(T301K)). The 
Gata1 protein with this mutation bound to its DNA target sequence with reduced
affinity and transactivated inefficiently in a reporter assay. gata1(T301K/T301K)
fish had a decreased number of erythrocytes during primitive hematopoiesis but
normal adult hematopoiesis. We crossed the gata1(T301K/T301K) fish with those
carrying the R339X mutation, also known as vlad tepes (vlt), which abolishes DNA 
binding and transactivation activities. As we reported previously, gata1(vlt/vlt)
embryos were "bloodless" and died approximately 11 to 15 days after
fertilization. Interestingly, the gata1(T301K/vlt) fish had nearly a complete
block of primitive hematopoiesis, but they resumed hematopoiesis between 7 and 14
days after fertilization and grew to phenotypically normal fish with normal adult
hematopoiesis. Our findings suggest that the impact of Gata1 on hematopoiesis
correlates with its DNA-binding ability and that primitive hematopoiesis is more 
sensitive to reduction in Gata1 function than definitive hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2792212
PMID: 19843882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Oct;7(10):1693-703. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0031. Epub
2009 Oct 13.

PU.1 activation relieves GATA-1-mediated repression of Cebpa and Cbfb during
leukemia differentiation.

Burda P(1), Curik N, Kokavec J, Basova P, Mikulenkova D, Skoultchi AI, Zavadil J,
Stopka T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathological Physiology and Center of Experimental Hematology,
First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1 and PU.1 bind each other on DNA to
block transcriptional programs of undesired lineage during hematopoietic
commitment. Murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells that coexpress GATA-1 and PU.1 are
blocked at the blast stage but respond to molecular removal (downregulation) of
PU.1 or addition (upregulation) of GATA-1 by inducing terminal erythroid
differentiation. To test whether GATA-1 blocks PU.1 in MEL cells, we have
conditionally activated a transgenic PU.1 protein fused with the estrogen
receptor ligand-binding domain (PUER), resulting in activation of a myeloid
transcriptional program. Gene expression arrays identified components of the
PU.1-dependent transcriptome negatively regulated by GATA-1 in MEL cells,
including CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (Cebpa) and core-binding factor,
beta subunit (Cbfb), which encode two key hematopoietic transcription factors.
Inhibition of GATA-1 by small interfering RNA resulted in derepression of PU.1
target genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays identified PU.1
motif sequences near Cebpa and Cbfb that are co-occupied by PU.1 and GATA-1 in
the leukemic blasts. Significant derepression of Cebpa and Cbfb is achieved in
MEL cells by either activation of PU.1 or knockdown of GATA-1. Furthermore,
transcriptional regulation of these loci by manipulating the levels of PU.1 and
GATA-1 involves quantitative increases in a transcriptionally active chromatin
mark: acetylation of histone H3K9. Collectively, we show that either activation
of PU.1 or inhibition of GATA-1 efficiently reverses the transcriptional block
imposed by GATA-1 and leads to the activation of a myeloid transcriptional
program directed by PU.1.

PMCID: PMC3193075
PMID: 19825991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Sep;1176:77-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04968.x.

Removal of the spleen in mice alters the cytokine expression profile of the
marrow micro-environment and increases bone formation.

Martelli F(1), Verrucci M, Migliaccio G, Zingariello M, Rana RA, Vannucchi AM,
Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Splenectomized mice express progressively increased numbers of platelets in the
blood and reduced numbers of megakaryocytes in the marrow with age. The
megakaryocytes in the marrow of these animals express reduced levels of Gata1, a 
transcription factor necessary for their maturation. In addition, the marrow from
these animals expresses greater levels of cytokines (TGF-beta, PDGF-alpha, and
VEGF) known to be produced at high levels by megakaryocytes expressing reduced
levels of Gata1. This high level of cytokine expression is in turn associated
with active osteoblast proliferation localized to areas of the femur, where
megakaryocytes expressing reduced Gata1 levels are also found. These results
confirm the role of megakaryocytes as regulator of bone formation in mice and
suggest that a cross-talk between the spleen and marrow may regulate the total
numbers of hemopoietic niches present in an animal.

PMCID: PMC3690574
PMID: 19796235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Sep;1176:18-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04570.x.

Lymphoid lineage fate decision of hematopoietic stem cells.

Akashi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
Koichi_akashi@dfci.harvard.edu

To understand the mechanism in lymphoid development, it is critical to identify
developmental intermediates downstream of hematopoietic stem cells, including
cells responsible for seeding the thymus. Although early studies showed that
hematopoietic stem cells choose either the myeloid-erythroid or the lymphoid
pathway, recent data suggest that myelo-lymphoid precursors lacking erythroid
potential exist in early hematopoiesis before cells are fully committed to the
lymphoid lineage. We here summarize the phenotype and functional properties of
such progenitors and the current developmental map for the lymphoid lineage.

PMID: 19796229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Exp Hematol. 2009 Dec;37(12):1379-1386.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.08.008.
Epub 2009 Sep 20.

A novel zebrafish jak2a(V581F) model shared features of human JAK2(V617F)
polycythemia vera.

Ma AC(1), Fan A, Ward AC, Liongue C, Lewis RS, Cheng SH, Chan PK, Yip SF, Liang
R, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

OBJECTIVE: The Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) is important for embryonic primitive
hematopoiesis. A gain-of-function JAK2 (JAK2(V617F)) mutation in human is
pathogenetically linked to polycythemia vera (PV). In this study, we generated a 
zebrafish ortholog of human JAK2(V617F) (referred herewith jak2a(V581F)) by
site-directed mutagenesis and examined its relevance as a model of human PV.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Zebrafish embryos at one-cell stage were injected with
jak2a(V581F) mRNA (200pg/embryo). In some experiments, the embryos were treated
with a specific JAK2 inhibitor, TG101209. The effects of jak2a stimulation on
hematopoiesis, jak/stat signaling, and erythropoietin signaling were evaluated at
18-somites.
RESULTS: Injection with jak2a(V581F) mRNA significantly increased erythropoiesis,
as enumerated by flow cytometry based on gfp(+) population in dissociated
Tg(gata1:gfp) embryos. The response was reduced by stat5.1 morpholino coinjection
(control: 4.37% +/- 0.08%; jak2a(V581F) injected: 5.71% +/- 0.07%, coinjecting
jak2a(V581F) mRNA and stat5.1 morpholino: 4.66% +/- 0.13%; p<0.01). jak2a(V581F) 
mRNA also upregulated gata1 (1.83 +/- 0.08 fold; p=0.005), embryonic
alpha-hemoglobin (1.61 +/- 0.12 fold; p=0.049), and beta-hemoglobin gene
expression (1.65 +/- 0.13-fold; p=0.026) and increased stat5 phosphorylation.
These responses were also ameliorated by stat5.1 morpholino coinjection or
treatment with a specific JAK2 inhibitor, TG101209. jak2a(V581F) mRNA
significantly reduced erythropoietin gene (0.24 +/- 0.03 fold; p=0.006) and
protein expression (control: 0.633+/-0.11; jak2a(V581F) mRNA: 0.222+/-0.07
mIU/mL; p=0.019).
CONCLUSION: The zebrafish jak2a(V581F) model shared many features with human PV
and might provide us with mechanistic insights of this disease.

PMID: 19772888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Nov;37(21):7024-38. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp747.

Primary sequence and epigenetic determinants of in vivo occupancy of genomic DNA 
by GATA1.

Zhang Y(1), Wu W, Cheng Y, King DC, Harris RS, Taylor J, Chiaromonte F, Hardison 
RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Huck Institutes of Life
Sciences.

DNA sequence motifs and epigenetic modifications contribute to specific binding
by a transcription factor, but the extent to which each feature determines
occupancy in vivo is poorly understood. We addressed this question in erythroid
cells by identifying DNA segments occupied by GATA1 and measuring the level of
trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and monomethylation of H3
lysine 4 (H3K4me1) along a 66 Mb region of mouse chromosome 7. While 91% of the
GATA1-occupied segments contain the consensus binding-site motif WGATAR, only
approximately 0.7% of DNA segments with such a motif are occupied. Using a
discriminative motif enumeration method, we identified additional motifs
predictive of occupancy given the presence of WGATAR. The specific motif variant 
AGATAA and occurrence of multiple WGATAR motifs are both strong discriminators.
Combining motifs to pair a WGATAR motif with a binding site motif for GATA1, EKLF
or SP1 improves discriminative power. Epigenetic modifications are also strong
determinants, with the factor-bound segments highly enriched for H3K4me1 and
depleted of H3K27me3. Combining primary sequence and epigenetic determinants
captures 52% of the GATA1-occupied DNA segments and substantially increases the
specificity, to one out of seven segments with the required motif combination and
epigenetic signals being bound.

PMCID: PMC2790884
PMID: 19767611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30673-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.042242. Epub
2009 Sep 7.

Expression levels of histone deacetylases determine the cell fate of
hematopoietic progenitors.

Wada T(1), Kikuchi J, Nishimura N, Shimizu R, Kitamura T, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
School, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are globally implicated in the growth and
differentiation of mammalian cells; however, relatively little is known about
their specific roles in hematopoiesis. In this study, we investigated the
expression of HDACs in human hematopoietic cells and their functions during
hematopoiesis. The expression of HDACs was very low in hematopoietic progenitor
cells, which was accompanied by histone hyperacetylation. HDACs were detectable
in more differentiated progenitors and erythroid precursors but down-regulated in
mature myeloid cells especially granulocytes. In contrast, acute myeloid
leukemias showed HDAC overexpression and histone hypoacetylation. Transcription
of the HDAC1 gene was repressed by CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins during myeloid
differentiation, and activated by GATA-1 during erythro-megakaryocytic
differentiation. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC1 enhanced
myeloid differentiation in immature hematopoietic cell lines and perturbed
erythroid differentiation in progenitor cells. Myeloid but not
erythro-megakaryocytic differentiation was blocked in mice transplanted with
HDAC1-overexpressing hematopoietic progenitor cells. These findings suggest that 
HDAC is not merely an auxiliary factor of genetic elements but plays a direct
role in the cell fate decision of hematopoietic progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2781621
PMID: 19736310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Blood. 2009 Nov 19;114(21):4654-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-189910. Epub 2009 
Sep 3.

The role and regulation of friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) during blood development in
the zebrafish.

Amigo JD(1), Ackermann GE, Cope JJ, Yu M, Cooney JD, Ma D, Langer NB, Shafizadeh 
E, Shaw GC, Horsely W, Trede NS, Davidson AJ, Barut BA, Zhou Y, Wojiski SA,
Traver D, Moran TB, Kourkoulis G, Hsu K, Kanki JP, Shah DI, Lin HF, Handin RI,
Cantor AB, Paw BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Brigham & Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The nuclear protein FOG-1 binds transcription factor GATA-1 to facilitate
erythroid and megakaryocytic maturation. However, little is known about the
function of FOG-1 during myeloid and lymphoid development or how FOG-1 expression
is regulated in any tissue. We used in situ hybridization, gain- and
loss-of-function studies in zebrafish to address these problems. Zebrafish FOG-1 
is expressed in early hematopoietic cells, as well as heart, viscera, and
paraspinal neurons, suggesting that it has multifaceted functions in
organogenesis. We found that FOG-1 is dispensable for endoderm specification but 
is required for endoderm patterning affecting the expression of late-stage T-cell
markers, independent of GATA-1. The suppression of FOG-1, in the presence of
normal GATA-1 levels, induces severe anemia and thrombocytopenia and expands
myeloid-progenitor cells, indicating that FOG-1 is required during
erythroid/myeloid commitment. To functionally interrogate whether GATA-1
regulates FOG-1 in vivo, we used bioinformatics combined with transgenic assays. 
Thus, we identified 2 cis-regulatory elements that control the tissue-specific
gene expression of FOG-1. One of these enhancers contains functional GATA-binding
sites, indicating the potential for a regulatory loop in which GATA factors
control the expression of their partner protein FOG-1.

PMCID: PMC2780302
PMID: 19729519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30187-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.026948. Epub
2009 Sep 1.

Characterization of a functional ZBP-89 binding site that mediates Gata1 gene
expression during hematopoietic development.

Ohneda K(1), Ohmori S, Ishijima Y, Nakano M, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Takasaki University of Health and
Welfare, Takasaki 370-0033, Japan. kohneda@takasaki-u.ac.jp

GATA-1 is a lineage-restricted transcription factor that plays essential roles in
hematopoietic development. The Gata1 gene hematopoietic enhancer allowed Gata1
reporter expression in erythroid cells and megakaryocytes of transgenic mice. The
Gata1 hematopoietic enhancer activity is strictly dependent on a GATA site
located in the 5' region of the enhancer. However, the importance of the GC-rich 
region adjacent to the 3'-end of this GATA site has been also suggested. In this 
study, we show that this GC-rich region contains five contiguous deoxyguanosine
residues (G(5) string) that are bound by multiple nuclear proteins.
Interestingly, deletion of one deoxyguanosine residue from the G(5) string (G(4) 
mutant) specifically eliminates binding to ZBP-89, a Krüppel-like transcription
factor, but not to Sp3 and other binding factors. We demonstrate that GATA-1 and 
ZBP-89 occupy chromatin regions of the Gata1 enhancer and physically associate in
vitro through zinc finger domains. Gel mobility shift assays and DNA affinity
precipitation assays suggest that binding of ZBP-89 to this region is reduced in 
the absence of GATA-1 binding to the G1HE. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrate
that ZBP-89 activates the Gata1 enhancer depending on the G(5) string sequence.
Finally, transgenic mouse studies reveal that the G(4) mutation significantly
reduced the reporter activity of the Gata1 hematopoietic regulatory domain
encompassing an 8.5-kbp region of the Gata1 gene. These data provide compelling
evidence that the G(5) string is necessary for Gata1 gene expression in vivo and 
ZBP-89 is the functional trans-acting factor for this cis-acting region.

PMCID: PMC2781574
PMID: 19723625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2009 Oct 29;114(18):3813-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-210484. Epub 2009 
Aug 31.

Reciprocal role of GATA-1 and vitamin D receptor in human myeloid dendritic cell 
differentiation.

Göbel F(1), Taschner S, Jurkin J, Konradi S, Vaculik C, Richter S, Kneidinger D, 
Mühlbacher C, Bieglmayer C, Elbe-Bürger A, Strobl H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Center of Physiology, Pathophysiology, and
Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Two major pathways of human myeloid dendritic cell (DC) subset differentiation
have previously been delineated. Langerhans cells (LCs) reside in epithelia in
the steady state, whereas monocytes can provide dendritic cells (DCs) on demand
in response to inflammatory signals. Both DC subset pathways arise from shared
CD14+ monocyte precursors, which in turn develop from myeloid committed
progenitor cells. However, the underlying hematopoietic mechanisms still remain
poorly defined. Here, we demonstrate that the vitamin D(3) receptor (VDR) is
induced by transforming growth factor beta1 during LC lineage commitment and
exerts a positive role during LC generation. In contrast, VDR is repressed during
interleukin-4 (IL-4)-dependent monocyte-derived DC (moDC) differentiation. We
identified GATA-1 as a repressor of VDR. GATA-1 is induced by IL-4 in moDCs.
Forced inducible expression of GATA-1 mimics IL-4 in redirecting moDC
differentiation and vice versa, GATA-1 knockdown arrests moDC differentiation at 
the monocyte stage. Moreover, ectopic GATA-1 expression stabilizes the moDC
phenotype under monocyte-promoting conditions in the presence of vitamin D3
(VD3). In summary, human myeloid DC subset differentiation is inversely regulated
by GATA-1 and VDR. GATA-1 mediates the repression of VDR and enables
IL-4-dependent moDC differentiation. Conversely, VDR is induced downstream of
transforming growth factor beta1 and is functionally involved in promoting LC
differentiation.

PMID: 19721012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Mol Diagn. 2009 Sep;11(5):371-80. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2009.080132.

Down syndrome and malignancies: a unique clinical relationship: a paper from the 
2008 william beaumont hospital symposium on molecular pathology.

Xavier AC(1), Ge Y, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Department
of Pediatrics, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 3901 Beaubien Blvd.,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

The patterns of malignancies in Down syndrome (DS) are unique and highlight the
relationship between chromosome 21 and cancer. DS children have a approximately
10- to 20-fold higher risk for developing acute lymphoblastic leukemia and acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML), as compared with non-DS children, although they do not
have a uniformly increased risk of developing solid tumors. DS children with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia frequently experience higher levels of
treatment-related toxicity and inferior event-free survival rates, as compared
with non-DS children. DS children also develop AML with unique features and have 
a 500-fold increased risk of developing the AML subtype, acute megakaryocytic
leukemia (AMkL; M7). Nearly 10% of DS newborns are diagnosed with a variant of
AMkL, the transient myeloproliferative disorder, which can resolve spontaneously 
without treatment; event-free survival rates for DS patients with AMkL ranges
from 80% to 100%, in comparison with <30% for non-DS children with AMkL. In
addition, somatic mutations of the GATA1 gene have been detected in nearly all DS
TMD and AMkL cases and not in leukemia cases in non-DS children. GATA1 mutations 
are key factors linked to both leukemogenesis and the high cure rates of DS AMkL 
patients. Identifying the mechanisms that account for the high event-free
survival rates of DS AMkL patients may ultimately improve AML treatment as well. 
Examining leukemogenesis in DS children may identify factors linked to the
general development of childhood leukemia and lead to potential new therapeutic
strategies to fight this disease.

PMCID: PMC2729834
PMID: 19710397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Oct 15;108(3):675-87. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22304.

Chicken alpha-globin switching depends on autonomous silencing of the embryonic
pi globin gene by epigenetics mechanisms.

Rincón-Arano H(1), Guerrero G, Valdes-Quezada C, Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 70-242, México 04510,
DF, México.

Switching in hemoglobin gene expression is an informative paradigm for studying
transcriptional regulation. Here we determined the patterns of chicken
alpha-globin gene expression during development and erythroid differentiation.
Previously published data suggested that the promoter regions of alpha-globin
genes contain the complete information for proper developmental regulation.
However, our data show a preferential trans-activation of the embryonic
alpha-globin gene independent of the developmental or differentiation stage. We
also found that DNA methylation and histone deacetylation play key roles in
silencing the expression of the embryonic pi gene in definitive erythrocytes.
However, drug-mediated reactivation of the embryonic gene during definitive
erythropoiesis dramatically impaired the expression of the adult genes,
suggesting gene competition or interference for enhancer elements. Our results
also support a model in which the lack of open chromatin marks and localized
recruitment of chicken MeCP2 contribute to autonomous gene silencing of the
embryonic alpha-globin gene in a developmentally specific manner. We propose that
epigenetic mechanisms are necessary for in vivo chicken alpha-globin gene
switching through differential gene silencing of the embryonic alpha-globin gene 
in order to allow proper activation of adult alpha-globin genes.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19693775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;29(20):5399-412. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00777-09. Epub 2009 Aug
17.

Chromatin architecture and transcription factor binding regulate expression of
erythrocyte membrane protein genes.

Steiner LA(1), Maksimova Y, Schulz V, Wong C, Raha D, Mahajan MC, Weissman SM,
Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, P.O. Box 208064, New Haven, CT 06520-8064, USA.

Erythrocyte membrane protein genes serve as excellent models of complex gene
locus structure and function, but their study has been complicated by both their 
large size and their complexity. To begin to understand the intricate interplay
of transcription, dynamic chromatin architecture, transcription factor binding,
and genomic organization in regulation of erythrocyte membrane protein genes, we 
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with microarray analysis
and ChIP coupled with massively parallel DNA sequencing in both erythroid and
nonerythroid cells. Unexpectedly, most regions of GATA-1 and NF-E2 binding were
remote from gene promoters and transcriptional start sites, located primarily in 
introns. Cooccupancy with FOG-1, SCL, and MTA-2 was found at all regions of
GATA-1 binding, with cooccupancy of SCL and MTA-2 also found at regions of NF-E2 
binding. Cooccupancy of GATA-1 and NF-E2 was found frequently. A common signature
of histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 4, GATA-1, NF-E2, FOG-1, SCL, and MTA-2
binding and consensus GATA-1-E-box binding motifs located 34 to 90 bp away from
NF-E2 binding motifs was found frequently in erythroid cell-expressed genes.
These results provide insights into our understanding of membrane protein gene
regulation in erythropoiesis and the regulation of complex genetic loci in
erythroid and nonerythroid cells and identify numerous candidate regions for
mutations associated with membrane-linked hemolytic anemia.

PMCID: PMC2756878
PMID: 19687298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Genes Cells. 2009 Sep;14(9):1119-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01338.x. Epub 
2009 Aug 13.

Induction of hyperproliferative fetal megakaryopoiesis by an N-terminally
truncated GATA1 mutant.

Shimizu R(1), Kobayashi E, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Two GATA1-related leukemias have been described: one is an erythroleukemia that
develops in mice as a consequence of diminished expression of wild-type GATA1,
whereas the other is an acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) that arises in
Down syndrome children as a consequence of somatic N-terminal truncation
(DeltaNT) of GATA1. We discovered that mice expressing the shortened GATA1
protein (DeltaNTR mice) phenocopies the human transient myeloproliferative
disorder (TMD) that precedes AMKL in Down syndrome children. In perinatal livers 
of the DeltaNTR mutant mice, immature megakaryocytes accumulate massively, and
this fraction contains cells that form hyperproliferative megakaryocytic
colonies. Furthermore, showing good agreement with the clinical course of TMD in 
humans, DeltaNTR mutant mice undergo spontaneous resolution from the massive
megakaryocyte accumulation concomitant with the switch of hematopoietic
microenvironment from liver to bone marrow/spleen. These results thus demonstrate
that expression of the GATA1/Gata1 N-terminal deletion mutant per se induces
hyperproliferative fetal megakaryopoiesis. This mouse model serves as an
important means to clarify how impaired GATA1 function contributes to the
multi-step leukemogenesis.

PMID: 19682090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 23;284(43):29310-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.043497. Epub 2009
Aug 4.

Translational isoforms of FOG1 regulate GATA1-interacting complexes.

Snow JW(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Erythropoietic and megakaryocytic programs are directed by the transcription
factor GATA1. Friend of GATA1 (FOG1), a protein interaction partner of GATA1, is 
critical for GATA1 function in multiple contexts. Previous work has shown that
FOG1 recruits two multi-protein complexes, the nucleosome remodeling domain
(NuRD) complex and a C-terminal binding protein (CTBP)-containing complex, into
association with GATA1 to mediate activation and repression of target genes. To
elucidate mechanisms that might differentially regulate the association of FOG1, 
as well as GATA1, with these two complexes, we characterized a previously
unrecognized translational isoform of FOG1. We found that an N-terminally
truncated version of FOG1 is produced from an internal ATG and that this isoform,
designated FOG1S, lacks the nucleosome remodeling domain-binding domain, altering
the complexes with which it interacts. Both isoforms interact with the C-terminal
binding protein complex, which we show also contains lysine-specific demethylase 
1 (LSD1). FOG1S is preferentially excluded from the nucleus by unknown
mechanisms. These data reveal two novel mechanisms for the regulation of GATA1
interaction with FOG1-dependent protein complexes through the production of two
translational isoforms with differential interaction profiles and independent
nuclear localization controls.

PMCID: PMC2785561
PMID: 19654328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Blood. 2009 Sep 24;114(13):2753-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-190330. Epub 2009 
Jul 24.

Mutational spectrum at GATA1 provides insights into mutagenesis and
leukemogenesis in Down syndrome.

Cabelof DC(1), Patel HV, Chen Q, van Remmen H, Matherly LH, Ge Y, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI,
USA.

Down syndrome (DS) children have a unique genetic susceptibility to develop
leukemia, in particular, acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL) associated with
somatic GATA1 mutations. The study of this genetic susceptibility with the use of
DS as a model of leukemogenesis has broad applicability to the understanding of
leukemia in children overall. On the basis of the role of GATA1 mutations in DS
AMkL, we analyzed the mutational spectrum of GATA1 mutations to begin elucidating
possible mechanisms by which these sequence alterations arise. Mutational
analysis revealed a predominance of small insertion/deletion, duplication, and
base substitution mutations, including G:C>T:A, G:C>A:T, and A:T>G:C. This
mutational spectrum points to potential oxidative stress and aberrant folate
metabolism secondary to genes on chromosome 21 (eg, cystathionine-beta-synthase, 
superoxide dismutase) as potential causes of GATA1 mutations. Furthermore, DNA
repair capacity evaluated in DS and non-DS patient samples provided evidence that
the base excision repair pathway is compromised in DS tissues, suggesting that
inability to repair DNA damage also may play a critical role in the unique
susceptibility of DS children to develop leukemia. A model of leukemogenesis in
DS is proposed in which mutagenesis is driven by cystathionine-beta-synthase
overexpression and altered folate homeostasis that becomes fixed as the ability
to repair DNA damage is compromised.

PMCID: PMC2756130
PMID: 19633202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Br J Pharmacol. 2009 Aug;157(8):1451-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00333.x.
Epub 2009 Jul 20.

A non-apoptotic function of caspase-3 in pharmacologically-induced
differentiation of K562 cells.

Sztiller-Sikorska M(1), Jakubowska J, Wozniak M, Stasiak M, Czyz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of Cancer, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz,
Poland.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Several anticancer drugs with diverse chemical structures
can induce differentiation of cancer cells. This study was undertaken to explore 
the potential contribution of caspase-3 to pharmacologically-induced
differentiation of K562 cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We assessed differentiation by measuring the expression of
glycophorin A and haemoglobin synthesis in K562 cells treated with low
concentrations of doxorubicin, hydroxyurea, cytosine arabinoside, cisplatin and
haemin. Caspase-3 activation, mitochondrial membrane potential dissipation and
viability were assessed by FACS. GATA-1-binding activity was evaluated by EMSA.
KEY RESULTS: Treatment of K562 cells with low concentrations of the tested drugs 
activated caspase-3 but did not trigger detectable apoptosis. Instead, elevated
levels of haemoglobin-positive and glycophorin A/caspase-3-double-positive cells 
were observed, suggesting involvement of caspase-3 in drug-induced
differentiation. Inhibition of caspase-3 activity significantly reduced the
ability of K562 cells to execute the differentiation programme. Mitochondrial
membrane potential dissipation was observed, indicating involvement of the
mitochondrial pathway. Binding activity of GATA-1, transcription factor
responsible for differentiation and cell survival, was not diminished by
increased caspase-3 activity during drug-stimulated differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our results could explain how anticancer drugs,
with diverse structures and modes of action, can stimulate erythroid
differentiation in leukaemic cells with appropriate genetic backgrounds. Our
findings imply that some similarities exist between pharmacologically-induced
differentiation of erythroleukaemic cells and normal erythropoiesis, both
involving caspase-3 activation at high levels of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-X(L) 
and chaperone protein Hsp70 (heat shock protein 70). Therefore, the functions of 
caspase-3, unrelated to cell death, can be extended to pharmacologically-induced 
differentiation of some cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2765302
PMID: 19627286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):5168-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00482-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
20.

GATA-2 reinforces megakaryocyte development in the absence of GATA-1.

Huang Z(1), Dore LC, Li Z, Orkin SH, Feng G, Lin S, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Northwestern University, Lurie Research
Building 5-113, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

GATA-2 is an essential transcription factor that regulates multiple aspects of
hematopoiesis. Dysregulation of GATA-2 is a hallmark of acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia in children with Down syndrome, a malignancy that is defined by the
combination of trisomy 21 and a GATA1 mutation. Here, we show that GATA-2 is
required for normal megakaryocyte development as well as aberrant
megakaryopoiesis in Gata1 mutant cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that GATA-2
indirectly controls cell cycle progression in GATA-1-deficient megakaryocytes.
Genome-wide microarray analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies
revealed that GATA-2 regulates a wide set of genes, including cell cycle
regulators and megakaryocyte-specific genes. Surprisingly, GATA-2 also negatively
regulates the expression of crucial myeloid transcription factors, such as Sfpi1 
and Cebpa. In the absence of GATA-1, GATA-2 prevents induction of a latent
myeloid gene expression program. Thus, GATA-2 contributes to cell cycle
progression and the maintenance of megakaryocyte identity of GATA-1-deficient
cells, including GATA-1s-expressing fetal megakaryocyte progenitors. Moreover,
our data reveal that overexpression of GATA-2 facilitates aberrant
megakaryopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2738300
PMID: 19620289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Exp Hematol. 2009 Oct;37(10):1143-1156.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.07.001.
Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Dynamics of alpha-globin locus chromatin structure and gene expression during
erythroid differentiation of human CD34(+) cells in culture.

Mahajan MC(1), Karmakar S, Newburger PE, Krause DS, Weissman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Anlyan Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study has been to establish serum-free culture 
conditions for ex vivo expansion and differentiation of human CD34(+) cells into 
erythroid lineage and to study the chromatin structure, gene expression, and
transcription factor recruitment at the alpha-globin locus in the developing
erythron.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A basal Iscove's modified Dulbecco's medium cell culture
medium with 1% bovine serum albumin as a serum replacement and a combination of
cytokines and growth factors was used for expansion and differentiation of the
CD34(+) cells. Expression patterns of the alpha- and beta-like genes at various
stages of erythropoiesis was studied by reverse transcriptase quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analysis, profile of key erythroid transcription
factors was investigated by Western blotting, and the chromatin structure and
transcription factor recruitment at the alpha-globin locus was investigated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis.
RESULTS: Human CD34(+) cells in the serum-free medium undergo near synchronous
erythroid differentiation to yield large amount of cells at different
differentiation stages. We observe distinct patterns of the histone modifications
and transcription factor binding at the alpha-globin locus during erythroid
differentiation of CD34(+) cells. Nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2 (NF-E2) was 
present at upstream activator sites even before addition of erythropoietin (EPO),
while bound GATA-1 was only detectable after EPO treatment. After 7 days of EPO
treatment, H3K4Me2 modification uniformly increases throughout the alpha-globin
locus. Acetylation at H3K9 and binding of Pol II, NF-E2, and GATA-1 were
restricted to certain hypersensitive sites of the enhancer and theta gene, and
were conspicuously low at the alpha-like globin promoters. Rearrangement of the
insulator binding factor CTCF took place at and around the alpha-globin locus as 
CD34(+) cells differentiated into erythroid pathway.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that remodeling of the upstream elements may be 
the primary event in activation of alpha-globin gene expression. Activation of
alpha-globin genes upon EPO treatment involves initial binding of Pol II,
downregulation of pre-existing factors like NF-E2, removal of CTCF from the
locus, then rebinding of CTCF in an altered pattern, and concurrent or subsequent
binding of transcription factors like GATA-1.

PMCID: PMC2997688
PMID: 19607874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Development. 2009 Aug;136(16):2757-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.034959. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

The Integrator subunits function in hematopoiesis by modulating Smad/BMP
signaling.

Tao S(1), Cai Y, Sampath K.

Author information: 
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 Research Link, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

Hematopoiesis, the dynamic process of blood cell development, is regulated by the
activity of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway and by many
transcription factors. However, the molecules and mechanisms that regulate
BMP/Smad signaling in hematopoiesis are largely unknown. Here, we show that the
Integrator complex, an evolutionarily conserved group of proteins, functions in
zebrafish hematopoiesis by modulating Smad/BMP signaling. The Integrator complex 
proteins are known to directly interact with RNA polymerase II to mediate 3' end 
processing of U1 and U2 snRNAs. We have identified several subunits of the
Integrator complex in zebrafish. Antisense morpholino-mediated knockdown of the
Integrator subunit 5 (Ints5) in zebrafish embryos affects U1 and U2 snRNA
processing, leading to aberrant splicing of smad1 and smad5 RNA, and reduced
expression of the hematopoietic genes stem cell leukemia (scl, also known as
tal1) and gata1. Blood smears from ints5 morphant embryos show arrested red blood
cell differentiation, similar to scl-deficient embryos. Interestingly, targeting 
other Integrator subunits also leads to defects in smad5 RNA splicing and
arrested hematopoiesis, suggesting that the Ints proteins function as a complex
to regulate the BMP pathway during hematopoiesis. Our work establishes a link
between the RNA processing machinery and the downstream effectors of BMP
signaling, and reveals a new group of proteins that regulates the switch from
primitive hematopoietic stem cell identity and blood cell differentiation by
modulating Smad function.

PMID: 19605500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Br J Haematol. 2009 Oct;147(1):3-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07789.x. Epub 
2009 Jul 6.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (AMKL) and transient myeloproliferative disorder
(TMD) in Down syndrome: a multi-step model of myeloid leukaemogenesis.

Roy A(1), Roberts I, Norton A, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) have a marked increase in susceptibility to
Acute Megakaryoblastic Leukaemia (DS-AMKL) and the closely linked neonatal
preleukaemic syndrome, Transient Myeloproliferative Disorder (DS-TMD). The
distinct stages of DS-TMD and DS-AMKL provide an excellent tractable model to
study leukaemogenesis. This review focuses on recent studies describing clinical,
haematological and biological features of DS-AMKL and DS-TMD. The findings from
these studies suggest that mutations in the key haemopoietic regulator GATA1
(GATA binding protein 1) in DS-AMKL and DS-TMD may be useful in diagnosis and
assessing minimal residual disease. These findings raise the possibility of
population-based screening strategies for DS-TMD and the development of treatment
to eliminate the preleukaemic TMD clone to prevent DS-AMKL. Advances in our
understanding of perturbed haemopoiesis in DS, the role of GATA1 and of
cooperating mutations are also discussed. These findings have implications for
leukaemia biology more broadly given the frequency of acquired trisomy in other
human leukaemias.

PMID: 19594743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2009 Oct;154(2):270-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.06.024. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Ontogenetic development of erythropoiesis can be studied non-invasively in
GATA-1:DsRed transgenic zebrafish.

Yaqoob N(1), Holotta M, Prem C, Kopp R, Schwerte T.

Author information: 
(1)University of Innsbruck, Institute of Zoology, Technikerstrasse 25, A-6020
Innsbruck, Austria.

For the erythroid cell lineage development in vertebrates, GATA-1 transcription
factor is essential. In our report, we have demonstrated that the approximate
developmental status of erythrocytes and the progression of blood formation can
be studied non-invasively in GATA-1:DsRed transgenic zebrafish (Danio rerio)
embryo and larva by characterization of fluorescence luminance spectra. The study
was carried out for animals maintained under normoxic and hypoxic (152 and 20
torr PO(2) respectively) conditions up to 10 days post-fertilization (dpf) and
total blood cell concentrations and fluorescent cells' percentage were determined
for this purpose. The erythroids were classified into five intensity stages (IS) 
on the basis of their fluorescence intensity. The luminescent cells with medium
intensities (IS3) in normoxic animals were found throughout 2 to 10 dpf although 
in lower quantity while in hypoxic group they appeared from 5 dpf to 10 dpf
showing a maximum of 15% of the total luminescent cells at 8 dpf. The total blood
cell concentration dropped after 8 dpf in contrast to hypoxic group which showed 
further increasing trend. The fluorescent cells' percentage in normoxic group was
generally higher as compared to the hypoxic ones. Our method successfully defined
various stages of erythroid development. An effort was also made to correlate our
luminance data (GATA-1 expression) and total blood cell concentrations with Epo
mRNA production. Quantitative RT-PCR of 2-15 dpf old zebrafish was carried out
for this purpose. Normoxic animals showed 1-3 Epo mRNA copies per ng RNA in
contrast to the hypoxic larvae that showed remarkable fluctuation of 1 to 12 Epo 
mRNA copies per ng RNA during development. The blood volume (aortic diameter) and
production time scale proved to be important factors to define the relationship
of Epo mRNA with total blood cell concentration and GATA-1 protein expression
respectively.

PMID: 19584002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Blood. 2009 Sep 3;114(10):2107-20. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-211680. Epub 2009
Jul 1.

Gata1 expression driven by the alternative HS2 enhancer in the spleen rescues the
hematopoietic failure induced by the hypomorphic Gata1low mutation.

Migliaccio AR(1), Martelli F, Verrucci M, Sanchez M, Valeri M, Migliaccio G,
Vannucchi AM, Zingariello M, Di Baldassarre A, Ghinassi B, Rana RA, van
Hensbergen Y, Fibbe WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Instituto Superiore 
Sanità, Rome, Italy. annarita.migliaccio@mssm.edu

Rigorously defined reconstitution assays developed in recent years have allowed
recognition of the delicate relationship that exists between hematopoietic stem
cells and their niches. This balance ensures that hematopoiesis occurs in the
marrow under steady-state conditions. However, during development, recovery from 
hematopoietic stress and in myeloproliferative disorders, hematopoiesis occurs in
extramedullary sites whose microenvironments are still poorly defined. The
hypomorphic Gata1(low) mutation deletes the regulatory sequences of the gene
necessary for its expression in hematopoietic cells generated in the marrow. By
analyzing the mechanism that rescues hematopoiesis in mice carrying this
mutation, we provide evidence that extramedullary microenvironments sustain
maturation of stem cells that would be otherwise incapable of maturing in the
marrow.

PMCID: PMC2744572
PMID: 19571316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 28;284(35):23331-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.036079. Epub
2009 Jun 25.

Novel roles of GATA1 in regulation of angiogenic factor AGGF1 and endothelial
cell function.

Fan C(1), Ouyang P, Timur AA, He P, You SA, Hu Y, Ke T, Driscoll DJ, Chen Q, Wang
QK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

AGGF1 is an angiogenic factor, and its deregulation is associated with a vascular
malformation consistent with Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome (KTS). This study defines
the molecular mechanism for transcriptional regulation of AGGF1 expression.
Transcription of AGGF1 starts at two nearby sites, -367 and -364 bp upstream of
the translation start site. Analyses of 5'- and 3'-serial promoter deletions
defined the core promoter/regulatory elements, including two repressor sites
(from -1971 to -3990 and from -7521 to -8391, respectively) and two activator
sites (a GATA1 consensus binding site from -295 to -300 and a second activator
site from -129 to -159). Both the GATA1 site and the second activator site are
essential for AGGF1 expression. A similar expression profile was found for GATA1 
and AGGF1 in cells (including various endothelial cells) and tissues.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that GATA1 was able to bind to the AGGF1 DNA in vitro and in vivo.
Overexpression of GATA1 increased expression of AGGF1. We identified one rare
polymorphism -294C>T in a sporadic KTS patient, which is located in the GATA1
site, disrupts binding of GATA1 to DNA, and abolishes the GATA1 stimulatory
effect on transcription of AGGF1. Knockdown of GATA1 expression by siRNA reduced 
expression of AGGF1, and resulted in endothelial cell apoptosis and inhibition of
endothelial capillary vessel formation and cell migration, which was rescued by
purified recombinant human AGGF1 protein. These results demonstrate that GATA1
regulates expression of AGGF1 and reveal a novel role for GATA1 in endothelial
cell biology and angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2749107
PMID: 19556247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cutis. 2009 May;83(5):234-6.

Vesiculopustular eruption associated with transient myeloproliferative disorder.

Nornhold E(1), Li A, Rothman IL, Lakshminrusimha S, Helm TN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University at Buffalo, The State University of New 
York, 1036 Lakeview Terr #B, Grand Island, NY 14072, USA. erikadowns@hotmail.com

Transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) is a hematologic abnormality usually 
associated with Down syndrome that may present with a skin eruption in addition
to typical systemic findings. We report a case of a patient with TMD and a
vesiculopustular eruption without the phenotypic characteristics of Down syndrome
who was found to have mosaic trisomy 21. Mutations of the globin transcription
factor 1 gene, GATA1, are associated with both TMD and acute megakaryocytic
leukemia. Transient myeloproliferative disorder typically presents with
pancytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, and immature circulating white blood cells, and
affects approximately 10% of neonates with Down syndrome. These abnormalities
rapidly regress within the first few months of life. However, 20% to 30% of
neonates with Down syndrome and TMD later develop leukemia. The tumor antigen
PRAME (preferentially expressed antigen in melanoma) may serve as a marker for
leukemic transformation. We report an illustrative case to alert clinicians about
this uncommon cause of vesiculopustular eruption in a neonate without the
phenotypic characteristics of Down syndrome and review the clinical findings and 
laboratory studies that aid in accurate diagnosis.

PMID: 19537279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Blood. 2009 Aug 6;114(6):1254-62. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-210146. Epub 2009
Jun 15.

The HBS1L-MYB intergenic interval associated with elevated HbF levels shows
characteristics of a distal regulatory region in erythroid cells.

Wahlberg K(1), Jiang J, Rooks H, Jawaid K, Matsuda F, Yamaguchi M, Lathrop M,
Thein SL, Best S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene and Cell Based Therapy, King's College London School of
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

HBS1L-MYB intergenic polymorphism (HMIP) on chromosome 6q23 is associated with
elevated fetal hemoglobin levels and has pleiotropic effects on several
hematologic parameters. To investigate potential regulatory activity in the
region, we have measured sensitivity of the sequences to DNase I cleavage that
identified 3 tissue-specific DNase I hypersensitive sites in the core intergenic 
interval. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with microarray (ChIP-chip) analysis
showed strong histone acetylation in a defined interval of 65 kb corresponding to
the core HBS1L-MYB intergenic region in primary human erythroid cells but not in 
non-MYB-expressing HeLa cells. ChIP-chip analysis also identified several
potential cis-regulatory elements as strong GATA-1 signals that coincided with
the DNase I hypersensitive sites present in MYB-expressing erythroid cells. We
suggest that HMIP contains regulatory sequences that could be important in
hematopoiesis by controlling MYB expression. This study provides the functional
link between genetic association of HMIP with control of fetal hemoglobin and
other hematologic parameters. We also present a large-scale analysis of histone
acetylation as well as RNA polymerase II and GATA-1 interactions on chromosome
6q, and alpha and beta globin gene loci. The data suggest that GATA-1 regulates
numerous genes of various functions on chromosome 6q.

PMID: 19528534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Stem Cells. 2009 Sep;27(9):2153-62. doi: 10.1002/stem.151.

Gfi-1B promoter remains associated with active chromatin marks throughout
erythroid differentiation of human primary progenitor cells.

Laurent B(1), Randrianarison-Huetz V, Kadri Z, Roméo PH, Porteu F, Duménil D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Growth Factor Independent-1B (Gfi-1B) is a transcriptional repressor that plays
critical roles in the control of erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis. Gfi-1B
expression was described to be repressed by an autoregulatory feedback control
loop. Here, we show that Gfi-1 transcription is positively regulated early after 
induction of erythroid differentiation and remains highly active to late
erythroblasts. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in CD34+ cells from
human cord blood, we found that Gfi-1 and GATA-2 in immature progenitors and then
Gfi-1B and GATA-1 in erythroblasts are bound to the Gfi-1B promoter as well as to
the promoter of c-myc, a known Gfi-1B target gene. Surprisingly, this
Gfi-1/GATA-2-Gfi-1B/GATA-1 switch observed at erythroblast stages is associated
to an increase in the Gfi-1B transcription whereas it triggers repression of
c-myc transcription. Accordingly, analysis of chromatin modification patterns
shows that HDAC, CoREST, and LSD1 are recruited to the c-myc promoter leading to 
appearance of repressive chromatin marks. In contrast, the Gfi-1B promoter
remains associated with a transcriptionally active chromatin configuration as
highlighted by an increase in histone H3 acetylation and concomitant release of
the LSD1 and CoREST corepressors. The repressive function of Gfi-1B therefore
depends on the nature of the proteins recruited to the target gene promoters and 
on chromatin modifications. We conclude that Gfi-1B behaves as a
lineage-affiliated gene with an open chromatin configuration in multipotent
progenitors and sustained activation as cells progress throughout erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2962905
PMID: 19522008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS Biol. 2009 Jun 9;7(6):e1000123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000123. Epub 2009
Jun 9.

Direct binding of pRb/E2F-2 to GATA-1 regulates maturation and terminal cell
division during erythropoiesis.

Kadri Z(1), Shimizu R, Ohneda O, Maouche-Chretien L, Gisselbrecht S, Yamamoto M, 
Romeo PH, Leboulch P, Chretien S.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Institute of Emerging Diseases and Innovative Therapies,
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

How cell proliferation subsides as cells terminally differentiate remains largely
enigmatic, although this phenomenon is central to the existence of multicellular 
organisms. Here, we show that GATA-1, the master transcription factor of
erythropoiesis, forms a tricomplex with the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and
E2F-2. This interaction requires a LXCXE motif that is evolutionary conserved
among GATA-1 orthologs yet absent from the other GATA family members.
GATA-1/pRb/E2F-2 complex formation stalls cell proliferation and steers erythroid
precursors towards terminal differentiation. This process can be disrupted in
vitro by FOG-1, which displaces pRb/E2F-2 from GATA-1. A GATA-1 mutant unable to 
bind pRb fails to inhibit cell proliferation and results in mouse embryonic
lethality by anemia. These findings clarify the previously suspected
cell-autonomous role of pRb during erythropoiesis and may provide a unifying
molecular mechanism for several mouse phenotypes and human diseases associated
with GATA-1 mutations.

PMCID: PMC2684697
PMID: 19513100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 7;284(32):21139-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.026849. Epub 2009
Jun 9.

p73 plays a role in erythroid differentiation through GATA1 induction.

Marqués-García F(1), Ferrandiz N, Fernández-Alonso R, González-Cano L,
Herreros-Villanueva M, Rosa-Garrido M, Fernández-García B, Vaque JP, Marqués MM, 
Alonso ME, Segovia JC, León J, Marín MC.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina, Spain.

The TP73 gene gives rise to transactivation domain-p73 isoforms (TAp73) as well
as DeltaNp73 variants with a truncated N terminus. Although TAp73alpha and -beta 
proteins are capable of inducing cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and
differentiation, DeltaNp73 acts in many cell types as a dominant-negative
repressor of p53 and TAp73. It has been proposed that p73 is involved in myeloid 
differentiation, and its altered expression is involved in leukemic degeneration.
However, there is little evidence as to which p73 variants (TA or DeltaN) are
expressed during differentiation and whether specific p73 isoforms have the
capacity to induce, or hinder, this differentiation in leukemia cells. In this
study we identify GATA1 as a direct transcriptional target of TAp73alpha.
Furthermore, TAp73alpha induces GATA1 activity, and it is required for erythroid 
differentiation. Additionally, we describe a functional cooperation between TAp73
and DeltaNp73 in the context of erythroid differentiation in human myeloid cells,
K562 and UT-7. Moreover, the impaired expression of GATA1 and other erythroid
genes in the liver of p73KO embryos, together with the moderated anemia observed 
in p73KO young mice, suggests a physiological role for TP73 in erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2755837
PMID: 19509292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):983-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-207944. Epub 2009
Jun 2.

Graded repression of PU.1/Sfpi1 gene transcription by GATA factors regulates
hematopoietic cell fate.

Chou ST(1), Khandros E, Bailey LC, Nichols KE, Vakoc CR, Yao Y, Huang Z, Crispino
JD, Hardison RC, Blobel GA, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA.

GATA-1 and PU.1 are essential hematopoietic transcription factors that control
erythromegakaryocytic and myelolymphoid differentiation, respectively. These
proteins antagonize each other through direct physical interaction to repress
alternate lineage programs. We used immortalized Gata1(-) erythromegakaryocytic
progenitor cells to study how PU.1/Sfpi1 expression is regulated by GATA-1 and
GATA-2, a related factor that is normally expressed at earlier stages of
hematopoiesis. Both GATA factors bind the PU.1/Sfpi1 gene at 2 highly conserved
regions. In the absence of GATA-1, GATA-2 binding is associated with an
undifferentiated state, intermediate level PU.1/Sfpi1 expression, and low-level
expression of its downstream myeloid target genes. Restoration of GATA-1 function
induces erythromegakaryocytic differentiation. Concomitantly, GATA-1 replaces
GATA-2 at the PU.1/Sfpi1 locus and PU.1/Sfpi1 expression is extinguished. In
contrast, when GATA-1 is not present, shRNA knockdown of GATA-2 increases
PU.1/Sfpi1 expression by 3-fold and reprograms the cells to become macrophages.
Our findings indicate that GATA factors act sequentially to regulate lineage
determination during hematopoiesis, in part by exerting variable repressive
effects at the PU.1/Sfpi1 locus.

PMCID: PMC2721792
PMID: 19491391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 May;50(5):834-40. doi: 10.1080/10428190902829433.

Detection of mutations in GATA1 gene using automated denaturing high-performance 
liquid chromatography and direct sequencing in children with Down syndrome.

Amorim MR, Figueiredo AB, Splendore A, Magalhães IQ, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS,
El-Jaick KB, D'andrea ML, Aquino J, Alencar DM, Brandalise SR, Burlemaqui L,
Cardoso TC, Carvalho EG, Coser VM, Costa I, Dorea D, Drumond M, Lopes VG,
Mendonça N, Lee ML, Lopes LF, Mendonça CM, Nogueira F, Pimenta F, Pinheiro VP, Da
Silva DB, Sobral E, Vargas FR, Werneck F.

Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) was developed to screen
DNA variations by separating heteroduplex and homoduplex DNA fragments by
ion-pair reverse-phase liquid chromatography. In this study, we have evaluated
the dHPLC screening method and direct sequencing for the detection of GATA1
mutations in peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirates samples from children
with Down syndrome (DS). Cases were ascertained consecutively as part of an
epidemiological study of DS and hematological disorders in Brazil. A total of 130
samples corresponding to 115 children with DS were analysed using dHPLC and
direct sequencing methods to detect mutations in GATA1 exons 2, 3 and 4 gene
sequences. The overall detection rate of sequencing and dHPLC screening methods
was similar. Twenty mutations were detected in exon 2 and one mutation in exon 3 
(c.231_232 dupGT) sequences of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia and transient
leukemia samples. Four GATA1 mutations were newly described [c.155C > G;
c.156_178 del23 bp; c.29_30 del GG; c.182C > A and c.151A > T,c.153_162 del 10
bp). Out of four, three had single nucleotide change. In conclusion, our results 
indicate that dHPLC is an efficient and valuable tool for GATA1 mutational
analysis.

PMID: 19452320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Exp Hematol. 2009 Aug;37(8):889-900. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.05.004. Epub 2009
May 15.

Role of STAT3 and GATA-1 interactions in gamma-globin gene expression.

Yao X(1), Kodeboyina S, Liu L, Dzandu J, Sangerman J, Ofori-Acquah SF, Pace BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Tex. 75080, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We previously demonstrated a silencing role for signal transducers and
activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) in gamma-globin gene regulation in primary 
erythroid cells. Recently, GATA-1, a key transcription factor involved in
hematopoietic cell development, was shown to directly inhibit STAT3 activity in
vivo. Therefore, we completed studies to determine if interactions between these 
two factors influence gamma-globin gene expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was used to ascertain 
in vivo protein binding at the gamma-globin 5' untranslated region (5'UTR);
protein-protein interactions were examined by coimmunoprecipitation analysis. In 
vitro protein-DNA binding were completed using surface plasmon resonance and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Activity of a luciferase gamma-globin
promoter reporter and levels of gamma-globin messenger RNA and fetal hemoglobin
in stable K562 cell lines overexpressing STAT3 and GATA-1, were used to determine
the influence of the STAT3/GATA-1 interaction on gamma-globin gene expression.
RESULTS: We observed interaction between STAT3 and GATA-1 in K562 and mouse
erythroleukemia cells in vivo at the gamma-globin 5'UTR by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay performed with a 
41-base pair gamma-globin DNA probe (gamma41) demonstrated the presence of STAT3 
and GATA-1 proteins in complexes assembled at the gamma-globin 5'UTR. A consensus
STAT3 DNA probe inhibited GATA-1-binding in a concentration-dependent manner, and
the converse was also true. Enforced STAT3 expression augmented its binding at
the gamma-globin 5'UTR in vivo and silenced gamma-promoter-driven luciferase
activity. Stable enforced STAT3 expression in K562 cells reduced endogenous
gamma-globin messenger RNA level. This effect was reversed by GATA-1.
CONCLUSION: These data provide evidence that GATA-1 can reverse STAT3-mediated
gamma-globin gene silencing in erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC2746970
PMID: 19447160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Br J Haematol. 2009 Jul;146(2):185-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07722.x.
Epub 2009 May 4.

Timed feeding of mice modulates light-entrained circadian rhythms of reticulated 
platelet abundance and plasma thrombopoietin and affects gene expression in
megakaryocytes.

Hartley PS(1), Sheward J, Scholefield E, French K, Horn JM, Holmes MC, Harmar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's Medical Research Institute, The
University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
p.s.hartley@ed.ac.uk

Circadian (c. 24 h) rhythms of physiology are entrained to either the
environmental light-dark cycle or the timing of food intake. In the current work 
the hypothesis that rhythms of platelet turnover in mammals are circadian and
entrained by food intake was explored in mice. Mice were entrained to 12 h
light-dark cycles and given either ad libitum (AL) or restricted access (RF) to
food during the light phase. Blood and megakaryocytes were then collected from
mice every 4 h for 24 h. It was found that total and reticulated platelet
numbers, plasma thrombopoietin (TPO) concentration and the mean size of mature
megakaryocytes were circadian but not entrained by food intake. In contrast, a
circadian rhythm in the expression of Arnt1 in megakaryocytes was entrained by
food. Although not circadian, the expression in megakaryocytes of Nfe2, Gata1,
Itga2b and Tubb1 expression was downregulated by RF, whereas Ccnd1 was not
significantly affected by the feeding protocol. It is concluded that circadian
rhythms of total platelet number, reticulated platelet number and plasma TPO
concentration are entrained by the light-dark cycle rather than the timing of
food intake. These findings imply that circadian clock gene expression regulates 
platelet turnover in mammals.

PMID: 19438469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Platelets. 2009 May;20(3):216-24. doi: 10.1080/09537100902818344.

GATA-1, G208S macrothrombocytes are deficient in talin: immunofluorescence
studies.

White JG(1), Burris SM, Crowe BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology and Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, MN, USA. White003@umn.edu

Previous investigations from our laboratory identified the ultrastructural
pathology and cytochemistry of macrothrombocytes (MTC) from patients with the
X-linked, G208S varient of the GATA-1 mutation.A subsequent biochemical study of 
the MTC cytoskeletal proteins using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and
western blot analysis revealed the MTC were deficient in the high-molecular
weight, actin binding protein, talin. The present study has used
immunofluorescent techniques to further characterize the talin deficiency.
Results confirm that the GATA-1, G208S MTC are deficient in talin, and what
little is present relocates to the undersurface of the plasma membrane following 
activations where it associates with adhesion plaques.

PMID: 19437340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Blood. 2009 Jul 2;114(1):165-73. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-10-180489. Epub 2009 May
1.

GATA-1 associates with and inhibits p53.

Trainor CD(1), Mas C, Archambault P, Di Lello P, Omichinski JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
ceceliat@mail.nih.gov

In addition to orchestrating the expression of all erythroid-specific genes,
GATA-1 controls the growth, differentiation, and survival of the erythroid
lineage through the regulation of genes that manipulate the cell cycle and
apoptosis. The stages of mammalian erythropoiesis include global gene
inactivation, nuclear condensation, and enucleation to yield circulating
erythrocytes, and some of the genes whose expression are altered by GATA-1 during
this process are members of the p53 pathway. In this study, we demonstrate a
specific in vitro interaction between the transactivation domain of p53 (p53TAD) 
and a segment of the GATA-1 DNA-binding domain that includes the
carboxyl-terminal zinc-finger domain. We also show by immunoprecipitation that
the native GATA-1 and p53 interact in erythroid cells and that activation of
p53-responsive promoters in an erythroid cell line can be inhibited by the
overexpression of GATA-1. Mutational analysis reveals that GATA-1 inhibition of
p53 minimally requires the segment of the GATA-1 DNA-binding domain that
interacts with p53TAD. This inhibition is reciprocal, as the activation of a
GATA-1-responsive promoter can be inhibited by p53. Based on these findings, we
conclude that inhibition of the p53 pathway by GATA-1 may be essential for
erythroid cell development and survival.

PMCID: PMC2710945
PMID: 19411634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Haematologica. 2009 May;94(5):599-602. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.005785.

Close to unraveling the secrets of congenital dyserythropoietic anemia types I
and II.

Iolascon A, Delaunay J.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2009 May;94(5):629-37.

The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias are rare recessive disorders
characterized by erythroblast multinuclearity, ineffective erythropoiesis, anemia
and iron overload. In this perspective article, Drs. Iolascon and Delaunay
examine genetic and clinical aspects of these inherited disorders.

PMCID: PMC2675668
PMID: 19407313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 3;284(27):18021-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M900896200. Epub 2009 
Apr 27.

ARR19 (androgen receptor corepressor of 19 kDa), an antisteroidogenic factor, is 
regulated by GATA-1 in testicular Leydig cells.

Qamar I(1), Park E, Gong EY, Lee HJ, Lee K.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

ARR19 (androgen receptor corepressor of 19 kDa), which encodes for a leucine-rich
protein, is expressed abundantly in the testis. Further analyses revealed that
ARR19 was expressed in Leydig cells, and its expression was differentially
regulated during Leydig cell development. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of
ARR19 in Leydig cells inhibited testicular steroidogenesis, down-regulating the
expression of steroidogenic enzymes, which suggests that ARR19 is an
antisteroidogenic factor. Interestingly, cAMP/luteinizing hormone attenuated
ARR19 expression in a fashion similar to that of GATA-1, which was previously
reported to be down-regulated by cAMP. Sequence analysis of the Arr19 promoter
revealed the presence of two putative GATA-1 binding motifs. Further analyses
with 5' deletion and point mutants of putative GATA-1 binding motifs showed that 
these GATA-1 binding sites were critical for high promoter activity. CREB-binding
protein coactivated GATA-1 and markedly increased the activity of the Arr19
promoter. Both GATA-1 and CREB-binding proteins occupied the GATA-1 motifs within
the Arr19 promoter, which was repressed by cAMP treatment. Altogether, these
findings demonstrate that ARR19 is the target gene of GATA-1 and suggest that
ARR19 gene expression in testicular Leydig cells is regulated by luteinizing
hormone/cAMP signaling via the control of GATA-1 expression, resulting in the
control of testicular steroidogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2709340
PMID: 19398553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 May;60(5):869-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2008.09.029.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder with vesiculopustular eruption: Early smear
is useful for quick diagnosis.

Uhara H(1), Shiohara M, Baba A, Shiohara J, Saida T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi,
Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan. uhara@shinshu-u.ac.jp

We report a male infant with Down syndrome who had a transient myeloproliferative
disorder associated with skin lesions. He was transferred to a neonatal intensive
care unit because of low body weight, fetal edema, disseminated intravascular
coagulation, and 10% blast cells in the peripheral blood. On postnatal day (PD)
1, erythema with small papules, vesicles, and pustules appeared on the entire
body. A smear preparation from the pustules on PD 2 showed 10% blast cells. A
biopsy specimen taken on PD 5 revealed subcorneal pustules containing neutrophils
and eosinophils. Genetic analyses detected a somatic mutation (197G>T,
Glu295Stop) in exon 2 of GATA-1. On PD 10, the eruptions resolved spontaneously
and the population of blast cells in peripheral blood decreased to 1%. The number
of blast cells in pustules decreased markedly after three days. Therefore, we
recommend that cytologic examination should be performed as early as possible.

PMID: 19389530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;543:253-66. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-015-1_17.

Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation protocol: ChIP-reChIP.

Furlan-Magaril M(1), Rincón-Arano H, Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 70-242, México, D.F.
04510, Mexico.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation has been widely used to determine the status of
histone covalent modifications and also to investigate DNA-protein and
protein-protein associations to a particular genomic location in vivo. Generally,
DNA regulatory elements nucleate the interaction of several transcription factors
in conjunction with ubiquitous and/or tissue-specific cofactors in order to
regulate gene transcription. Therefore, it has become relevant to determine the
cohabitation of several proteins in a particular developmental stage and cell
type. Furthermore, multiple post-translational histone modifications can be
analyzed on the same genomic location with the aim of deciphering the
combinatorial pattern of histone modifications associated to specific
transcriptional stages during cell commitment. Here we describe the ChIP-reChIP
assay that represents a direct strategy to determine the in vivo colocalization
of proteins interacting or in close contact in a chromatinized template on the
basis of double and independent rounds of immunoprecipitations with high-quality 
ChIP grade antibodies.

PMID: 19378171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Sep 15;131(1-2):127-36. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.03.007. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Co-culture of carp (Cyprinus carpio) kidney haematopoietic cells with feeder
cells resulting in long-term proliferation of T-cell lineages.

Katakura F(1), Takizawa F, Yoshida M, Yamaguchi T, Araki K, Tomana M, Nakao M,
Moritomo T, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon
University, Kameino 1866, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-8510, Japan.

To characterise fish haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, it is necessary to
develop a culture system that supports proliferation and differentiation of these
cells. In the present study, we established cell lines from various tissues of
carp (Cyprinus carpio) and ginbuna (Carassius auratus langsdorfii). By using
these cell lines, we developed a culture system in which carp haematopoietic
cells proliferated and were successively passaged. Cell lines from carp thymus
(KoT), carp fin (KoF1) and ginbuna thymus (GTS6 and GTS9) were newly established.
In addition to these cell lines, ginbuna fin (CFS) cell lines were also used as
feeder layers. Kidney haematopoietic cells co-cultured with these feeder layers
proliferated rapidly and were passaged over 20 times for more than 60 days. To
characterise the proliferating cells, expression of marker genes for blood cell
development were analysed. In the primary culture, marker genes for
myeloid/erythroid progenitors (gata1), haematopoietic stem cells (gata2),
neutrophils (mpx/mpo), B-cells (IgH) and T-cells (lck, TCRbeta and gata3) were
detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Expression 
of most of the genes disappeared after the third passage, only T-cell marker
genes were highly expressed after passages. These results indicate that multiple 
blood cells developed in the primary culture and then T-cell lineages dominantly 
proliferated after several passages.

PMID: 19375173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005170. Epub 2009 Apr 13.

Mechanisms controlling anaemia in Trypanosoma congolense infected mice.

Noyes HA(1), Alimohammadian MH, Agaba M, Brass A, Fuchs H, Gailus-Durner V, Hulme
H, Iraqi F, Kemp S, Rathkolb B, Wolf E, de Angelis MH, Roshandel D, Naessens J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Trypanosoma congolense are extracellular protozoan parasites of the
blood stream of artiodactyls and are one of the main constraints on cattle
production in Africa. In cattle, anaemia is the key feature of disease and
persists after parasitaemia has declined to low or undetectable levels, but
treatment to clear the parasites usually resolves the anaemia.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The progress of anaemia after Trypanosoma
congolense infection was followed in three mouse strains. Anaemia developed
rapidly in all three strains until the peak of the first wave of parasitaemia.
This was followed by a second phase, characterized by slower progress to severe
anaemia in C57BL/6, by slow recovery in surviving A/J and a rapid recovery in
BALB/c. There was no association between parasitaemia and severity of anaemia.
Furthermore, functional T lymphocytes are not required for the induction of
anaemia, since suppression of T cell activity with Cyclosporin A had neither an
effect on the course of infection nor on anaemia. Expression of genes involved in
erythropoiesis and iron metabolism was followed in spleen, liver and kidney
tissues in the three strains of mice using microarrays. There was no evidence for
a response to erythropoietin, consistent with anaemia of chronic disease, which
is erythropoietin insensitive. However, the expression of transcription factors
and genes involved in erythropoiesis and haemolysis did correlate with the
expression of the inflammatory cytokines Il6 and Ifng.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The innate immune response appears to be the major
contributor to the inflammation associated with anaemia since suppression of T
cells with CsA had no observable effect. Several transcription factors regulating
haematopoiesis, Tal1, Gata1, Zfpm1 and Klf1 were expressed at consistently lower 
levels in C57BL/6 mice suggesting that these mice have a lower haematopoietic
capacity and therefore less ability to recover from haemolysis induced anaemia
after infection.

PMCID: PMC2664899
PMID: 19365556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Ther. 2009 Aug;17(8):1434-41. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.74. Epub 2009 Apr 7.

The sea urchin sns5 insulator protects retroviral vectors from chromosomal
position effects by maintaining active chromatin structure.

D'Apolito D(1), Baiamonte E, Bagliesi M, Di Marzo R, Calzolari R, Ferro L, Franco
V, Spinelli G, Maggio A, Acuto S.

Author information: 
(1)Unità di Ricerca P. Cutino, U.O.C. Ematologia II, A.O. V. Cervello, Palermo,
Italy.

Silencing and position-effect (PE) variegation (PEV), which is due to integration
of viral vectors in heterochromatin regions, are considered significant obstacles
to obtaining a consistent level of transgene expression in gene therapy. The
inclusion of chromatin insulators into vectors has been proposed to counteract
this position-dependent variegation of transgene expression. Here, we show that
the sea urchin chromatin insulator, sns5, protects a recombinant gamma-retroviral
vector from the negative influence of chromatin in erythroid milieu. This element
increases the probability of vector expression at different chromosomal
integration sites, which reduces both silencing and PEV. By chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis, we demonstrated the specific binding of
GATA1 and OCT1 transcription factors and the enrichment of hyperacetylated
nucleosomes to sns5 sequences. The results suggest that this new insulator is
able to maintain a euchromatin state inside the provirus locus with mechanisms
that are common to other characterized insulators. On the basis of its ability to
function as barrier element in erythroid milieu and to bind the erythroid
specific factor GATA1, the inclusion of sns5 insulator in viral vectors may be of
practical benefit in gene transfer applications and, in particular, for gene
therapy of erythroid disorders.

PMCID: PMC2835237
PMID: 19352322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Jun 1;107(3):377-82. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22142.

Megakaryocytic programming by a transcriptional regulatory loop: A circle
connecting RUNX1, GATA-1, and P-TEFb.

Goldfarb AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. ang3x@virginia.edu

Transcription factors originally identified as drivers of erythroid
differentiation subsequently became linked to megakaryopoiesis, reflecting the
shared parentage of red cells and platelets. The divergent development of
megakaryocytic and erythroid progenitors relies on signaling pathways that impose
lineage-specific transcriptional programs on non-lineage-restricted protein
complexes. One such signaling pathway involves RUNX1, a transcription factor
upregulated in megakaryocytes and downregulated in erythroid cells. In this
pathway, RUNX1 engages the erythro-megakaryocytic master regulator GATA-1 in a
megakaryocytic transcriptional complex whose activity is highly dependent on the 
P-TEFb kinase complex. The implications of this pathway for normal and
pathological megakaryopoiesis are discussed.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2775554
PMID: 19350569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 22;383(1):11-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.122. Epub 2009 Mar 28.

SATB1 regulates beta-like globin genes through matrix related nuclear relocation 
of the cluster.

Gong H(1), Wang Z, Zhao GW, Lv X, Wei GH, Wang L, Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Peking Union Medical College, Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing, PR China.

The nuclear location and relocation of genes play crucial regulatory roles in
gene expression. SATB1, a MAR-binding protein, has been found to regulate
beta-like globin genes through chromatin remodeling. In this study, we generated 
K562 cells over-expressing wild-type or nuclear matrix targeting sequences
(NMTS)-deficient SATB1 and found that like wild-type SATB1, NMTS-deficient SATB1 
induces out loop of beta-globin cluster from its chromosome territory (CT), while
it is unable to associate the cluster with the nuclear matrix as wild-type SATB1 
does and had no regulatory functions to the beta-globin cluster. Besides, our
data showed that the transacting factor occupancies and chromatin modifications
at beta-globin cluster were differentially affected by wild-type and
NMTS-deficient SATB1. These results indicate that SATB1 regulates beta-like
globin genes at the nuclear level interlaced with chromatin and DNA level, and
emphasize the nuclear matrix binding activity of SATB1 to its regulatory
function.

PMID: 19332023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Exp Hematol. 2009 Apr;37(4):435-445.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.12.004.

Stem cells of GATA1-related leukemia undergo pernicious changes after
5-fluorouracil treatment.

Abe K(1), Shimizu R, Pan X, Hamada H, Yoshikawa H, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences and Center for Tsukuba
Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Transcription factor GATA1 plays a critical role in erythropoiesis
through the integrated regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and
apoptosis. In Gata1.05 gene knockdown mice, Gata1 expression deteriorates to 5%
of wild-type allelic expression, a level insufficient for supporting normal
erythropoiesis and one that leads to accumulation of erythroid progenitors that
are readily transformed into erythroblastic leukemia. Serial engraftment of
leukemic cells into primary or subsequent nude mice reconstituted complete
leukemic phenotype in recipient. To delineate characteristics of leukemic stem
cells (LSCs), we analyzed LSCs of Gata1.05 leukemia, which have a potential to
reestablish leukemia in mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Leukemic cells isolated from the first recipient mice of
Gata1.05 leukemia cells were divided into two fractions using Hoechst dye.
Fractionated cells were transplanted into second recipient, or analyzed gene
expression profiles and cell-cycle status. Consequences of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 
treatment on leukemic cells in vivo were studied.
RESULTS: LSCs were enriched in the Hoechst dye-excluded side population (SP), and
leukemic cells in the SP population (LSP cells) were morphologically and
immunophenotypically indistinguishable from other leukemic cells. However,
expression of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)-related genes was upregulated in the 
LSP cells. In cell-cycle analyses, LSP cells were quiescent like HSCs, but
reentry into the cell cycle was stimulated by 5-FU treatment. Nonetheless, 5-FU
treatment established a point of newly adjusted equilibrium in the LSP cells and 
the cells never recovered to their previous quiescent state.
CONCLUSION: Based on this observation, distinct self-renewal regulatory
mechanisms in LSCs may be considered as one of the causes of worsening of the
features of leukemia after injury and relapse.

PMID: 19302918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cancer Sci. 2009 Apr;100(4):689-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01097.x. Epub
2009 Mar 11.

Leukemia-related transcription factor TEL/ETV6 expands erythroid precursors and
stimulates hemoglobin synthesis.

Eguchi-Ishimae M(1), Eguchi M, Maki K, Porcher C, Shimizu R, Yamamoto M, Mitani
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine,
Tochigi 321-0293, Japan.

TEL/ETV6 located at chromosome 12p13 encodes a member of the E26
transformation-specific family of transcription factors. TEL is known to be
rearranged in a variety of leukemias and solid tumors resulting in the formation 
of oncogenic chimeric protein. Tel is essential for maintaining hematopoietic
stem cells in the bone marrow. To understand the role of TEL in erythropoiesis,
we generated transgenic mice expressing human TEL under the control of Gata1
promoter that is activated during the course of the erythroid-lineage
differentiation (GATA1-TEL transgenic mice). Although GATA1-TEL transgenic mice
appeared healthy up to 18 months of age, the level of hemoglobin was higher in
transgenic mice compared to non-transgenic littermates. In addition,
CD71+/TER119+ and c-kit+/CD41+ populations proliferated with a higher frequency
in transgenic mice when bone marrow cells were cultured in the presence of
erythropoietin and thrombopoietin, respectively. In transgenic mice, enhanced
expression of Alas-e and beta-major globin genes was observed in
erythroid-committed cells. When embryonic stem cells expressing human TEL under
the same Gata1 promoter were differentiated into hematopoietic cells, immature
erythroid precursor increased better compared to controls as judged from the
numbers of burst-forming unit of erythrocytes. Our findings suggest some roles of
TEL in expanding erythroid precursors and accumulating hemoglobin.

PMID: 19302286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 8;284(19):13099-109. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807307200. Epub 2009
Mar 10.

GATA transcription factors regulate the expression of the human
eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (RNase 2) gene.

Qiu Z(1), Dyer KD, Xie Z, Rådinger M, Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 have been implicated in promoting
differentiation of eosinophilic leukocytes. In this study, we examined the roles 
of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in activating transcription of the secretory ribonuclease,
the eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN/RNase 2). Augmented expression of both
GATA-1 and GATA-2 was detected in eosinophil promyelocyte HL-60 clone 15 cells in
response to biochemical differentiation with butyric acid. Deletion or mutation
of one or both of the two consensus GATA-binding sites in the extended 1000-bp 5'
promoter of the EDN gene resulted in profound reduction in reporter gene
activity. Antibody-augmented electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses indicate that GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins bind to
both functional GATA consensus sequences in the EDN promoter. Interestingly, RNA 
silencing of GATA-1 alone had no impact on EDN expression; silencing of GATA-2
resulted in diminished expression of EDN, and also diminished expression of
GATA-1 in both butyric acid-induced HL-60 clone 15 cells and in differentiating
human eosinophils derived from CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitors. Likewise,
overexpression of GATA-2 in uninduced HL-60 clone 15 cells resulted in augmented 
transcription of both EDN and GATA-1. Taken together, our data suggest that
GATA-2 functions directly via interactions with the EDN promoter and also
indirectly, via its ability to regulate the expression of GATA-1 in
differentiating eosinophils and eosinophil cell lines.

PMCID: PMC2676042
PMID: 19279013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2009 Feb;50(2):73-7.

[Relapsed acute myeloid leukemia with Down syndrome showing long disease-free
survival after bone marrow transplantation].

[Article in Japanese]

Daifu T(1), Kato I, Matubara H, Abe D, Uryu K, Tokumasu M, Umeda K, Watanabe K,
Izawa K, Asai K, Nakahata T, Adachi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

We report a sixteen-year-old boy with Down syndrome and relapse of AML (M7), who 
has been in complete remission (CR) more than 12 months after bone marrow
transplantation (BMT) from an HLA-matched sibling donor. Because monosomy 7 was
detected at onset of AML and he experienced relapse after the treatment of AML 99
Down protocol, his prognosis was considered very poor. However, he achieved CR
following chemotherapy that included high-dose AraC and BMT from an HLA-matched
sibling donor without severe complication. He has remained in CR for more than 12
months after BMT. In this case, GATA1 mutation was not detected at either onset
or relapse of AML and it is suggested that this case is in a different risk group
than the usual Down syndrome patient with AML showing GATA1 mutation.

PMID: 19265297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009 Jul;53(1):108-11. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21983.

GATA1 mutations in patients with down syndrome and acute megakaryoblastic
leukaemia do not always confer a good prognosis.

Ariffin H(1), Garcia JC, Daud SS, Ibrahim K, Aizah N, Ong GB, Chong LA, Mohamad
Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia. hany@um.edu.my

Children with Down syndrome and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL) have
been shown to have increased sensitivity to cytarabine based chemotherapy. The
excellent prognosis in patients with DS-AMKL may be due to mutations in the GATA1
gene leading to reduced expression of the enzyme cytidine deaminase. This leads
to a decreased ability to convert cytarabine into its inactive metabolite,
resulting in high intracellular concentration of this cytotoxic agent. We report 
two cases of DS-AMKL with GATA1 mutations who had poor outcome. These patients
had high expression levels of cytidine deaminase mRNA transcripts. We speculate
that other factors can affect overall outcome in patients with DS-AMKL
irrespective of the presence of GATA1 mutations.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19260099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Leuk Res. 2009 Sep;33(9):1249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.01.022. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

Inhibition of all-trans retinoic acid-induced granulocytic differentiation of
WEHI-3B D+ cells by forced expression of SCL (TAL1) and GATA-1.

Ishiguro K(1), Rice AM, Rice KP, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Program, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces granulocytic maturation of WEHI-3B D+
leukemia cells and LiCl enhances this maturation, while WEHI-3B D- cells are
non-responsive to ATRA. Transfection of SCL, expressed in D- but absent in D+
cells, into D+ cells, caused resistance to ATRA, while transfection of GATA-1
into D+ cells produced resistance to the combination of ATRA and LiCl. SCL
expression in D+ cells did not induce the expression of c-Kit, a putative target 
gene for SCL. LiCl, known to inhibit some kinases by displacing Mg2+, did not
affect tyrosine kinase activity of the cytoplasmic domain of c-Kit.

PMCID: PMC2780339
PMID: 19230972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Int J Oncol. 2009 Mar;34(3):853-60.

The inhibitory effect of the proinflammatory cytokine TNFalpha on erythroid
differentiation involves erythroid transcription factor modulation.

Buck I(1), Morceau F, Cristofanon S, Reuter S, Dicato M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, L-2540 Luxemburg, Luxemburg.

The hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 regulates the expression of several
genes associated with differentiation of erythroid cells. We show here the
inhibitory effect of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), a proinflammatory
cytokine, on hemoglobinization and erythroid transcription factor GATA-1
expression in erythroleukemia (HEL) as well as in chronic myelogenous leukemia
(K562) cells, which were induced to differentiate towards the erythroid lineage
after aclacinomycin (Acla), doxorubicin (Dox) or hemin (HM) treatment. As a
result, we observed i) a decreased expression of Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1), an
essential cofactor of GATA-1 transcription factor, ii) a downregulation of GATA-1
by proteasomal degradation and iii) a reduced acetylation level of GATA-1 in
HM-induced K562 cells after TNF treatment. As a result, these modifications i)
decreased the level of GATA-1/FOG-1 complex, ii) unsettled the GATA-1/GATA-2
balance, iii) reduced GATA-1 transcriptional activity and iv) inhibited erythroid
marker gene expression (glycophorin A, erythropoietin receptor, gamma-globin)
independently of the cell line or the inducer used. These data provided new
insights into the role of GATA-1 regulation in TNFalpha-mediated inhibition of
erythroid differentiation in erythroleukemia.

PMID: 19212691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Leukemia. 2009 Jul;23(7):1270-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.13. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

GATA-1 and GATA-2 binding to 3' enhancer of WT1 gene is essential for its
transcription in acute leukemia and solid tumor cell lines.

Furuhata A(1), Murakami M, Ito H, Gao S, Yoshida K, Sobue S, Kikuchi R, Iwasaki
T, Takagi A, Kojima T, Suzuki M, Abe A, Naoe T, Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Health 
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

Although oncogenic functions and the clinical significance of Wilms tumor 1 (WT1)
have been extensively studied in acute leukemia, the regulatory mechanism of its 
transcription still remains to be determined. We found a significant correlation 
among the amounts of WT1, GATA-1 and GATA-2 mRNAs from leukemia and solid tumor
cell lines. Overexpression and small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection
experiments of GATA-1 and GATA-2 showed that these GATA transcription factors
could induce WT1 expression. Promoter analysis showed that the 5' promoter did
not explain the different WT1 mRNA levels between cell lines. The 3' enhancer,
especially the distal sites out of six putative GATA binding sites located within
the region, but not the intron 3 enhancer, were essential for the WT1 mRNA level.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed both GATA-1 and GATA-2 bound
to these GATA sites. Besides acute leukemia cell lines, solid tumor cell lines
including, TYK-nu-cPr also showed a high level of WT1 mRNA. We showed that GATA-2
expression is a determinant of WT1 mRNA expression in both TYK-nu-cPr cells and
HL60 cells without GATA-1 expression. Taken together, these results suggest that 
GATA-1 and/or GATA-2 binding to a GATA site of the 3' enhancer of WT1 played an
important role in WT1 gene expression.

PMID: 19212333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Haematologica. 2009 Mar;94(3):326-34. doi: 10.3324/haematol.13635. Epub 2009 Feb 
11.

TAM receptors and the regulation of erythropoiesis in mice.

Tang H(1), Chen S, Wang H, Wu H, Lu Q, Han D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: TAM receptors (Tyro3, Axl and Mer) are expressed in hematopoietic
tissues. The roles of the three receptors in hematopoiesis are, however, largely 
unknown. We investigated the role of TAM receptors in regulating erythropoiesis.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Single and double mutant mice for Axl and Mer were used in
the study. Cellularity of bone marrow and spleen, hematologic parameters, flow
cytometry analysis of erythroid cell maturation, erythropoietic response to acute
hemolytic anemia, bone marrow transplantation and the expression of erythropoisis
were analyzed to evaluate the function of Axl and Mer in erythropoiesis.
RESULTS: Axl and Mer, but not Tyro3, were constitutively expressed in developing 
erythroid cells. Mice lacking Axl and Mer (Axl(-/-)Me(-/-)) had impaired
erythropoiesis in bone marrow and expanded splenic erythropoiesis. We found an
inhibition of differentiation at the transition from erythroid progenitors to
proerythroblasts in Axl(-/-)Mer(-/-) mice. These mice exhibited a low rate of
erythropoietic response to acute anemia induced by phenylhydrazine. Bone marrow
transplantation studies showed that the impaired erythropoiesis in
Axl(-/-)Mer(-/-) mice is erythroid cell-autonomous. TAM receptors may influence
erythropoiesis through the regulation of GATA-1 erythropoietin receptor and EpoR 
expression in erythroid progenitors. Notably, mice lacking single Axl or Mer
exhibited normal erythropoiesis in steady-state conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Axl and Mer play an important role in regulating erythropoiesis.
This finding provides a novel insight into the mechanism of erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2649353
PMID: 19211638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 15;69(4):1633-42. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2562. Epub
2009 Feb 10.

EVI1 Impairs myelopoiesis by deregulation of PU.1 function.

Laricchia-Robbio L(1), Premanand K, Rinaldi CR, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA. robbiol@uic.edu

EVI1 is an oncogene inappropriately expressed in the bone marrow (BM) of
approximately 10% of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients. This disease is
characterized by severe anemia and multilineage myeloid dysplasia that are
thought to be a major cause of mortality in MDS patients. We earlier reported on 
a mouse model that constitutive expression of EVI1 in the BM led to fatal anemia 
and myeloid dysplasia, as observed in MDS patients, and we subsequently showed
that EVI1 interaction with GATA1 blocks proper erythropoiesis. Whereas this
interaction could provide the basis for the erythroid defects in EVI1-positive
MDS, it does not explain the alteration of myeloid differentiation. Here, we have
examined the expression of several genes activated during terminal myelopoiesis
in BM cells and identified a group of them that are altered by EVI1. A common
feature of these genes is their regulation by the transcription factor PU.1. We
report here that EVI1 interacts with PU.1 and represses the PU.1-dependent
activation of a myeloid promoter. EVI1 does not seem to inhibit PU.1 binding to
DNA, but rather to block its association with the coactivator c-Jun. After
mapping the PU.1-EVI1 interaction sites, we show that an EVI1 point mutant,
unable to bind PU.1, restores the activation of PU.1-regulated genes and allows a
normal differentiation of BM progenitors in vitro.

PMID: 19208846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Feb 5;10:6. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-6.

Optimal use of tandem biotin and V5 tags in ChIP assays.

Kolodziej KE(1), Pourfarzad F, de Boer E, Krpic S, Grosveld F, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Dr Molewaterplein 50, 3015GE
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. k.kolodziej@nki.nl

BACKGROUND: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays coupled to genome arrays 
(Chip-on-chip) or massive parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) lead to the genome wide 
identification of binding sites of chromatin associated proteins. However, the
highly variable quality of antibodies and the availability of epitopes in
crosslinked chromatin can compromise genomic ChIP outcomes. Epitope tags have
often been used as more reliable alternatives. In addition, we have employed
protein in vivo biotinylation tagging as a very high affinity alternative to
antibodies. In this paper we describe the optimization of biotinylation tagging
for ChIP and its coupling to a known epitope tag in providing a reliable and
efficient alternative to antibodies.
RESULTS: Using the biotin tagged erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 as
example, we describe several optimization steps for the application of the high
affinity biotin streptavidin system in ChIP. We find that the omission of SDS
during sonication, the use of fish skin gelatin as blocking agent and choice of
streptavidin beads can lead to significantly improved ChIP enrichments and lower 
background compared to antibodies. We also show that the V5 epitope tag performs 
equally well under the conditions worked out for streptavidin ChIP and that it
may suffer less from the effects of formaldehyde crosslinking.
CONCLUSION: The combined use of the very high affinity biotin tag with the less
sensitive to crosslinking V5 tag provides for a flexible ChIP platform with
potential implications in ChIP sequencing outcomes.

PMCID: PMC2644297
PMID: 19196479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Math Med Biol. 2009 Jun;26(2):117-32. doi: 10.1093/imammb/dqn026. Epub 2009 Jan
29.

A bistable genetic switch which does not require high co-operativity at the
promoter: a two-timescale model for the PU.1-GATA-1 interaction.

Bokes P(1), King JR, Loose M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Mathematical Medicine and Biology, School of Mathematical Sciences,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK. pmxpb@nottingham.ac.uk

The transcription factors PU.1 and GATA-1 antagonize each other in common myeloid
progenitors and their relative abundance is thought to decide whether the cell
follows the erythrocyte/megakaryocyte lineage or the granulocyte/macrophage
lineage. We propose a kinetic model for the PU.1-GATA-1 interaction, analyse its 
phase space and interpret the results of our analysis. The conclusions have
broader implications for the modelling of cell-fate selection.

PMID: 19181622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Platelets. 2009 Feb;20(1):41-9. doi: 10.1080/09537100802406661.

Platelet structural pathology in a patient with the X-linked GATA-1, R216Q
mutation.

White JG(1), Thomas A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology and Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, MN, USA. white003@umn.edu

The ultrastructural pathology of GATA-1, V205M and G208S macrothrombocytes was
discussed in earlier investigations. This study has used the same technology to
evaluate macrothrombocytes from a patient with the GATA-1, R216Q mutation. Some
of the pathological features observed in macrothrombocytes from patients with the
V205M and G208S variations including hypo- and agranular platelets, tubular
inclusions and platelets within platelets, as well as platelets within platelets 
within platelets were identified. However, tubular membrane sheets in
megakaryocytes and platelets of the V205M and G208S types and large groups of
platelets attached to platelets to form megathrombocytes were not observed. The
unique pathology of the megathrombocytes from this patient was the near absence
of dense bodies in his giant cells. Storage Pool Deficiency, together with large 
platelets, defective adhesion and aggregation of his macrocytes under shear
stress to vWF and collagen and defective clot retraction may contribute to the
pathogenesis of his bleeding disorder.

PMID: 19172521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2259-64. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806420106. Epub 2009 Jan 26.

BRG1 requirement for long-range interaction of a locus control region with a
downstream promoter.

Kim SI(1), Bultman SJ, Kiefer CM, Dean A, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The dynamic packaging of DNA into chromatin is a fundamental step in the control 
of diverse nuclear processes. Whereas certain transcription factors and
chromosomal components promote the formation of higher-order chromatin loops, the
co-regulator machinery mediating loop assembly and disassembly is unknown. Using 
mice bearing a hypomorphic allele of the BRG1 chromatin remodeler, we demonstrate
that the Brg1 mutation abrogated a cell type-specific loop between the
beta-globin locus control region and the downstream beta major promoter, despite 
trans-acting factor occupancy at both sites. By contrast, distinct loops were
insensitive to the Brg1 mutation. Molecular analysis with a conditional allele of
GATA-1, a key regulator of hematopoiesis, in a novel cell-based system provided
additional evidence that BRG1 functions early in chromatin domain activation to
mediate looping. Although the paradigm in which chromatin remodelers induce
nucleosome structural transitions is well established, our results demonstrating 
an essential role of BRG1 in the genesis of specific chromatin loops expands the 
repertoire of their functions.

PMCID: PMC2650142
PMID: 19171905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3337-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-08-174813. Epub 2009
Jan 23.

ETS2 and ERG promote megakaryopoiesis and synergize with alterations in GATA-1 to
immortalize hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Stankiewicz MJ(1), Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Oct 22;114(17):3717-8.

ETS2 and ERG are transcription factors, encoded on human chromosome 21 (Hsa21),
that have been implicated in human cancer. People with Down syndrome (DS), who
are trisomic for Hsa21, are predisposed to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
(AMKL). DS-AMKL blasts harbor a mutation in GATA1, which leads to loss of
full-length protein but expression of the GATA-1s isoform. To assess the
consequences of ETS protein misexpression on megakaryopoiesis, we expressed ETS2,
ERG, and the related protein FLI-1 in wild-type and Gata1 mutant murine fetal
liver progenitors. These studies revealed that ETS2, ERG, and FLI-1 facilitated
the expansion of megakaryocytes from wild-type, Gata1-knockdown, and Gata1s
knockin progenitors, but none of the genes could overcome the differentiation
block characteristic of the Gata1-knockdown megakaryocytes. Although
overexpression of ETS proteins increased the proportion of CD41(+) cells
generated from Gata1s-knockin progenitors, their expression led to a significant 
reduction in the more mature CD42 fraction. Serial replating assays revealed that
overexpression of ERG or FLI-1 immortalized Gata1-knockdown and Gata1s knockin,
but not wild-type, fetal liver progenitors. Immortalization was accompanied by
activation of the JAK/STAT pathway, commonly seen in megakaryocytic malignancies.
These findings provide evidence for synergy between alterations in GATA-1 and
overexpression of ETS proteins in aberrant megakaryopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2665899
PMID: 19168790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 Jan;5(1):e1000268. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000268. Epub
2009 Jan 23.

Computational modeling of the hematopoietic erythroid-myeloid switch reveals
insights into cooperativity, priming, and irreversibility.

Chickarmane V(1), Enver T, Peterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
United States of America.

Hematopoietic stem cell lineage choices are decided by genetic networks that are 
turned ON/OFF in a switch-like manner. However, prior to lineage commitment,
genes are primed at low expression levels. Understanding the underlying molecular
circuitry in terms of how it governs both a primed state and, at the other
extreme, a committed state is of relevance not only to hematopoiesis but also to 
developmental systems in general. We develop a computational model for the
hematopoietic erythroid-myeloid lineage decision, which is determined by a
genetic switch involving the genes PU.1 and GATA-1. Dynamical models based upon
known interactions between these master genes, such as mutual antagonism and
autoregulation, fail to make the system bistable, a desired feature for robust
lineage determination. We therefore suggest a new mechanism involving a cofactor 
that is regulated as well as recruited by one of the master genes to bind to the 
antagonistic partner that is necessary for bistability and hence switch-like
behavior. An interesting fallout from this architecture is that suppression of
the cofactor through external means can lead to a loss of cooperativity, and
hence to a primed state for PU.1 and GATA-1. The PU.1-GATA-1 switch also
interacts with another mutually antagonistic pair, C/EBPalpha-FOG-1. The latter
pair inherits the state of its upstream master genes and further reinforces the
decision due to several feedback loops, thereby leading to irreversible
commitment. The genetic switch, which handles the erythroid-myeloid lineage
decision, is an example of a network that implements both a primed and a
committed state by regulating cooperativity through recruitment of cofactors.
Perturbing the feedback between the master regulators and downstream targets
suggests potential reprogramming strategies. The approach points to a framework
for lineage commitment studies in general and could aid the search for
lineage-determining genes.

PMCID: PMC2613533
PMID: 19165316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Leukemia. 2009 Apr;23(4):712-20. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.363. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

The role of survivin2 in primitive hematopoiesis during zebrafish development.

Ma AC(1), Chung MI, Liang R, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Survivin is an inhibitor of apoptosis and its role in embryonic development is
not completely understood. In zebrafish, survivin undergoes gene duplication.
Survivin1 (sur1) has been shown to mediate angiogenesis but not hematopoiesis. In
this study, we examined survivin2 (sur2) with particular reference to its role in
primitive hematopoiesis during zebrafish development. sur2 was expressed
predominantly in the intermediate cell mass (ICM, site of primitive
hematopoiesis). Morpholino (MO) targeting at intron1-exon2 junction of sur2
significantly reduced green fluorescent protein(+) (erythroid) cell population in
transgenic Tg (gata1:gfp) embryos at 18 h post-fertilization (h.p.f.; wild type: 
4.49+/-0.15%; Sur2(MO) embryos: 2.22+/-0.12%, P=0.02). Molecular targeting was
confirmed by reverse transcription-PCR and MO specificity by successful sur2 mRNA
rescue. sur2 MO also downregulated genes associated with hematopoietic stem cells
(scl, lmo2), erythroid (gata1, alpha- and beta-embryonic hemoglobins) as well as 
early (pu.1) and late (mpo, l-plastin) myelomonocytic lineages at 12 and 18
h.p.f. This was associated with an increase in apoptosis in the ICM and
alteration of cell-cycle status of erythroid cells. Both effects were caspase
dependent. In conclusion, sur2 is important in maintaining hematopoietic stem and
lineage committed cells during zebrafish development, by virtue of its
antiapoptotic activity in a caspase dependent and cell autonomous fashion.

PMID: 19151781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7719-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807489200. Epub 2009 
Jan 14.

FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha imposes eosinophil lineage commitment on hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells.

Fukushima K(1), Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Tokunaga M, Yasumi M, Satoh Y, Shibayama H, 
Tanaka H, Iwama A, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Although leukemogenic tyrosine kinases (LTKs) activate a common set of downstream
molecules, the phenotypes of leukemia caused by LTKs are rather distinct. Here we
report the molecular mechanism underlying the development of hypereosinophilic
syndrome/chronic eosinophilic leukemia by FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha. When introduced into
c-Kit(high)Sca-1(+)Lineage(-) cells, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha conferred
cytokine-independent growth on these cells and enhanced their self-renewal,
whereas it did not immortalize common myeloid progenitors in in vitro replating
assays and transplantation assays. Importantly, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha but not
TEL-PDGFRbeta enhanced the development of Gr-1(+)IL-5Ralpha(+) eosinophil
progenitors from c-Kit(high)Sca-1(+)Lineage(-) cells. FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha also
promoted eosinophil development from common myeloid progenitors. Furthermore,
when expressed in megakaryocyte/erythrocyte progenitors and common lymphoid
progenitors, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha not only inhibited differentiation toward
erythroid cells, megakaryocytes, and B-lymphocytes but aberrantly developed
eosinophil progenitors from megakaryocyte/erythrocyte progenitors and common
lymphoid progenitors. As for the mechanism of FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha-induced
eosinophil development, FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha was found to more intensely activate
MEK1/2 and p38(MAPK) than TEL-PDGFRbeta. In addition, a MEK1/2 inhibitor and a
p38(MAPK) inhibitor suppressed FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha-promoted eosinophil development.
Also, reverse transcription-PCR analysis revealed that FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha
augmented the expression of C/EBPalpha, GATA-1, and GATA-2, whereas it hardly
affected PU.1 expression. In addition, short hairpin RNAs against C/EBPalpha and 
GATA-2 and GATA-3KRR, which can act as a dominant-negative form over all GATA
members, inhibited FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha-induced eosinophil development. Furthermore,
FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha and its downstream Ras inhibited PU.1 activity in luciferase
assays. Together, these results indicate that FIP1L1-PDGFRalpha enhances
eosinophil development by modifying the expression and activity of
lineage-specific transcription factors through Ras/MEK and p38(MAPK) cascades.

PMCID: PMC2658066
PMID: 19147501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Blood. 2009 Mar 19;113(12):2619-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-163501. Epub 2009 
Jan 12.

Insights into the manifestations, outcomes, and mechanisms of leukemogenesis in
Down syndrome.

Malinge S(1), Izraeli S, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) show a spectrum of clinical anomalies, including
cognitive impairment, cardiac malformations, and craniofacial dysmorphy.
Moreover, hematologists have also noted that these children commonly show
macrocytosis, abnormal platelet counts, and an increased incidence of transient
myeloproliferative disease (TMD), acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL), and acute
lymphoid leukemia (ALL). In this review, we summarize the clinical manifestations
and characteristics of these leukemias, provide an update on therapeutic
strategies and patient outcomes, and discuss the most recent advances in
DS-leukemia research. With the increased knowledge of the way in which trisomy 21
affects hematopoiesis and the specific genetic mutations that are found in
DS-associated leukemias, we are well on our way toward designing improved
strategies for treating both myeloid and lymphoid malignancies in this high-risk 
population.

PMCID: PMC2661853
PMID: 19139078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2008 Dec;47(4):422-30. doi:
10.1016/S1028-4559(09)60010-3.

Genetic network analysis of human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/precursor cells.

Chang SJ(1), Huang TS, Wang KL, Wang TY, Yang YC, Chang MD, Wu YH, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, and
National Tsing Hua University, HsinChu, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Somatic CD34+ hematopoietic stem/precursor cells (HSPCs) give rise to 
hematopoietic cells and endothelial cells and have been used in clinical
applications. Understanding the genes responsible for stemness and how they
interact with each other will help us to manipulate these cells more efficiently 
in the future.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed microarray analysis on human CD34+ HSPCs and 
on two different progeny cell types, i.e. microvascular endothelial cells and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Systems biology and advanced bioinformatics
tools were used to help clarify the genetic networks associated with these stem
cell genes.
RESULTS: We identified CD34+ HSPC genes and found that they were involved in
critical biologic processes such as cell cycle regulation, chromosome
organization, and DNA repair. We also identified a novel precursor gene cluster
on chromosome 19p13.3. Analysis of HSPC-enriched genes using systems biology
tools revealed a complex genetic network functioning in CD34+ cells, in which
several genes acted as hubs to maintain the stability (such as GATA1) or
connectivity (such as hepatic growth factor) of the whole network.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the foundation for a more detailed understanding 
of CD34+ HSPCs.

PMID: 19126509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Korean Med Sci. 2008 Dec;23(6):1105-8. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2008.23.6.1105. Epub
2008 Dec 24.

A novel mutation in the GATA1 gene associated with acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia in a Korean Down syndrome patient.

Kim IS(1), Park ES, Lim JY, Ki CS, Chi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Gyeongsang National University Hospital,
Jinju, Korea.

Although acquired mutations in the GATA1 gene have been reported for Down
syndrome-related acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL) in Caucasians, this is
the first report of a Korean Down syndrome patient with AMKL carrying a novel
mutation of the GATA1 gene. A 3-yr-old Korean girl with Down syndrome was
admitted to our hospital complaining of pallor and fever. The findings of a
peripheral blood smear and bone marrow study were compatible with the presence of
AMKL. A chromosome study showed 48,XX,-7,+21c,+21,+r[3]/47,XX,+21c[17]. Following
GATA1 gene mutation analysis, a novel mutation, c.145dupG (p.Ala49GlyfsX18), was 
identified in the N-terminal activation domain of the GATA1 gene. This mutation
caused a premature termination at codon 67 and expression of an abnormal GATA-1
protein with a defective N-terminal activation domain, and the absence of
full-length GATA-1 protein. This case demonstrates that a leukemogenic mechanism 
for DS-AMKL is contributed by a unique collaboration between overexpressed genes 
from trisomy 21 and an acquired GATA1 mutation previously seen in Caucasians and 
now in a Korean patient.

PMCID: PMC2610649
PMID: 19119459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Dec;24(12):1065-70. doi: 10.1051/medsci/200824121065.

[Ikaros and erythropoiesis].

[Article in French]

Dijon M(1), Chabannon C, Tonnelle C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Centre de Thérapie Cellulaire et Génique, Inserm,
U891, CRCM, Equipe Recherche Clinique, Marseille, F-13009, France.
dijon.marilyne@orange.fr

Mostly studied in murine models, Ikaros--a factor that positively or negatively
controls gene transcription--was first described as essential to lymphopoiesis
until its involvement in numerous hematopoietic lineages was documented. Indeed, 
Ikaros is also active in murine erythropoiesis and more precisely during fetal to
adult globin switching. Recently, these observations were confirmed by our team
in a human context. We here review some of the most important characteristics of 
Ikaros, and detail more precisely how defects of Ikaros activity either by gene
inactivation or mutation in mice, or by forced expression of dominant negative
isoforms in human precursor cells, modify the erythroid differentiation. An
increased cell death, together with decreased cell proliferation, decreased
expression of erythroid-specific genes including GATA1, and a delay in fetal to
adult globin switching were observed. At the same time, myeloid differentiation
was slightly favoured thus suggesting that Ikaros could be involved in the
control of the myeloid/erythroid commitment.

PMID: 19116116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;29(6):1526-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01523-08. Epub 2008 Dec
29.

Ikaros and GATA-1 combinatorial effect is required for silencing of human
gamma-globin genes.

Bottardi S(1), Ross J, Bourgoin V, Fotouhi-Ardakani N, Affar el B, Trudel M,
Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

During development and erythropoiesis, globin gene expression is finely modulated
through an important network of transcription factors and chromatin modifying
activities. In this report we provide in vivo evidence that endogenous Ikaros is 
recruited to the human beta-globin locus and targets the histone deacetylase
HDAC1 and the chromatin remodeling protein Mi-2 to the human gamma-gene
promoters, thereby contributing to gamma-globin gene silencing at the time of the
gamma- to beta-globin gene transcriptional switch. We show for the first time
that Ikaros interacts with GATA-1 and enhances the binding of the latter to
different regulatory regions across the locus. Consistent with these results, we 
show that the combinatorial effect of Ikaros and GATA-1 impairs close proximity
between the locus control region and the human gamma-globin genes. Since the
absence of Ikaros also affects GATA-1 recruitment to GATA-2 promoter, we propose 
that the combinatorial effect of Ikaros and GATA-1 is not restricted to globin
gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC2648246
PMID: 19114560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Aug;29(8):535-9.

[The expression of basic fibroblast growth factor 1 during human embryonic yolk
sac hematopoiesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang YS(1), Li JY, Jin SH, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotech, Binzhou Medical College, Yantai 264003, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of basic fibroblast growth factor 1 (bFGF1)
during embryonic development on hematopoiesis, to study the expression of FGF1,
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (KDR), CD133, CD34 and transcription 
factors Ihh, SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and PU. 1 in the yolk sac, and to learn about
the role and relationships of FGF1, hematopoietic cells and transcription factors
during embryonic hematopoiesis.
METHODS: 10 microm sections and total RNA were prepared from 107 human embryos
aged 3-12 weeks. Immunohischemical SP staining and RT-PCR were performed.
RESULTS: The yolk sac blood islands of human 3 approximately 12 weeks embryos
consisted of peripheral vascular endothelial cells and central hematopoietic
cells. The expression of FGF1 was firstly found in visceral mesoderm around
periphery of yolk sac blood island at day 16, while was little inside it. KDR was
not or lowly expressed and CD34 and CD133 were not expressed then. The expression
increased, gray value decreased and staining enhanced at day 21. Strong staining 
of CD34+, CD133+ and KDR+ cells were found in blood island and mesoderm at day
30, their gray values changed from 156 +/- 16, 173 +/- 18 and 160 +/- 14 to 53
+/- 7, 52 +/- 6 and 69 +/- 8 respectively. FGF1 expression was strong positive,
the gray value declined dramatically from 161 +/- 13 to 40 +/- 5. Some positive
cells formed vessel-like structure along the periphery of blood island. Moderate 
expression of CD34+, CD133+, KDR+ cells increased at day 45, the cells aggregated
into mass in blood island and FGF1+ cells did the same in blood island, while
little in mesoderm. Its gray valve was increased. After 7 weeks, CD133+, KDR+,
CD34+ cells significantly decreased their gray values increased, the staining
became week. FGF1 was weakly expressed in yolk sac and its gray value increased
to 179 +/- 22. RT-PCR showed Ihh, SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2 were expressed at
different time in yolk sac. PU. 1 were not expressed at day 16, and then
expressed.
CONCLUSIONS: The hematopoietic properties of yolk sac may be dependent on
signaling through FGF receptors and FGF1 plays an important role in hematopoietic
stem cell homeostasis. The FGF pathway regulates primitive hematopoiesis by
modulating transcription factors such as Gata1 expression level and activity.

PMID: 19112917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Blood. 2009 Feb 26;113(9):1929-37. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-161422. Epub 2008
Dec 24.

Hematopoietic defects in the Ts1Cje mouse model of Down syndrome.

Carmichael CL(1), Majewski IJ, Alexander WS, Metcalf D, Hilton DJ, Hewitt CA,
Scott HS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Melbourne, Australia. carmichael@wehi.edu.au

Down syndrome (DS) persons are born with various hematopoietic abnormalities,
ranging from relatively benign, such as neutrophilia and macrocytosis, to a more 
severe transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD). In most cases, these
abnormalities resolve in the first few months to years of life. However,
sometimes the TMD represents a premalignant disease that develops into acute
megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL), usually in association with acquired GATA1
mutations. To gain insight into the mechanisms responsible for these
abnormalities, we analyzed the hematopoietic development of the Ts1Cje mouse
model of DS. Our analyses identified defects in mature blood cells, including
macrocytosis and anemia, as well as abnormalities in fetal liver and bone marrow 
stem and progenitor cell function. Despite these defects, the Ts1Cje mice do not 
develop disease resembling either TMD or AMKL, and this was not altered by a loss
of function allele of Gata1. Thus, loss of Gata1 and partial trisomy of
chromosome 21 orthologs, when combined, do not appear to be sufficient to induce 
TMD or AMKL-like phenotypes in mice.

PMID: 19109561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;29(5):1163-75. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01572-08. Epub 2008 Dec
22.

Differential contribution of the Gata1 gene hematopoietic enhancer to erythroid
differentiation.

Suzuki M(1), Moriguchi T, Ohneda K, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

GATA1 is a key regulator of erythroid cell differentiation. To examine how Gata1 
gene expression is regulated in a stage-specific manner, transgenic mouse lines
expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter from the Gata1 locus in a
bacterial artificial chromosome (G1BAC-GFP) were prepared. We found that the GFP 
reporter expression faithfully recapitulated Gata1 gene expression. Using GFP
fluorescence in combination with hematopoietic surface markers, we established a 
purification protocol for two erythroid progenitor fractions, referred to as
burst-forming units-erythroid cell-related erythroid progenitor (BREP) and
CFU-erythroid cell-related erythroid progenitor (CREP) fractions. We examined the
functions of the Gata1 gene hematopoietic enhancer (G1HE) and the highly
conserved GATA box in the enhancer core. Both deletion of the G1HE and
substitution mutation of the GATA box caused almost complete loss of GFP
expression in the BREP fraction, but the CREP stage expression was suppressed
only partially, indicating the critical contribution of the GATA box to the BREP 
stage expression of Gata1. Consistently, targeted deletion of G1HE from the
chromosomal Gata1 locus provoked suppressed expression of the Gata1 gene in the
BREP fraction, which led to aberrant accumulation of BREP stage hematopoietic
progenitor cells. These results demonstrate the physiological significance of the
dynamic regulation of Gata1 gene expression in a differentiation stage-specific
manner.

PMCID: PMC2643832
PMID: 19103751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Jan 15;188(2):99-102. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.08.011.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis in a Down syndrome newborn followed by acute
myeloid leukemia: identification of the same chromosomal abnormality in both
stages.

Kitoh T(1), Taki T, Hayashi Y, Nakamura K, Irino T, Osaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Shiga Medical Center for Children, 5-7-30
Moriyama, Moriyama 524-0022, Moriyama, Japan. tkitoh-mccs@umin.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Apr 15;190(2):134.

A transient abnormal myelopoiesis was observed in a newborn with Down syndrome.
Cytogenetic study revealed multiple oligoclonal abnormalities:
47,XY,inv(6)(p23q21),+21c[3]/47,XY,der(7)t(1;7)(q25;p15),+21c[1]/47,XY,del(13)(q?
),+21c[1]/47,XY,+21c[15]. Ten months after the patient achieved remission, the
transient abnormal myelopoiesis evolved to an acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
Cytogenetic study revealed only a single clonal abnormality,
47,XY,der(7)t(1;7)(q25;p15),+21c, identical to one of the structural changes seen
at birth. Sequence analysis of the GATA1 gene revealed a deletion-insertion
mutation within the exon 2 introducing a stop codon after Arg 64. It may be that 
the der(7)t(1;7)(q25;p15) abnormality played some selective role in the
development of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in this patient. To our knowledge,
the present case is unique in demonstrating a subclone with der(7)t(1;7)(q25;p15)
evolving to acute leukemia.

PMID: 19100513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Am J Hematol. 2009 Feb;84(2):79-86. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21332.

Clinical significance of Gata-1, Gata-2, EKLF, and c-MPL expression in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Ayala RM(1), Martínez-López J, Albízua E, Diez A, Gilsanz F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Hematologia, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, España.
rayaladiaz@yahoo.es

The aim of this study was to evaluate the biological correlation and prognostic
impact of Gata-1, Gata-2, EKLF, and c-MPL transcript level in a group of 41 acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. Gata-1 overexpression was related to advanced
age and a low percentage of bone marrow blasts and was associated with the
expression of CD34 antigen and lymphoid T markers. The negative impact of Gata-1 
expression on the probability of achieving complete remission has been confirmed.
Gata-2 overexpression was associated with a low percentage of blasts in BM and
males. Expression of c-MPL was associated with CD34+ AML and M2 FAB AML subtype. 
A higher expression of EKLF was found in secondary AML versus primary AML.
Nevertheless, patients expressing EKLF had a longer overall survival and event
free survival than those patients that did not express EKLF. Our study has
identified expression of EKLF as a factor with a favorable impact on prognosis in
AML.

PMID: 19097174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 27;284(9):5827-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808712200. Epub 2008
Dec 18.

Structural analysis of MED-1 reveals unexpected diversity in the mechanism of DNA
recognition by GATA-type zinc finger domains.

Lowry JA(1), Gamsjaeger R, Thong SY, Hung W, Kwan AH, Broitman-Maduro G, Matthews
JM, Maduro M, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, New South
Wales 2006, Australia.

MED-1 is a member of a group of divergent GATA-type zinc finger proteins recently
identified in several species of Caenorhabditis. The med genes are
transcriptional regulators that are involved in the specification of the mesoderm
and endoderm precursor cells in nematodes. Unlike other GATA-type zinc fingers
that recognize the consensus sequence (A/C/T)GATA(A/G), the MED-1 zinc finger
(MED1zf) binds the larger and atypical site GTATACT(T/C)(3). We have examined the
basis for this unusual DNA specificity using a range of biochemical and
biophysical approaches. Most strikingly, we show that although the core of the
MED1zf structure is similar to that of GATA-1, the basic tail C-terminal to the
zinc finger unexpectedly adopts an alpha-helical structure upon binding DNA. This
additional helix appears to contact the major groove of the DNA, making contacts 
that explain the extended DNA consensus sequence observed for MED1zf. Our data
expand the versatility of DNA recognition by GATA-type zinc fingers and perhaps
shed new light on the DNA-binding properties of mammalian GATA factors.

PMID: 19095651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2009 Jun;36(2-3):104-8. doi: 10.1007/s12016-008-8103-0.

Infections and the antiphospholipid syndrome.

García-Carrasco M(1), Galarza-Maldonado C, Mendoza-Pinto C, Escarcega RO, Cervera
R.

Author information: 
(1)Systemic Autoimmune Diseases Research Unit, CMN Manuel Avila Camacho, IMSS,
Puebla, México. mgc30591@yahoo.com

Currently, the origin of autoimmune diseases is considered to be multifactorial. 
Genetic predisposition, immune system malfunction or even backfire, hormonal
regulation, and environmental factors, i.e. infections, all play important roles 
in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as the antiphospholipid syndrome 
(APS). New drugs and strategies aimed at preventing infections could further
improve the outcome of APS and other autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 19089659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2009 Mar-Apr;42(2):121-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.10.012.
Epub 2008 Dec 7.

Development and perspective of current Brazilian studies on the epidemiology of
childhood leukemia.

Pombo de Oliveira MS(1), Koifman S, Vasconcelos GM, Emerenciano M, de Oliveira
Novaes C; Brazilian Collaborative Study Group of Infant Acute Leukemia.

Collaborators: Alencar DM, Apa A, Aquino J, Arancibia AM, Araújo FN, Araújo PI,
Basegio RM, Brandalise SR, Burlemaqui L, Carvalho EG, Cordeiro SN, Córdoba JC,
Coser VM, Costa I, D'Andrea ML, Fonseca TC, Freitas FA, Guerra MC, Lankszner M,
Lee ML, Lopes LF, Magalhães IQ, Mendonça CM, Mendonça N, Nogueira F, Pereira W,
Pinheiro VP, Ramos G, Ribeiro E, Salles TJ, Sobral E, Yunes JA.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology Pediatric Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional de 
Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. mpombo@inca.gov.br

In this concise report, we describe the history and evolution of childhood acute 
leukemia studies in Brazil, and the application if key biomarkers for clinical
trials and epidemiological studies over the past 8 years. Highlights of each
ongoing study are summarized. A Brazilian network integrating hospitals and
scientific institutions from all country regions has been established. This
organization is made possible through informatics and computer networking, and
the standardization of pathological reviews including immunophenotyping and
molecular characterization of childhood leukemias. The unique characteristics of 
the Brazilian population combined with a large clinical and epidemiologic
framework for patient ascertainment has enabled large-scale epidemiological
studies on childhood leukemia in Brazil.

PMID: 19064327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Science. 2008 Dec 19;322(5909):1839-42. doi: 10.1126/science.1165409. Epub 2008
Dec 4.

Human fetal hemoglobin expression is regulated by the developmental
stage-specific repressor BCL11A.

Sankaran VG(1), Menne TF, Xu J, Akie TE, Lettre G, Van Handel B, Mikkola HK,
Hirschhorn JN, Cantor AB, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 Dec 19;322(5909):1803-4.

Differences in the amount of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) that persists into adulthood 
affect the severity of sickle cell disease and the beta-thalassemia syndromes.
Genetic association studies have identified sequence variants in the gene BCL11A 
that influence HbF levels. Here, we examine BCL11A as a potential regulator of
HbF expression. The high-HbF BCL11A genotype is associated with reduced BCL11A
expression. Moreover, abundant expression of full-length forms of BCL11A is
developmentally restricted to adult erythroid cells. Down-regulation of BCL11A
expression in primary adult erythroid cells leads to robust HbF expression.
Consistent with a direct role of BCL11A in globin gene regulation, we find that
BCL11A occupies several discrete sites in the beta-globin gene cluster. BCL11A
emerges as a therapeutic target for reactivation of HbF in beta-hemoglobin
disorders.

PMID: 19056937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 6;284(6):3480-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805874200. Epub 2008 Dec
2.

The role of zinc finger protein 521/early hematopoietic zinc finger protein in
erythroid cell differentiation.

Matsubara E(1), Sakai I, Yamanouchi J, Fujiwara H, Yakushijin Y, Hato T,
Shigemoto K, Yasukawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioregulatory Medicine, Ehime University Graduate School of
Medicine, Toon, Ehime 791-0295, Japan.

ZNF521 (zinc finger protein 521) is a transcription factor with an N-terminal
transcriptional repressor motif and 30 zinc finger domains. Although a high
expression level of ZNF521 in human CD34+ progenitors and hematopoietic
malignancies has been demonstrated, the functional role of ZNF521 in
hematopoietic cell differentiation has not been clarified. In this study, we
analyzed the role of ZNF521 in erythroid cell differentiation using the short
hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated gene silencing method. Down-regulation of ZNF521
mediated by transient expression of shRNA for ZNF521 resulted in increased
synthesis of hemoglobin in K562 and HEL cell lines as compared with control
cells. K562-derived clones in which ZNF521 was constitutively silenced by shRNA
also showed marked synthesis of hemoglobin and an increased expression level of
glycophorin A. Since GATA-1 is the key regulator of erythroid differentiation,
the effect of ZNF521 on transcription activity of GATA-1 was analyzed using a
luciferase assay. GATA-1 activity was markedly inhibited by ZNF521 in a
dose-dependent manner. Deletion analysis of ZNF521 showed that the repressive
effect requires an N-terminal repression motif. Furthermore, the direct
interaction of ZNF521 with GATA-1 was demonstrated. These results indicate that
ZNF521 modulates erythroid cell differentiation through direct binding with
GATA-1.

PMID: 19049973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 1;181(11):8171-81.

Hemopoietic cell expression of the chemokine decoy receptor D6 is dynamic and
regulated by GATA1.

McKimmie CS(1), Fraser AR, Hansell C, Gutiérrez L, Philipsen S, Connell L, Rot A,
Kurowska-Stolarska M, Carreno P, Pruenster M, Chu CC, Lombardi G, Halsey C,
McInnes IB, Liew FY, Nibbs RJ, Graham GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Grasgow Biomedical Research Centre, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

Corrected and republished from
    J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3353-63.

D6 scavenges inflammatory chemokines and is essential for the regulation of
inflammatory and immune responses. Mechanisms explaining the cellular basis for
D6 function have been based on D6 expression by lymphatic endothelial cells. In
this study, we demonstrate that functional D6 is also expressed by murine and
human hemopoietic cells and that this expression can be regulated by pro- and
anti-inflammatory agents. D6 expression was highest in B cells and dendritic
cells (DCs). In myeloid cells, LPS down-regulated expression, while TGF-beta
up-regulated expression. Activation of T cells with anti-CD3 and soluble CD28
up-regulated mRNA expression 20-fold, while maturation of human macrophage and
megakaryocyte precursors also up-regulated D6 expression. Competition assays
demonstrated that chemokine uptake was D6 dependent in human leukocytes, whereas 
mouse D6-null cells failed to uptake and clear inflammatory chemokines.
Furthermore, we present evidence indicating that D6 expression is GATA1
dependent, thus explaining D6 expression in myeloid progenitor cells, mast cells,
megakaryocytes, and DCs. We propose a model for D6 function in which leukocytes, 
within inflamed sites, activate D6 expression and thus trigger resolution of
inflammatory responses. Our data on D6 expression by circulating DCs and B cells 
also suggest alternative roles for D6, perhaps in the coordination of innate and 
adaptive immune responses. These data therefore alter our models of in vivo D6
function and suggest possible discrete, and novel, roles for D6 on lymphatic
endothelial cells and leukocytes.

PMID: 19039854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 2009 Mar 5;113(10):2191-201. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-169417. Epub 2008 
Nov 14.

SCL and associated proteins distinguish active from repressive GATA transcription
factor complexes.

Tripic T(1), Deng W, Cheng Y, Zhang Y, Vakoc CR, Gregory GD, Hardison RC, Blobel 
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

GATA-1 controls hematopoietic development by activating and repressing gene
transcription, yet the in vivo mechanisms that specify these opposite activities 
are unknown. By examining the composition of GATA-1-associated protein complexes 
in a conditional erythroid rescue system as well as through the use of tiling
arrays we detected the SCL/TAL1, LMO2, Ldb1, E2A complex at all positively acting
GATA-1-bound elements examined. Similarly, the SCL complex is present at all
activating GATA elements in megakaryocytes and mast cells. In striking contrast, 
at sites where GATA-1 functions as a repressor, the SCL complex is depleted. A
DNA-binding defective form of SCL maintains association with a subset of active
GATA elements indicating that GATA-1 is a key determinant for SCL recruitment.
Knockdown of LMO2 selectively impairs activation but not repression by GATA-1.
ETO-2, an SCL-associated protein with the potential for transcription repression,
is also absent from GATA-1-repressed genes but, unlike SCL, fails to accumulate
at GATA-1-activated genes. Together, these studies identify the SCL complex as a 
critical and consistent determinant of positive GATA-1 activity in multiple
GATA-1-regulated hematopoietic cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC2652367
PMID: 19011221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Platelets. 2008 Nov;19(7):543-50. doi: 10.1080/09537100802275934.

Cytoskeletons of X-linked GATA-1, G208S macrothrombocytes are deficient in talin.

White JG(1), Burris SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Minnesota School of Medicine,
Minneapolis, MN, USA. white003@umn.edu

An X-linked mutation in the GATA-1 transcription factor, G208S, causes
macrothrombocytopenia and serious bleeding problems in affected male family
members. The unique ultrastructural pathology of their platelets was described
previously. The present investigation has evaluated the cytoskeletal proteins of 
the GATA-1, G208S macrothrombocytes of two male patients by page gel
electrophoresis and Western blot analysis. The 235-245 KD cytoskeletal protein,
Talin, was absent from their (PAGE) gels and undetectable by a specific talin
antibody on Western blots.

PMID: 18979367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Exp Hematol. 2008 Dec;36(12):1604-1615. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.08.005. Epub
2008 Oct 29.

Regulation of hematopoiesis by the BMP signaling pathway in adult zebrafish.

McReynolds LJ(1), Tucker J, Mullins MC, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The zebrafish is an established model system for studying the
embryonic emergence of tissues and organs, including the hematopoietic system. We
hypothesized that key signaling pathways controlling embryonic hematopoiesis
continue to be important in the adult, and we sought to develop approaches to
test this in zebrafish, focused on the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling
pathway. Functions for this pathway in adult hematopoiesis have been challenging 
to probe in other models.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Several approaches tested the function of BMP signaling
during adult zebrafish hematopoiesis. First, we evaluated steady-state
hematopoiesis in adult fish that are heterozygous for mutant alleles of Smad5, or
are homozygous for mutant alleles, and rescued to adulthood by injection of RNA
encoding Smad5. Second, we tested the relative ability of smad5 mutant fish to
recover from hemolytic anemia. Third, we generated a transgenic line that targets
the expression of a dominant-negative BMP receptor to adult-stage Gata1+
progenitor cells.
RESULTS: Adult fish with a strong mutant smad5 allele are anemic at steady state 
and, in addition, respond to hemolytic anemia with kinetics that are altered
compared to wild-type fish. Fish expressing a mutant BMP receptor in early Gata1+
definitive progenitors generate excessive eosinophils.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides proof of principle that regulation of adult
hematopoiesis can be studied in zebrafish by altering specific pathways. We show 
that the BMP signaling pathway is relevant for adult hematopoiesis to maintain
steady state erythropoiesis, control the erythropoietic response following stress
anemia, and to generate normal numbers of eosinophils.

PMCID: PMC2602881
PMID: 18973974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Ethnopharmacol. 2008 Dec 8;120(3):437-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.09.024. Epub 
2008 Oct 1.

Molecular pharmacological basis of the YiSui ShenXu Granule in beta-thalassemia
therapy.

Zhang C(1), Wu ZK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory of Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100053, China.

OBJECTIVES: To study the molecular pharmacological basis of the YiSui ShenXu
Granule, a complex prescription of the Chinese traditional medicine used to treat
beta-thalassemia.
METHODS: Real-time quantitative PCR method had been applied to analyze the genes 
expression: gamma-globin, Ckit, EpoR, Spi, FKLF, GATA1 and GATA2 in K562 cell
treated and untreated with this complex prescription and its each single herbal
medicine.
RESULTS: The results showed that this complex prescription increased the
gamma-globin, EpoR, Spi and FKLF expression and decreased the Ckit, GATA1 and
GATA2 expression. And all single herbal medicines of this complex prescription
could change some of those gene expressions, but not the same as the complex
prescription. Even that, this study results indicated that the YiSui ShenXu
Granule has its molecular pharmacological basis in treating beta-thalassemia.

PMID: 18951967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Feb;218(2):323-33. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21605.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into osteogenic or hematopoietic
lineages: a dose-dependent effect of osterix over-expression.

Kärner E(1), Unger C, Cerny R, Ahrlund-Richter L, Ganss B, Dilber MS, Wendel M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oral Biology, Institute of Odontology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Enhanced differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (HESCs), induced by
genetic modification could potentially generate a vast number of diverse cell
types. Such genetic modifications have frequently been achieved by
over-expression of individual regulatory proteins. However, careful evaluation of
the expression levels is critical, since this might have important implications
for the differentiation potential of HESCs. To date, attempts to promote
osteogenesis by means of gene transfer into HESCs using the early bone "master"
transcription factor osterix (Osx) have not been reported. In this study, we
attained HESC subpopulations expressing two significantly different levels of
Osx, following lentiviral gene transfer. Both subpopulations exhibited
spontaneous differentiation and reduced expression of markers characteristic of
the pluripotent phenotype, such as SSEA3, Tra1-60, and Nanog, In order to promote
bone differentiation, the cells were treated with ascorbic acid,
beta-glycerophosphate and dexamethasone. The high level of Osx, compared to
endogenous levels found in primary human osteoblasts, did not enhance osteogenic 
differentiation, and did not up-regulate collagen I expression. We show that the 
high Osx levels instead induced the commitment towards the
hematopoietic-endothelial lineage-by up-regulating the expression of CD34 and
Gata1. However, low levels of Osx up-regulated collagen I, bone sialoprotein and 
osteocalcin. Conversely, forced high level expression of the homeobox
transcription factor HoxB4, a known regulator for early hematopoiesis, promoted
osteogenesis in HESCs, while low levels of HoxB4 lead to hematopoietic gene
expression.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18932205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Gene. 2008 Dec 31;427(1-2):1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.09.018. Epub 2008 Sep
30.

Human phenotypes associated with GATA-1 mutations.

Ciovacco WA(1), Raskind WH, Kacena MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

GATA-1 is one of the six members of the GATA gene family, a group of related
transcription factors discovered in the 1980s. In the past few decades, the
crucial role of GATA-1 in normal human hematopoiesis has been delineated. As
would be expected, mutations in GATA-1 have subsequently been found to have
important clinical significance, and are directly linked to deregulated formation
of certain blood cell lineages. This paper reviews the functional consequences of
GATA-1 mutations by linking specific errors in the gene, or its downstream
protein products, to documented human diseases. These five human diseases are:
X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT), X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia
(XLTT), congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP), transient myeloproliferative
disorder (TMD) and acute megarakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) associated with
Trisomy 21, and, lastly, a particular subtype of anemia associated with the
production of GATA-1s, a shortened, mutant isoform of the wild-type GATA-1. The
different phenotypic expressions associated with GATA-1 mutations illustrate the 
integral function of the transcription factor in overall body homeostasis.
Furthermore, these direct genotype-phenotype correlations reinforce the
importance of unraveling the human genome, as such connections may lead to
important therapeutic or preventive therapies.

PMCID: PMC2601579
PMID: 18930124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Blood. 2009 Jan 15;113(3):646-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-08-170928. Epub 2008 Oct
16.

Specific JAK2 mutation (JAK2R683) and multiple gene deletions in Down syndrome
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kearney L(1), Gonzalez De Castro D, Yeung J, Procter J, Horsley SW,
Eguchi-Ishimae M, Bateman CM, Anderson K, Chaplin T, Young BD, Harrison CJ,
Kempski H, So CW, Ford AM, Greaves M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Haemato-Oncology, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United 
Kingdom. lyndal.kearney@icr.ac.uk

Comment in
    Br J Haematol. 2009 Jun;146(1):113-5.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) have a greatly increased risk of acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Both
DS-AMKL and the related transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) have GATA1
mutations as obligatory, early events. To identify mutations contributing to
leukemogenesis in DS-ALL, we undertook sequencing of candidate genes, including
FLT3, RAS, PTPN11, BRAF, and JAK2. Sequencing of the JAK2 pseudokinase domain
identified a specific, acquired mutation, JAK2R683, in 12 (28%) of 42 DS-ALL
cases. Functional studies of the common JAK2R683G mutation in murine Ba/F3 cells 
showed growth factor independence and constitutive activation of the JAK/STAT
signaling pathway. High-resolution SNP array analysis of 9 DS-ALL cases
identified additional submicroscopic deletions in key genes, including ETV6,
CDKN2A, and PAX5. These results infer a complex molecular pathogenesis for DS-ALL
leukemogenesis, with trisomy 21 as an initiating or first hit and with chromosome
aneuploidy, gene deletions, and activating JAK2 mutations as complementary
genetic events.

PMID: 18927438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Dyn. 2008 Nov;237(11):3332-41. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21746.

Definitive erythropoiesis in chicken yolk sac.

Nagai H(1), Sheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Early Embryogenesis, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

The first wave of erythropoiesis in amniotic animals generates all primitive
erythrocytes and takes place exclusively in yolk sac mesoderm. It is less clear, 
however, to what extent and for how long the yolk sac contributes to the second
wave of erythropoiesis which gives rise to definitive erythrocytes for later
embryonic and adult use. Here, we examine the initiation, duration, and site of
definitive erythrocyte formation in chicken yolk sac. We show that the earliest
definitive erythrocytes are generated in yolk sac venous vessels surrounding
major arteries at embryonic day (E) 4-4.5, and that mature definitive
erythrocytes enter circulating at E4.5-E5. This takes place at a time when yolk
sac vasculature remodels extensively to generate paired arterial/venous vessels. 
The yolk sac remains the predominant site for definitive erythropoiesis from E5
to E10, and continues to generate definitive erythrocytes at least until E15.
Similar to primitive erythropoiesis, definitive erythropoiesis in the yolk sac is
accompanied by the expression of transcriptional regulators gata1, scl, and lmo2.
Furthermore, our data suggest that one main source of definitive erythropoietic
cells is the pre-existing vascular endothelial cells. It remains unclear whether 
yolk sac derived hematopoietic progenitors that do not undergo erythropoiesis in 
the yolk sac may take up intraembryonic niches and contribute to erythropoietic
stem cell population after hatching.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18924232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 May;29(5):325-8.

[Identification of interaction partners and function analysis of new splicing
product of human LMO2 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan W(1), Yang S, Sun W, Du J, Zhai CL, Wang ZQ, Zhu TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Medical College, Nankai University, Tianjin 
300071, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the interaction partners of a new splicing product of LMO2
gene (LMO2-C), and study its function in K562 cells.
METHODS: Maltose binding protein (MBP) pull down and mammalian two-hybrid assay
(MTHA) were used to identify the interaction partners of LMO2-C in K562 cells.
Semiquantitative RT-PCR was used to detect the expression of hematopoietic
specific gene glycoprotein (GPA) in K562 cells.
RESULTS: MBP-LMO2-C fusion protein was expressed and purified in soluble form
successfully. Endogenous GATA1 and LDB1 proteins were confirmed to bind to LMO2-C
by MBP pull down analysis. The MTHA also showed that LMO2-C had comparable
binding affinities to LDB1 with LMO2-L, and over expression of LMO2-C prevented
LMO2-L from binding to LDB1, the inhibition rate being (81.13 +/- 0.68)%. RT-PCR 
results showed that the expression level of GPA was reduced [(51.00 +/- 1.58)%]
in K562 cells while LMO2-C overexpressed.
CONCLUSION: LMO2-C can bind endogenous GATA1 and LDB1 protein in K562 cells and
down regulates the expression of GPA.

PMID: 18844071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(24):7286-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00752-08. Epub 2008 Oct 
6.

Myc inhibits p27-induced erythroid differentiation of leukemia cells by
repressing erythroid master genes without reversing p27-mediated cell cycle
arrest.

Acosta JC(1), Ferrándiz N, Bretones G, Torrano V, Blanco R, Richard C, O'Connell 
B, Sedivy J, Delgado MD, León J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Molecular Biology Group, Department of Molecular Biology, Instituto de 
Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria, Universidad de Cantabria-CSIC-IDICAN,
Santander, Spain.

Inhibition of differentiation has been proposed as an important mechanism for
Myc-induced tumorigenesis, but the mechanisms involved are unclear. We have
established a genetically defined differentiation model in human leukemia K562
cells by conditional expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor
p27 (inducible by Zn(2+)) and Myc (activatable by 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen). Induction
of p27 resulted in erythroid differentiation, accompanied by Cdk inhibition and
G(1) arrest. Interestingly, activation of Myc inhibited p27-mediated erythroid
differentiation without affecting p27-mediated proliferation arrest.
Microarray-based gene expression indicated that, in the presence of p27, Myc
blocked the upregulation of several erythroid-cell-specific genes, including
NFE2, JUNB, and GATA1 (transcription factors with a pivotal role in
erythropoiesis). Moreover, Myc also blocked the upregulation of Mad1, a
transcriptional antagonist of Myc that is able to induce erythroid
differentiation. Cotransfection experiments demonstrated that Myc-mediated
inhibition of differentiation is partly dependent on the repression of Mad1 and
GATA1. In conclusion, this model demonstrates that Myc-mediated inhibition of
differentiation depends on the regulation of a specific gene program, whereas it 
is independent of p27-mediated cell cycle arrest. Our results support the
hypothesis that differentiation inhibition is an important Myc tumorigenic
mechanism that is independent of cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2593424
PMID: 18838534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Leukemia. 2009 Jan;23(1):95-103. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.267. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

The key role of stem cell factor/KIT signaling in the proliferation of blast
cells from Down syndrome-related leukemia.

Toki T(1), Kanezaki R, Adachi S, Fujino H, Xu G, Sato T, Suzuki K, Tauchi H, Endo
M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.

Transient leukemia (TL) has been observed in approximately 10% of newborn infants
with Down syndrome (DS). Although treatment with cytarabine is effective in
high-risk TL cases, approximately 20% of severe patients still suffer early
death. In this study, we demonstrate abundant KIT expression in all 13 patients
with GATA1 mutations, although no significant difference in expression levels was
observed between TL and acute myeloid leukemia. Stem cell factor (SCF) stimulated
the proliferation of the TL cells from five patients and treatment with the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib suppressed the proliferation effectively in
vitro. To investigate the signal cascade, we established the first SCF-dependent,
DS-related acute megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line, KPAM1. Withdrawal of SCF or
treatment with imatinib induced apoptosis of KPAM1 cells. SCF activated the
RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways, followed by downregulation of the pro-apoptotic
factor BIM and upregulation of the anti-apoptotic factor MCL1. Although we found 
novel missense mutations of KIT in 2 of 14 TL patients, neither mutation led to
KIT activation and neither reduced the cytotoxic effects of imatinib. These
results suggest the essential role of SCF/KIT signaling in the proliferation of
DS-related leukemia and the possibility of therapeutic benefits of imatinib for
TL patients.

PMID: 18830255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Genome Res. 2008 Dec;18(12):1896-905. doi: 10.1101/gr.083089.108. Epub 2008 Sep
25.

Transcriptional enhancement by GATA1-occupied DNA segments is strongly associated
with evolutionary constraint on the binding site motif.

Cheng Y(1), King DC, Dore LC, Zhang X, Zhou Y, Zhang Y, Dorman C, Abebe D, Kumar 
SA, Chiaromonte F, Miller W, Green RD, Weiss MJ, Hardison RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics of the Huck Institutes of
Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, USA.

Tissue development and function are exquisitely dependent on proper regulation of
gene expression, but it remains controversial whether the genomic signals
controlling this process are subject to strong selective constraint. While some
studies show that highly constrained noncoding regions act to enhance
transcription, other studies show that DNA segments with biochemical signatures
of regulatory regions, such as occupancy by a transcription factor, are seemingly
unconstrained across mammalian evolution. To test the possible correlation of
selective constraint with enhancer activity, we used chromatin
immunoprecipitation as an approach unbiased by either evolutionary constraint or 
prior knowledge of regulatory activity to identify DNA segments within a 66-Mb
region of mouse chromosome 7 that are occupied by the erythroid transcription
factor GATA1. DNA segments bound by GATA1 were identified by hybridization to
high-density tiling arrays, validated by quantitative PCR, and tested for gene
regulatory activity in erythroid cells. Whereas almost all of the occupied
segments contain canonical WGATAR binding site motifs for GATA1, in only 45% of
the cases is the motif deeply preserved (found at the orthologous position in
placental mammals or more distant species). However, GATA1-bound segments with
high enhancer activity tend to be the ones with an evolutionarily preserved
WGATAR motif, and this relationship was confirmed by a loss-of-function assay.
Thus, GATA1 binding sites that regulate gene expression during erythroid
maturation are under strong selective constraint, while nonconstrained binding
may have only a limited or indirect role in regulation.

PMCID: PMC2593580
PMID: 18818370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4503-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-05-157859. Epub 2008
Sep 23.

Trisomy 21 enhances human fetal erythro-megakaryocytic development.

Chou ST(1), Opalinska JB, Yao Y, Fernandes MA, Kalota A, Brooks JS, Choi JK,
Gewirtz AM, Danet-Desnoyers GA, Nemiroff RL, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA

Children with Down syndrome exhibit 2 related hematopoietic diseases: transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL).
Both exhibit clonal expansion of blasts with biphenotypic erythroid and
megakaryocytic features and contain somatic GATA1 mutations. While altered GATA1 
inhibits erythro-megakaryocytic development, less is known about how trisomy 21
impacts blood formation, particularly in the human fetus where TMD and AMKL
originate. We used in vitro and mouse transplantation assays to study
hematopoiesis in trisomy 21 fetal livers with normal GATA1 alleles. Remarkably,
trisomy 21 progenitors exhibited enhanced production of erythroid and
megakaryocytic cells that proliferated excessively. Our findings indicate that
trisomy 21 itself is associated with cell-autonomous expansion of
erythro-megakaryocytic progenitors. This may predispose to TMD and AMKL by
increasing the pool of cells susceptible to malignant transformation through
acquired mutations in GATA1 and other cooperating genes.

PMCID: PMC2597125
PMID: 18812473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Nov 1;26(31):5078-87. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.17.5554. Epub 2008
Sep 22.

Prognostic significance of, and gene and microRNA expression signatures
associated with, CEBPA mutations in cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia
with high-risk molecular features: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B Study.

Marcucci G(1), Maharry K, Radmacher MD, Mrózek K, Vukosavljevic T, Paschka P,
Whitman SP, Langer C, Baldus CD, Liu CG, Ruppert AS, Powell BL, Carroll AJ,
Caligiuri MA, Kolitz JE, Larson RA, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
guido.marcucci@osumc.edu

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2008 Dec 20;26(36):6021.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2009 Apr 20;27(12):2105; author reply 2106.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the prognostic significance of CEBPA mutations in the
context of established molecular markers in cytogenetically normal (CN) acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and gain biologic insights into leukemogenesis of the
CN-AML molecular high-risk subset (FLT3 internal tandem duplication [ITD]
positive and/or NPM1 wild type) that has a significantly higher incidence of
CEBPA mutations than the molecular low-risk subset (FLT3-ITD negative and NPM1
mutated).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred seventy-five adults age less than 60 years with
untreated primary CN-AML were screened before treatment for CEBPA, FLT3, MLL,
WT1, and NPM1 mutations and BAALC and ERG expression levels. Gene and microRNA
(miRNA) expression profiles were obtained for the CN-AML molecular high-risk
patients.
RESULTS: CEBPA mutations predicted better event-free (P = .007), disease-free (P 
= .014), and overall survival (P < .001) independently of other molecular and
clinical prognosticators. Among patients with CEBPA mutations, 91% were in the
CN-AML molecular high-risk group. Within this group, CEBPA mutations predicted
better event-free (P < .001), disease-free (P = .004), and overall survival (P = 
.009) independently of other molecular and clinical characteristics and were
associated with unique gene and miRNA expression profiles. The major features of 
these profiles were upregulation of genes (eg, GATA1, ZFPM1, EPOR, and GFI1B) and
miRNAs (ie, the miR-181 family) involved in erythroid differentiation and
downregulation of homeobox genes.
CONCLUSION: Pretreatment testing for CEBPA mutations identifies CN-AML patients
with different outcomes, particularly in the molecular high-risk group, thus
improving molecular risk-based classification of this large cytogenetic subset of
AML. The gene and miRNA expression profiling provided insights into
leukemogenesis of the CN-AML molecular high-risk group, indicating that CEBPA
mutations are associated with partial erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2652095
PMID: 18809607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Lancet. 2008 Oct 25;372(9648):1484-92. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61341-0. Epub
2008 Sep 19.

Mutations of JAK2 in acute lymphoblastic leukaemias associated with Down's
syndrome.

Bercovich D(1), Ganmore I, Scott LM, Wainreb G, Birger Y, Elimelech A, Shochat C,
Cazzaniga G, Biondi A, Basso G, Cario G, Schrappe M, Stanulla M, Strehl S, Haas
OA, Mann G, Binder V, Borkhardt A, Kempski H, Trka J, Bielorei B, Avigad S, Stark
B, Smith O, Dastugue N, Bourquin JP, Tal NB, Green AR, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Migal-Galilee
Biotechnology Centre, Kiryat Shmona, and Tel-Hai Academic College, Israel.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2008 Oct 25;372(9648):1448-50.

BACKGROUND: Children with Down's syndrome have a greatly increased risk of acute 
megakaryoblastic and acute lymphoblastic leukaemias. Acute megakaryoblastic
leukaemia in Down's syndrome is characterised by a somatic mutation in GATA1.
Constitutive activation of the JAK/STAT (Janus kinase and signal transducer and
activator of transcription) pathway occurs in several haematopoietic malignant
diseases. We tested the hypothesis that mutations in JAK2 might be a common
molecular event in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia associated with Down's syndrome.
METHODS: JAK2 DNA mutational analysis was done on diagnostic bone marrow samples 
obtained from 88 patients with Down's syndrome-associated acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia; and 216 patients with sporadic acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, Down's
syndrome-associated acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia, and essential
thrombocythaemia. Functional consequences of identified mutations were studied in
mouse haematopoietic progenitor cells.
FINDINGS: Somatically acquired JAK2 mutations were identified in 16 (18%)
patients with Down's syndrome-associated acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. The only 
patient with non-Down's syndrome-associated leukaemia but with a JAK2 mutation
had an isochromosome 21q. Children with a JAK2 mutation were younger (mean [SE]
age 4.5 years [0.86] vs 8.6 years [0.59], p<0.0001) at diagnosis. Five mutant
alleles were identified, each affecting a highly conserved arginine residue
(R683). These mutations immortalised primary mouse haematopoietic progenitor
cells in vitro, and caused constitutive Jak/Stat activation and
cytokine-independent growth of BaF3 cells, which was sensitive to pharmacological
inhibition with JAK inhibitor I. In modelling studies of the JAK2 pseudokinase
domain, R683 was situated in an exposed conserved region separated from the one
implicated in myeloproliferative disorders.
INTERPRETATION: A specific genotype-phenotype association exists between the type
of somatic mutation within the JAK2 pseudokinase domain and the development of
B-lymphoid or myeloid neoplasms. Somatically acquired R683 JAK2 mutations define 
a distinct acute lymphoblastic leukaemia subgroup that is uniquely associated
with trisomy 21. JAK2 inhibitors could be useful for treatment of this leukaemia.
FUNDING: Israel Trade Ministry, Israel Science Ministry, Jewish National Fund UK,
Sam Waxman Cancer Research Foundation, Israel Science Foundation, Israel Cancer
Association, Curtis Katz, Constantiner Institute for Molecular Genetics,
German-Israel Foundation, and European Commission FP6 Integrated Project
EUROHEAR.

PMID: 18805579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Nov 15;76(10):1229-39. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.08.025.
Epub 2008 Sep 2.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibits erythroid differentiation in human
erythropoietin-dependent cells involving p38 MAPK pathway, GATA-1 and FOG-1
downregulation and GATA-2 upregulation.

Buck I(1), Morceau F, Cristofanon S, Heintz C, Chateauvieux S, Reuter S, Dicato
M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, 9 rue Edward Steichen, L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

The proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) has been
linked to inflammation- and cancer-related anemia, which reduces both quality of 
life and prognosis of patients. The aim of this study was to reveal molecular
mechanisms linked to the inhibition of erythroid differentiation by TNFalpha. In 
this study, we showed that the inhibition of erythropoietin (Epo)-mediated
differentiation by TNFalpha lead to a downregulation of hemoglobin synthesis and 
was correlated to a modulation of key erythroid transcription factors. Thus, a
reverse of the transcription factor GATA-1/GATA-2 balance normally present during
erythropoiesis, as well as a downregulation of the cofactor of GATA-1, friend of 
GATA-1 (FOG-1), and the coregulating transcription factor nuclear factor
erythroid 2 (NF-E2) was observed after TNFalpha treatment. Moreover, we showed a 
reduction of GATA-1/FOG-1 interaction due to a reduced transcription of GATA-1
and a proteasome-dependent FOG-1 degradation after TNFalpha treatment. These
changes led to an inhibition of erythroid gene expression including Epo receptor 
(EpoR), alpha- and gamma-globin, erythroid-associated factor (ERAF),
hydroxymethylbilane synthetase (HMBS), and glycophorin A (GPA). An analysis of
distinct signaling pathway activations then revealed an activation of p38 by TNF,
as well as a corresponding involvement of this mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) in the cytokine-dependent inhibition of erythroid differentiation. Indeed 
the p38 inhibitor, SB203580, abrogated the inhibitory effect of TNFalpha on the
major erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 as well as erythroid marker
expression in Epo-induced TF-1 cells. Overall, these data contribute to a better 
understanding of cytokine-dependent anemia, by giving first hints about key
erythroid transcription factor modulations after TNFalpha treatment as well as an
involvement of p38 in the inhibition of erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 18805401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):5045-53.

IFN consensus sequence binding protein (Icsbp) is critical for eosinophil
development.

Milanovic M(1), Terszowski G, Struck D, Liesenfeld O, Carstanjen D.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut fuer Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin, Germany.

IFN consensus sequence binding protein (Icsbp) (IFN response factor-8) is a
hematopoietic transcription factor with dual functions in myelopoiesis and
immunity. In this study, we report a novel role of Icsbp in regulating the
development of eosinophils. Loss of Icsbp in mice leads to a reduction of
eosinophils in different tissues. During parasite infection with the nematode
Nippostrongylus brasiliensis, Icsbp-deficient mice fail to mount eosinophilia
despite a vigorous IL-5 response. Numbers of phenotypically defined eosinophil
progenitors are decreased and those progenitors have, on a per-cell basis,
reduced eosinophil differentiation potential. The transcription factor Gata1,
crucial for eosinophil development, is reduced expressed in committed eosinophil 
progenitors in wells as mature eosinophils. These findings identify Icsbp as a
novel transcription factor critical for the development of the eosinophil
lineage.

PMID: 18802108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;41(4):872-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.08.025.
Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Upregulation of human with-no-lysine kinase-4 gene expression by GATA-1
acetylation.

Li M(1), Zhao Y, Li Y, Li C, Chen F, Mao J, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, No92, Bei Er Road,
Shenyang 110001, China. sendtolm@126.com

With-no-lysine kinase-4 (WNK4), a member of the serine-threonine protein kinase
family, acts as a multifunctional regulator of diverse ion transporters.
Therefore, it is interesting to investigate the mechanisms that control its
expression. We have previously demonstrated that glucocorticoid downregulates
human WNK4 (hWNK4) expression through the negative glucocorticoid responsive
element. Here, using real-time PCR and Western blot assays, we show that
trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, upregulated hWNK4 mRNA and
protein expression in human embryo kidney 293 cells. Analysis of the
transcriptional activity of a series of the truncated hWNK4 promoters by
luciferase assay indicated that the region -484 to -337 of the hWNK4 promoter was
sensitive to TSA, and a GATA-1 binding motif was identified at position -426
using TRANSFAC-TESS program. Moreover, using electrophoresis mobility shift assay
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, the GATA-1 binding affinity to the hWNK4
promoter was shown to increase with TSA under in vitro and in vivo conditions.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses showed that the levels of
acetylated GATA-1 were increased with TSA, in agreement with changes in its
DNA-binding affinity. These findings indicate that TSA induces hWNK4 expression, 
at least in part, by increasing GATA-1 acetylation, and thereby its binding to
the GATA-1 responsive element, within the hWNK4 promoter.

PMID: 18793746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Jan;50(1):242-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-2206. Epub 
2008 Sep 12.

Elevated intraocular pressure, optic nerve atrophy, and impaired retinal
development in ODAG transgenic mice.

Sasaki T(1), Watanabe W, Muranishi Y, Kanamoto T, Aihara M, Miyazaki K, Tamura H,
Saeki T, Oda H, Souchelnytskyi N, Souchelnytskyi S, Aoyama H, Honda Z, Furukawa
T, Mishima HK, Kiuchi Y, Honda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology 
and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

PURPOSE: In an earlier study, a cDNA was cloned that showed abundant expression
in the eye at postnatal day (P)2 but was downregulated at P10; it was named ODAG 
(ocular development-associated gene). Its biological function was examined by
generating and analyzing transgenic mice overexpressing ODAG (ODAG Tg) in the eye
and by identifying ODAG-binding proteins.
METHODS: Transgenic mice were generated by using the mouse Crx promoter. EGFP was
designed to be coexpressed with transgenic ODAG, to identify transgene-expressing
cells. Overexpression of ODAG was confirmed by Northern and Western blot
analysis. IOP was measured with a microneedle technique. The eyes were
macroscopically examined and histologically analyzed. EGFP expression was
detected by confocal microscope. Proteins associated with ODAG were isolated by
pull-down assay in conjugation with mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Macroscopically, ODAG Tg exhibited gradual protrusion of the eyeballs.
The mean IOP of ODAG Tg was significantly higher than that of wild-type (WT)
littermates. Histologic analysis exhibited optic nerve atrophy and impaired
retinal development in the ODAG Tg eye. EGFP was expressed highly in the
presumptive outer nuclear layer and weakly in the presumptive inner nuclear layer
in the ODAG Tg retina. Rab6-GTPase-activating protein (Rab6-GAP) and its
substrate, Rab6, were identified as ODAG-binding proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Deregulated expression of ODAG in the eye induces elevated
intraocular pressure and optic nerve atrophy and impairs retinal development,
possibly by interfering with the Rab6/Rab6-GAP-mediated signaling pathway. These 
results provide new insights into the mechanisms regulating ocular development,
and ODAG Tg would be a novel animal model for human diseases caused by ocular
hypertension.

PMID: 18791169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Blood. 2008 Dec 15;112(13):4884-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-145722. Epub 2008 
Sep 9.

Cross-talk of GATA-1 and P-TEFb in megakaryocyte differentiation.

Elagib KE(1), Mihaylov IS, Delehanty LL, Bullock GC, Ouma KD, Caronia JF, Gonias 
SL, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Dec 15;112(13):4786-7.

The transcription factor GATA-1 participates in programming the differentiation
of multiple hematopoietic lineages. In megakaryopoiesis, loss of GATA-1 function 
produces complex developmental abnormalities and underlies the pathogenesis of
megakaryocytic leukemia in Down syndrome. Its distinct functions in megakaryocyte
and erythroid maturation remain incompletely understood. In this study, we
identified functional and physical interaction of GATA-1 with components of the
positive transcriptional elongation factor P-TEFb, a complex containing cyclin T1
and the cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9). Megakaryocytic induction was associated
with dynamic changes in endogenous P-TEFb composition, including recruitment of
GATA-1 and dissociation of HEXIM1, a Cdk9 inhibitor. shRNA knockdowns and
pharmacologic inhibition both confirmed contribution of Cdk9 activity to
megakaryocytic differentiation. In mice with megakaryocytic GATA-1 deficiency,
Cdk9 inhibition produced a fulminant but reversible megakaryoblastic disorder
reminiscent of the transient myeloproliferative disorder of Down syndrome. P-TEFb
has previously been implicated in promoting elongation of paused RNA polymerase
II and in programming hypertrophic differentiation of cardiomyocytes. Our results
offer evidence for P-TEFb cross-talk with GATA-1 in megakaryocytic
differentiation, a program with parallels to cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC2597596
PMID: 18780834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2008 May;24(5):887-91.

[Effect of different tags on pulldown assays implemented by LMO2 fusion protein].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan W(1), Sun W, Yang S, Yan J, Zhai C, Du J, Wang Z, An D, Zhu T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, Nankai University,
Tianjin 300071, China.

Pulldown assay is an in vitro method for studies of protein-protein interactions,
in which tagged proteins are usually expressed as the bait to enrich other
proteins that could bind to them. In this technology, the GST tag is broadest
used for its modest size and hydrophilic property. In most cases, the GST tag
could increase the hydrophility of the fusion protein and help to avoid the
formation of inclusion bodies. However, in the other few cases, the target
protein may be strongly hydrophobic or have complicated structures that were hard
to fold and assemble in correct conformations without champerons, and even the
existence of GST tag could not make them soluble. These proteins were always
expressed as inclusion bodies and had no functions. LMO2 was a small molecular
weight and insoluble protein, in this study, GST system and MBP system were used 
to express GST-LMO2 and MBP-LMO2 fusion proteins, respectively. We found that
GST-LMO2 fusion protein was expressed as inclusion bodies whereas MBP-LMO2 fusion
protein was expressed in soluble form. Moreover, the production rate of MBP-LMO2 
was also much higher than GST-LMO2. Then MBP-LMO2 fusion proteins and renatured
GST-LMO2 fusion proteins were used as bait in pulldown assay to study the
interaction between LMO2 and endogenous GATA1 in K562 cells. Western blot
analyses showed that both of these proteins could bind to endogenous GATA1 in
K562 cells, but recovered GATA1 protein by MBP-LMO2 fusion protein was much more 
than GST-LMO2 fusion protein. These results suggest that using of MBP system is a
helpful attempt in the case of studying small molecular weight, strong
hydrophobic proteins.

PMID: 18724713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3353-63.

Hemopoietic cell expression of the chemokine decoy receptor D6 is dynamic and
regulated by GATA1.

McKimmie CS(1), Fraser AR, Hansell C, Gutiérrez L, Philipsen S, Connell L, Rot A,
Kurowska-Stolarska M, Carreno P, Pruenster M, Chu CC, Lombardi G, Halsey C,
McInnes IB, Liew FY, Nibbs RJ, Graham GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection and Inflammation, Glasgow Biomedical
Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom;

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2008 Dec 1;181(11):8170.

Corrected and republished in
    J Immunol. 2008 Dec 1;181(11):8171-81.

D6 scavenges inflammatory chemokines and is essential for the regulation of
inflammatory and immune responses. Mechanisms explaining the cellular basis for
D6 function have been based on D6 expression by lymphatic endothelial cells. In
this study, we demonstrate that functional D6 is also expressed by murine and
human hemopoietic cells and that this expression can be regulated by pro- and
anti-inflammatory agents. D6 expression was highest in B cells and dendritic
cells (DCs). In myeloid cells, LPS down-regulated expression, while TGF-beta
up-regulated expression. Activation of T cells with anti-CD3 and soluble CD28
up-regulated mRNA expression 20-fold, while maturation of human macrophage and
megakaryocyte precursors also up-regulated D6 expression. Competition assays
demonstrated that chemokine uptake was D6 dependent in human leukocytes, whereas 
mouse D6-null cells failed to uptake and clear inflammatory chemokines.
Furthermore, we present evidence indicating that D6 expression is GATA1
dependent, thus explaining D6 expression in myeloid progenitor cells, mast cells,
megakaryocytes, and DCs. We propose a model for D6 function in which leukocytes, 
within inflamed sites, activate D6 expression and thus trigger resolution of
inflammatory responses. Our data on D6 expression by circulating DCs and B cells 
also suggest alternative roles for D6, perhaps in the coordination of innate and 
adaptive immune responses. These data therefore alter our models of in vivo D6
function and suggest possible discrete, and novel, roles for D6 on lymphatic
endothelial cells and leukocytes.

PMID: 18714007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Autoimmun Rev. 2008 Dec;8(2):116-20. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2008.07.005.

Human parvovirus B19 infection and autoimmunity.

Lunardi C(1), Tinazzi E, Bason C, Dolcino M, Corrocher R, Puccetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Internal
Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. claudio.lunardi@univr.it

Human parvovirus B19 infection is responsible for a wide range of human diseases 
ranging from mild erythema infectiosum in immunocompetent children to fetal loss 
in primary infected pregnant women and aplastic anemia or lethal cytopenias in
adult immunocompromised patients. Since persistent viral infection is responsible
for an autoimmune response and clinical symptoms can mimic autoimmune
inflammatory disorders, parvovirus B19 is the object of intense efforts to
clarify whether it is also able to trigger autoimmune diseases. Indeed the virus 
has been implicated as the causative or the precipitating agent of several
autoimmune disorders including rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus,
antiphospholipid syndrome, systemic sclerosis and vasculitides. Molecular mimicry
between host and viral proteins seems to be the main mechanism involved in the
induction of autoimmunity. By means of a random peptide library approach, we have
identified a peptide that shares homology with parvovirus VP1 protein and with
human cytokeratin. Moreover the VP peptide shares similarity with the
transcription factor GATA1 that plays an essential role in megakaryopoiesis and
in erythropoiesis. These new data sustain the role played by molecular mimicry in
the induction of cross-reactive (auto)antibodies by parvovirus B19 infection.

PMID: 18700174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Br J Haematol. 2008 Oct;143(2):300-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07332.x. Epub
2008 Aug 10.

Megakaryocyte hyperproliferation without GATA1 mutation in foetal liver of a case
of Down syndrome with hydrops foetalis.

De Vita S, Devoy A, Groet J, Kruslin B, Kuzmic-Prusac I, Nizetic D.

PMID: 18699852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Lipid Res. 2008 Dec;49(12):2590-604. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M800256-JLR200. Epub 2008
Aug 12.

Regulation of the human thromboxane A2 receptor gene by Sp1, Egr1, NF-E2, GATA-1,
and Ets-1 in megakaryocytes.

Gannon AM(1), Kinsella BT.

Author information: 
(1)University College Dublin School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences,
University College Dublin Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical
Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

The alpha and beta isoforms of the human thromboxane A(2) (TXA(2)) receptor (TP) 
are encoded by a single gene but are transcriptionally regulated by distinct
promoters, termed promoter 1 (Prm1) and Prm3, respectively. Herein, it was sought
to identify factors regulating Prm1 within the megakaryocytic human
erythroleukemia 92.1.7 cell line. Through gene deletion and reporter assays, the 
core Prm1 was localized to between nucleotides -6,320 and -5,895, proximal to the
transcription initiation site. Furthermore, two upstream repressor and two
upstream activator regions were identified. Site-directed mutagenesis of four
overlapping Sp1/Egr1 elements and an NF-E2/AP1 element within the proximal region
substantially reduced Prm1 activity. Deletion/mutation of GATA and Ets elements
disrupted the upstream activator sequence located between -7,962 and -7,717,
significantly impairing Prm1 activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and 
chromatin immunoprecipitations confirmed that Sp1, Egr1, and NF-E2 bind to
elements within the core promoter, whereas GATA-1 and Ets-1 factors bind to the
upstream activator sequence (between -7,962 and -7,717). Collectively, these data
establish that Sp1, Egr1, and NF-E2 regulate core Prm1 activity in the
megakaryocytic-platelet progenitor cells, whereas GATA-1 and Ets-1 act as
critical upstream activators, hence providing the first genetic basis for the
expression of the human TXA(2) receptor (TP) within the vasculature.

PMID: 18698092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Oct 1;314(16):2930-40. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.07.019. Epub 
2008 Jul 29.

Diverse hematopoietic potentials of five human embryonic stem cell lines.

Chang KH(1), Nelson AM, Fields PA, Hesson JL, Ulyanova T, Cao H, Nakamoto B, Ware
CB, Papayannopoulou T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology Division, University of Washington, 1705 NE
Pacific Street, Box 357710, Seattle, WA, USA.

Despite a growing body of literature concerning the hematopoietic differentiation
of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), the full hematopoietic potential of the
majority of existing hESC lines remains unknown. In this study, the hematopoietic
response of five NIH-approved hESC lines (H1, hSF6, BG01, BG02, and BG03) was
compared. Our data show that despite expressing similar hESC markers under
self-renewing conditions and initiating mesodermal differentiation under
spontaneous differentiation conditions, marked differences in subsequent
hematopoietic differentiation potential among these lines existed. A high degree 
of hematopoietic differentiation was attained only by H1 and BG02, whereas this
process appeared to be abortive in nature for hSF6, BG01, and BG03. This
difference in hematopoietic differentiation predisposition was readily apparent
during spontaneous differentiation, and further augmented under
hematopoietic-inducing conditions. This predisposition appeared to be intrinsic
to the specific hESC line and independent of passage number or gender karyotype. 
Interestingly, H1 and BG02 displayed remarkable similarities in their kinetics of
hematopoietic marker expression, hematopoietic colony formation, erythroid
differentiation, and globin expression, suggesting that a similar, predetermined 
differentiation sequence is followed. The identification of intrinsic and
extrinsic factors governing the hematopoietic differentiation potential of hESCs 
will be of great importance for the putative clinical utility of hESC lines.

PMCID: PMC2642930
PMID: 18692044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4507-11. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-04-152967. Epub 2008
Aug 8.

Abnormalities in the myeloid progenitor compartment in Down syndrome fetal liver 
precede acquisition of GATA1 mutations.

Tunstall-Pedoe O(1), Roy A, Karadimitris A, de la Fuente J, Fisk NM, Bennett P,
Norton A, Vyas P, Roberts I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London and Imperial Healthcare NHS
Trust, London, United Kingdom.

Down syndrome (DS) children have a high frequency of acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia (AMKL) in early childhood. At least 2 in utero genetic events are
required, although not sufficient, for DS-AMKL: trisomy 21 (T21) and
N-terminal-truncating GATA1 mutations. To investigate the role of T21 in DS-AMKL,
we compared second trimester hemopoiesis in DS without GATA1 mutations to
gestation-matched normal controls. In all DS fetal livers (FLs), but not marrows,
megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor frequency was increased (55.9% +/- 4% vs 17.1%
+/- 3%, CD34(+)CD38(+) cells; P < .001) with common myeloid progenitors (19.6%
+/- 2% vs 44.0% +/- 7%) and granulocyte-monocyte (GM) progenitors (15.8% +/- 4%
vs 34.5% +/- 9%) commensurately reduced. Clonogenicity of DS-FL versus normal FL 
CD34(+) cells was markedly increased (78% +/- 7% vs 15% +/- 3%) affecting
megakaryocyte-erythroid ( approximately 7-fold higher) and GM and colony-forming 
unit-granulocyte, erythrocyte macrophage, megakaryocyte (CFU-GEMM) progenitors.
Replating efficiency of CFU-GEMM was also markedly increased. These data indicate
that T21 itself profoundly disturbs FL hemopoiesis and they provide a testable
hypothesis to explain the increased susceptibility to GATA1 mutations in DS-AMKL 
and DS-associated transient myeloproliferative disorder.

PMID: 18689547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 6;3(8):e2850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002850.

K-ras/PI3K-Akt signaling is essential for zebrafish hematopoiesis and
angiogenesis.

Liu L(1), Zhu S, Gong Z, Low BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Cell Signaling and Developmental Biology
Laboratory, The National University of Singapore, Singapore, The Republic of
Singapore.

The RAS small GTPases orchestrate multiple cellular processes. Studies on
knock-out mice showed the essential and sufficient role of K-RAS, but not N-RAS
and H-RAS in embryonic development. However, many physiological functions of
K-RAS in vivo remain unclear. Using wild-type and fli1:GFP transgenic zebrafish, 
we showed that K-ras-knockdown resulted in specific hematopoietic and angiogenic 
defects, including the impaired expression of erythroid-specific gene gata1 and
sse3-hemoglobin, reduced blood circulation and disorganized blood vessels.
Expression of either K-rasC40 that links to phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
activation, or Akt2 that acts downstream of PI3K, could rescue both hematopoietic
and angiogenic defects in the K-ras knockdown. Consistently, the functional
rescue by k-ras mRNA was significantly suppressed by wortmannin, a PI3K-specific 
inhibitor. Our results provide direct evidence that PI3K-Akt plays a crucial role
in mediating K-ras signaling during hematopoiesis and angiogenesis in vivo, thus 
offering new targets and alternative vertebrate model for studying these
processes and their related diseases.

PMCID: PMC2483249
PMID: 18682746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Br J Haematol. 2008 Oct;143(1):129-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07293.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 28.

Haem-regulated eIF2alpha kinase is necessary for adaptive gene expression in
erythroid precursors under the stress of iron deficiency.

Liu S(1), Bhattacharya S, Han A, Suragani RN, Zhao W, Fry RC, Chen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Haem-regulated eIF2alpha kinase (HRI) is essential for the regulation of globin
gene translation and the survival of erythroid precursors in iron/haem
deficiency. This study found that that in iron deficiency, fetal definitive
erythropoiesis is inhibited at the basophilic erythroblast stage with increased
proliferation and elevated apoptosis. This hallmark of ineffective erythropoiesis
is more severe in HRI deficiency. Microarray gene profiling analysis showed that 
HRI was required for adaptive gene expression in erythroid precursors during
chronic iron deficiency. The number of genes with expression affected more than
twofold increased, from 213 in iron deficiency and 73 in HRI deficiency, to 3135 
in combined iron and HRI deficiencies. Many of these genes are regulated by Gata1
and Fog1. We demonstrate for the first time that Gata1 expression in developing
erythroid precursors is decreased in iron deficiency, and is decreased further in
combined iron and HRI deficiencies. Additionally, Fog1 expression is decreased in
combined deficiencies, but not in iron or HRI deficiency alone. Our results
indicate that HRI confers adaptive gene expression in developing erythroblasts
during iron deficiency through maintaining Gata1/Fog1 expression.

PMID: 18665838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Sep 1;105(1):301-12. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21826.

Identification of long range regulatory elements of mouse alpha-globin gene
cluster by quantitative associated chromatin trap (QACT).

Di LJ(1), Wang L, Zhou GL, Wu XS, Guo ZC, Ke XS, Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, P.R. China.

Chromatin from different regions of the genome frequently forms steady
associations that play important roles in regulating gene expression. The widely 
used chromatin conformation capture (3C) assay allows determination of the in
vivo structural organization of an active endogenous locus. However, unpredicted 
chromatin associations within a given genomic locus can not be identified by 3C. 
Here, we describe a new strategy, quantitative associated chromatin trap (QACT), 
which incorporates a modified 3C method and a quantitative assay tool, to capture
and quantitatively analyzes all possible associated chromatin partners (ACPs) of 
a given chromatin fragment. Using QACT, we have analyzed the chromatin
conformation of the mouse alpha-globin gene cluster and proved the extensive
interaction between HS26 and alpha-globin genes. In addition, we have identified 
a candidate alpha1-globin gene specific silencer 475A8 which shows the
differentiation-stage specific DNase I hypersensitivity. Functional analysis
suggests that 475A8 may regulate the alpha1-globin gene during terminal
differentiation of committed erythroid progenitor cells. ChIP (chromatin
immunoprecipitation) and cotransfection assays demonstrate that GATA-1, a
hemopoietic specific transcriptional factor, may increase alpha1-globin gene
expression by suppressing the function of 475A8 in terminally differentiated
erythroid cells.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18655188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. BMC Genomics. 2008 Jul 16;9:337. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-337.

Evolutionary conservation of zinc finger transcription factor binding sites in
promoters of genes co-expressed with WT1 in prostate cancer.

Eisermann K(1), Tandon S, Bazarov A, Brett A, Fraizer G, Piontkivska H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, USA.
keiserma@kent.edu

BACKGROUND: Gene expression analyses have led to a better understanding of growth
control of prostate cancer cells. We and others have identified the presence of
several zinc finger transcription factors in the neoplastic prostate, suggesting 
a potential role for these genes in the regulation of the prostate cancer
transcriptome. One of the transcription factors (TFs) identified in the prostate 
cancer epithelial cells was the Wilms tumor gene (WT1). To rapidly identify
coordinately expressed prostate cancer growth control genes that may be regulated
by WT1, we used an in silico approach.
RESULTS: Evolutionary conserved transcription factor binding sites (TFBS)
recognized by WT1, EGR1, SP1, SP2, AP2 and GATA1 were identified in the promoters
of 24 differentially expressed prostate cancer genes from eight mammalian
species. To test the relationship between sequence conservation and function,
chromatin of LNCaP prostate cancer and kidney 293 cells were tested for TF
binding using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Multiple putative TFBS in
gene promoters of placental mammals were found to be shared with those in human
gene promoters and some were conserved between genomes that diverged about 170
million years ago (i.e., primates and marsupials), therefore implicating these
sites as candidate binding sites. Among those genes coordinately expressed with
WT1 was the kallikrein-related peptidase 3 (KLK3) gene commonly known as the
prostate specific antigen (PSA) gene. This analysis located several potential WT1
TFBS in the PSA gene promoter and led to the rapid identification of a novel
putative binding site confirmed in vivo by ChIP. Conversely for two prostate
growth control genes, androgen receptor (AR) and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), known to be transcriptionally regulated by WT1, regulatory
sequence conservation was observed and TF binding in vivo was confirmed by ChIP.
CONCLUSION: Overall, this targeted approach rapidly identified important
candidate WT1-binding elements in genes coordinately expressed with WT1 in
prostate cancer cells, thus enabling a more focused functional analysis of the
most likely target genes in prostate cancer progression. Identifying these genes 
will help to better understand how gene regulation is altered in these tumor
cells.

PMCID: PMC2515153
PMID: 18631392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Blood. 2008 Oct 1;112(7):2738-49. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-146605. Epub 2008
Jul 14.

Characterization of megakaryocyte GATA1-interacting proteins: the corepressor
ETO2 and GATA1 interact to regulate terminal megakaryocyte maturation.

Hamlett I(1), Draper J, Strouboulis J, Iborra F, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Molecular Haematology Unit and Department of
Haematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor GATA1 coordinates timely activation and repression of
megakaryocyte gene expression. Loss of GATA1 function results in excessive
megakaryocyte proliferation and disordered terminal platelet maturation, leading 
to thrombocytopenia and leukemia in patients. The mechanisms by which GATA1 does 
this are unclear. We have used in vivo biotinylated GATA1 to isolate
megakaryocyte GATA1-partner proteins. Here, several independent approaches show
that GATA1 interacts with several proteins in the megakaryocyte cell line L8057
and in primary megakaryocytes. They include FOG1, the NURD complex, the
pentameric complex containing SCL/TAL-1, the zinc-finger regulators GFI1B and
ZFP143, and the corepressor ETO2. Knockdown of ETO2 expression promotes
megakaryocyte differentiation and enhances expression of select genes expressed
in terminal megakaryocyte maturation, eg, platelet factor 4 (Pf4). ETO2-dependent
direct repression of the Pf4 proximal promoter is mediated by GATA-binding sites 
and an E-Box motif. Consistent with this, endogenous ETO2, GATA1, and the SCL
pentameric complex all specifically bind the promoter in vivo. Finally, as ETO2
expression is restricted to immature megakaryocytes, these data suggest that ETO2
directly represses inappropriate early expression of a subset of terminally
expressed megakaryocyte genes by binding to GATA1 and SCL.

PMCID: PMC2556610
PMID: 18625887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Mol Biol. 2008 Sep 19;381(5):1292-306. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.072. Epub
2008 Jul 2.

Crystal structures of multiple GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA reveal new insights
into DNA recognition and self-association by GATA.

Bates DL(1), Chen Y, Kim G, Guo L, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309-0215, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors (GATA1-6) binds selected GATA sites in
vertebrate genomes to regulate specific gene expression. Although vertebrate GATA
factors have two highly conserved zinc finger motifs, how the two fingers act
together to recognize functional DNA elements is not well understood. Here we
determined the crystal structures of the C-terminal zinc finger of mouse GATA3
bound to DNA containing two variously arranged GATA binding sites. Our structures
and accompanying biochemical analyses reveal two distinct modes of DNA binding by
GATA to closely arranged sites. One mode involves cooperative binding by two GATA
factors that interact with each other through protein-protein interactions. The
other involves simultaneous binding of the N-terminal zinc finger (N-finger) and 
the C-terminal zinc finger of the same GATA factor. Our studies represent the
first crystallographic analysis of GATA zinc fingers bound to DNA and provide new
insights into the DNA recognition mechanism by the GATA zinc finger. Our crystal 
structure also reveals a dimerization interface in GATA that has previously been 
shown to be important for GATA self-association. These findings significantly
advance our understanding of the structure and function of GATA and provide an
important framework for further investigating the in vivo mechanisms of
GATA-dependent gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC4559223
PMID: 18621058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Leuk Res. 2009 Jan;33(1):166-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.05.021. Epub 2008 Jul
7.

Core promoter sequence of SEMG I spans between the two putative GATA-1 binding
domains and is responsive to IL-4 and IL-6 in myeloma cells.

Zhang Y(1), Wang Z, Zhang J, Lim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Harrington Regional Medical Center, Amarillo, United 
States.

Semenogelin (SEMG) I is a cancer-testis antigen expressed in myeloma cells. SEMG 
I expression is upregulated by IL-4, IL-6 and 5-azacytidine. In this study, we
set out to define the core promoter sequence needed for the expression of SEMG I 
in myeloma cells. We found that nucleotide sequences spanning the two putative
GATA-1 binding domains are vital for the primary regulation of SEMG I promoter
function while the other parts of the promoter sequence are responsible for the
fine adjustment of the core promoter function. The core promoter sequence is
responsive to the enhancing effect of IL-4 and IL-6.

PMCID: PMC2605945
PMID: 18602691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Oct;1779(10):606-15. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.06.004. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

Suppression of EDAG gene expression by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate is
mediated through down-regulation of GATA-1.

Li CY(1), Fang F, Xu WX, Xu CW, Zhan YQ, Wang ZD, Ding YL, Li YH, Sun HB, Yang
XM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 27 Taiping Road, Beijing, China.

EDAG, a hematopoietic tissue-specific protein, is involved in the regulation of
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of hematopoietic cells. In this
study, a dose-dependent inhibition of EDAG expression by PMA was observed in K562
cells. The responsive element for the PMA-induced inhibition was contained in the
region between -211 and +32bp of the EDAG gene promoter. By
oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis, EMSA, ChIP and transient transfection
assays, we found that two tandem repeat GATA-1 sites in the promoter of EDAG gene
played an important role in the PMA-mediated down-regulation of the EDAG gene
expression in K562 cells. The kinetics of EDAG expression during PMA induction
showed that the levels of EDAG expression were down-regulated concomitantly with 
GATA-1 down-expression. Decreased GATA-1 expression by siRNA reduced expression
of EDAG in K562 cells, and restored expression of GATA-1 significantly rescued
EDAG expression from PMA-mediated suppression. Overexpression of EDAG in K562
cells inhibited the megakaryocytic differentiation induced by PMA which raised
the interesting possibility that PMA induced K562 cells differentiation toward
megakaryocytic phenotype through, at least in part, the inhibition of EDAG
expression. In vivo analysis confirmed that EDAG was highly expressed in
primitive progenitor cells and down-regulated in megakaryocytes which was
consistent with the expression pattern of GATA-1. Furthermore, PKC and MAPK
specific inhibitors treatment attenuated the down-regulation of EDAG induced by
PMA. Taken together, these results suggest that the inhibition of the EDAG gene
by PMA is mediated through down-regulation of transcription factor GATA-1 and
involved the PKC/MAPK signaling pathway.

PMID: 18599389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int J Hematol. 2008 Sep;88(2):134-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-008-0121-4. Epub 2008
Jul 2.

Genetic evidence of PEBP2beta-independent activation of Runx1 in the murine
embryo.

Yokomizo T(1), Yanagida M, Huang G, Osato M, Honda C, Ema M, Takahashi S,
Yamamoto M, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8575, Japan.

The Runx1/AML1 transcription factor is required for the generation of
hematopoietic stem cells and is one of the most frequently targeted genes in
human leukemia. Runx1-deficient mice die around embryonic day (E)12.5 due to
severe hemorrhage in the central nervous system and the complete absence of
definitive hematopoietic cells. Since mice lacking the heterodimeric partner of
Runx1, PEBP2beta/CBFbeta, are almost identical in phenotype to Runx1 (-/-) mice, 
PEBP2beta was believed to be essential for the in vivo function of Runx1. Here we
show that transgenic overexpression of Runx1 partially rescues the lethal
phenotype of PEBP2beta-deficient mice at E12.5. Some of the rescued mice escaped 
from the severe hemorrhage at E11.5-12.5, although definitive hematopoiesis was
not restored. Thus, PEBP2beta-independent Runx1 activation can occur in vivo.
This observation sheds new light on the mechanism(s) that regulate the activity
of Runx transcription factors.

PMID: 18594778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Aug;36(14):4521-8. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn368. Epub 2008 Jun
27.

The role of transcriptional activator GATA-1 at human beta-globin HS2.

Cho Y(1), Song SH, Lee JJ, Choi N, Kim CG, Dean A, Kim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, Korea.

GATA-1 is an erythroid activator that binds beta-globin gene promoters and DNase 
I hypersensitive sites (HSs) of the beta-globin locus control region (LCR). We
investigated the direct role of GATA-1 interaction at the LCR HS2 enhancer by
mutating its binding sites within minichromosomes in erythroid cells. Loss of
GATA-1 in HS2 did not compromise interaction of NF-E2, a second activator that
binds to HS2, nor was DNase I hypersensitivity at HS2 or the promoter of a linked
epsilon-globin gene altered. Reduction of NF-E2 using RNAi confirmed the overall 
importance of this activator in establishing LCR HSs. However, recruitment of the
histone acetyltransferase CBP and RNA pol II to HS2 was diminished by GATA-1
loss. Transcription of epsilon-globin was severely compromised with loss of RNA
pol II from the transcription start site and reduction of H3 acetylation and H3K4
di- and tri-methylation in coding sequences. In contrast, widespread detection of
H3K4 mono-methylation was unaffected by loss of GATA-1 in HS2. These results
support the idea that GATA-1 interaction in HS2 has a prominent and direct role
in co-activator and pol II recruitment conferring active histone tail
modifications and transcription activation to a target gene but that it does not,
by itself, play a major role in establishing DNase I hypersensitivity.

PMCID: PMC2504316
PMID: 18586828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):886-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-02-138909. Epub 2008 Jun
5.

Attenuation of EPO-dependent erythroblast formation by death-associated protein
kinase-2.

Fang J(1), Menon M, Zhang D, Torbett B, Oxburgh L, Tschan M, Houde E, Wojchowski 
DM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem and Progenitor Cell Biology Program, Molecular Medicine Division, Maine
Medical Center Research Institute, Scarborough, Maine 04074, USA.

The adult erythron is maintained via dynamic modulation of erythroblast survival 
potentials. Toward identifying novel regulators of this process, murine splenic
erythroblasts at 3 developmental stages were prepared, purified and profiled.
Stage-to-stage modulated genes were then functionally categorized, with a focus
on apoptotic factors. In parallel with BCL-X and NIX, death-associated protein
kinase-2 (DAPK2) was substantially up-modulated during late erythropoiesis. Among
hematopoietic lineages, DAPK2 was expressed predominantly in erythroid cells. In 
a Gata1-IE3.9int-DAPK2 transgenic mouse model, effects on steady-state
reticulocyte and red blood cell (RBC) levels were limited. During hemolytic
anemia, however, erythropoiesis was markedly deficient. Ex vivo ana-lyses
revealed heightened apoptosis due to DAPK2 at a Kit(-)CD71(high)Ter119(-) stage, 
together with a subsequent multifold defect in late-stage
Kit(-)CD71(high)Ter119(+) cell formation. In UT7epo cells, siRNA knock-down of
DAPK2 enhanced survival due to cytokine withdrawal, and DAPK2's phosphorylation
and kinase activity also were erythropoietin (EPO)-modulated. DAPK2 therefore
comprises a new candidate attenuator of stress erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2481541
PMID: 18535204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Blood. 2008 Aug 15;112(4):1068-77. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-133504. Epub 2008
Jun 3.

Id2 intrinsically regulates lymphoid and erythroid development via interaction
with different target proteins.

Ji M(1), Li H, Suh HC, Klarmann KD, Yokota Y, Keller JR.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Inhibitors of DNA binding (Id) family members are key regulators of cellular
differentiation and proliferation. These activities are related to the ability of
Id proteins to antagonize E proteins and other transcription factors. As negative
regulators of E proteins, Id proteins have been implicated in lymphocyte
development. Overexpression of Id1, Id2, or Id3 has similar effects on lymphocyte
development. However, which Id protein plays a physiologic role during lymphocyte
development is not clear. By analyzing Id2 knock-out mice and retroviral
transduced hematopoietic progenitors, we demonstrated that Id2 is an intrinsic
negative regulator of B-cell development. Hematopoietic progenitor cells
overexpressing Id2 did not reconstitute B-cell development in vivo, which
resembled the phenotype of E2A null mice. The B-cell population in bone marrow
was significantly expanded in Id2 knock-out mice compared with their wild-type
littermates. Knock-down of Id2 by shRNA in hematopoietic progenitor cells
promoted B-cell differentiation and induced the expression of B-cell
lineage-specific genes. These data identified Id2 as a physiologically relevant
regulator of E2A during B lymphopoiesis. Furthermore, we identified a novel Id2
function in erythroid development. Overexpression of Id2 enhanced erythroid
development, and decreased level of Id2 impaired normal erythroid development.
Id2 regulation of erythroid development is mediated via interacting with
transcription factor PU.1 and modulating PU.1 and GATA-1 activities. We conclude 
that Id2 regulates lymphoid and erythroid development via interaction with
different target proteins.

PMCID: PMC2515127
PMID: 18523151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2008 Sep 15;310(6):479-91. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21220.

Patterns of angiogenic and hematopoietic gene expression during brown trout
embryogenesis.

Marschallinger J(1), Steinbacher P, Haslett JR, Sänger AM, Rescan PY, Stoiber W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic Biology, Division of Zoology and Functional Anatomy, 
University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

In this article, whole mount in situ hybridization is used to examine early blood
vessel and blood cell development in the embryos of the brown trout Salmo trutta 
lacustris. cDNAs encoding for the angiogenic markers fli1 and flk1, and for the
hematopoietic markers gata1 and gata2, were identified from an expressed sequence
tag library of rainbow trout. Results show that fli1, flk1 and gata2 are
activated in bilateral bands of the lateral trunk mesoderm before the onset of
somitogenesis, shortly followed by gata1. These bands then converge toward the
ventral midline to form the intermediate cell mass (ICM) (anterior ICM).
Subsequent axial vasculogenesis and initial blood cell formation involve a clear 
spatial separation of fli1 and gata gene expression. Fli1 staining is most
intense within the axial vessel (dorsal aorta, posterior cardinal vein) forming
and lateral ICM cells, whereas binding of gata1 and gata2 probes becomes confined
to the central portion of ICM cells beneath the dorsal aorta. This is followed by
a first wave of angiogenesis, indicated by expression of fli1 and flk1. This
gives rise to the intersegmental, dorsal longitudinal anastomotic and intestinal 
vessels. Further angiogenesis and hematopoiesis are activated in the "posterior
ICM" of the tail. Here, the absence of gata1 indicates that hematopoiesis in this
tissue generates myeloid rather than erythroid cells. The results supplement and 
validate previous, now historical morphological work in salmonids, thus aiding
the elucidation of a comprehensive general scheme of angiogenic and hematopoietic
development in the teleost embryo.

PMID: 18512703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Cell Res. 2008 Jun;18(6):677-85. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.60.

Gfi1.1 regulates hematopoietic lineage differentiation during zebrafish
embryogenesis.

Wei W(1), Wen L, Huang P, Zhang Z, Chen Y, Xiao A, Huang H, Zhu Z, Zhang B, Lin
S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, Center of
Developmental Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, 
Ministry of Education, Beijing 100871, China.

Growth factor independence 1 (GFI1) is important for maturation of mammalian
lymphocytes and neutrophils and maintenance of adult hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs). The role of GFI1 in embryonic hematopoiesis is less well characterized.
Through an enhancer trap screen and bioinformatics analysis, we identified a
zebrafish homolog of Gfi1 (named gfi1.1) and analyzed its function during
embryonic development. Expression of both an endogenous gfi1.1 gene and a GFP
reporter gene inserted near its genomic locus was detected in hematopoietic cells
of zebrafish embryos. Morpholino (MO) knockdown of gfi1.1 reduced expression of
scl, lmo2, c-myb, mpo, rag1, gata1 and hemoglobin alpha embryonic-1 (hbae1), as
well as the total amount of embryonic hemoglobin, but increased expression of
pu.1 and l-plastin. Under the same conditions, MO injection did not affect the
markers involved in vascular and pronephric development. Conversely,
overexpression of gfi1.1 via mRNA injection enhanced expression of gata1 but
inhibited expression of pu.1. These findings suggest that Gfi1.1 plays a critical
role in regulating the balance of embryonic erythroid and myeloid lineage
determination, and is also required for the differentiation of lymphocytes and
granulocytes during zebrafish embryogenesis.

PMID: 18504458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nature. 2008 May 22;453(7194):544-7. doi: 10.1038/nature06965.

Transcriptome-wide noise controls lineage choice in mammalian progenitor cells.

Chang HH(1), Hemberg M, Barahona M, Ingber DE, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Programme, Department of Pathology and Surgery, Children's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Phenotypic cell-to-cell variability within clonal populations may be a
manifestation of 'gene expression noise', or it may reflect stable phenotypic
variants. Such 'non-genetic cell individuality' can arise from the slow
fluctuations of protein levels in mammalian cells. These fluctuations produce
persistent cell individuality, thereby rendering a clonal population
heterogeneous. However, it remains unknown whether this heterogeneity may account
for the stochasticity of cell fate decisions in stem cells. Here we show that in 
clonal populations of mouse haematopoietic progenitor cells, spontaneous
'outlier' cells with either extremely high or low expression levels of the stem
cell marker Sca-1 (also known as Ly6a; ref. 9) reconstitute the parental
distribution of Sca-1 but do so only after more than one week. This slow
relaxation is described by a gaussian mixture model that incorporates
noise-driven transitions between discrete subpopulations, suggesting hidden
multi-stability within one cell type. Despite clonality, the Sca-1 outliers had
distinct transcriptomes. Although their unique gene expression profiles
eventually reverted to that of the median cells, revealing an attractor state,
they lasted long enough to confer a greatly different proclivity for choosing
either the erythroid or the myeloid lineage. Preference in lineage choice was
associated with increased expression of lineage-specific transcription factors,
such as a >200-fold increase in Gata1 (ref. 10) among the erythroid-prone cells, 
or a >15-fold increased PU.1 (Sfpi1) (ref. 11) expression among myeloid-prone
cells. Thus, clonal heterogeneity of gene expression level is not due to
independent noise in the expression of individual genes, but reflects metastable 
states of a slowly fluctuating transcriptome that is distinct in individual cells
and may govern the reversible, stochastic priming of multipotent progenitor cells
in cell fate decision.

PMID: 18497826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Exp Med. 2008 Jun 9;205(6):1285-92. doi: 10.1084/jem.20071836. Epub 2008 May
19.

Strain-specific requirement for eosinophils in the recruitment of T cells to the 
lung during the development of allergic asthma.

Walsh ER(1), Sahu N, Kearley J, Benjamin E, Kang BH, Humbles A, August A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Immunology and Infectious Disease and Department of
Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802, USA.

Eosinophils have been implicated as playing a major role in allergic airway
responses. However, the importance of these cells to the development of this
disease has remained ambiguous despite many studies, partly because of lack of
appropriate model systems. In this study, using transgenic murine models, we more
clearly delineate a role for eosinophils in asthma. We report that, in contrast
to results obtained on a BALB/c background, eosinophil-deficient C57BL/6 Delta
dblGATA mice (eosinophil-null mice via the Delta DblGATA1 mutation) have reduced 
airway hyperresponsiveness, and cytokine production of interleukin (IL)-4, -5,
and -13 in ovalbumin-induced allergic airway inflammation. This was caused by
reduced T cell recruitment into the lung, as these mouse lungs had reduced
expression of CCL7/MCP-3, CC11/eotaxin-1, and CCL24/eotaxin-2. Transferring
eosinophils into these eosinophil-deficient mice and, more importantly, delivery 
of CCL11/eotaxin-1 into the lung during the development of this disease rescued
lung T cell infiltration and airway inflammation when delivered together with
allergen. These studies indicate that on the C57BL/6 background, eosinophils are 
integral to the development of airway allergic responses by modulating chemokine 
and/or cytokine production in the lung, leading to T cell recruitment.

PMCID: PMC2413027
PMID: 18490489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):2081-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-145672. Epub 2008 May
16.

Mutations in EKLF/KLF1 form the molecular basis of the rare blood group In(Lu)
phenotype.

Singleton BK(1), Burton NM, Green C, Brady RL, Anstee DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Institute for Transfusion Sciences (BITS), National Blood Service,
United Kingdom. belinda.singleton@nbs.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):1554-5.

Comparison of normal erythroblasts and erythroblasts from persons with the rare
In(Lu) type of Lu(a-b-) blood group phenotype showed increased transcription
levels for 314 genes and reduced levels for 354 genes in In(Lu) cells. Many
erythroid-specific genes (including ALAS2, SLC4A1) had reduced transcript levels,
suggesting the phenotype resulted from a transcription factor abnormality. A
search for mutations in erythroid transcription factors showed mutations in the
promoter or coding sequence of EKLF in 21 of 24 persons with the In(Lu)
phenotype. In all cases the mutant EKLF allele occurred in the presence of a
normal EKLF allele. Nine different loss-of-function mutations were identified.
One mutation abolished a GATA1 binding site in the EKLF promoter (-124T>C). Two
mutations (Leu127X; Lys292X) resulted in premature termination codons, 2
(Pro190LeufsX47; Arg319GlufsX34) in frameshifts, and 4 in amino acid substitution
of conserved residues in zinc finger domain 1 (His299Tyr) or domain 2 (Arg328Leu;
Arg328His; Arg331Gly). Persons with the In(Lu) phenotype have no reported
pathology, indicating that one functional EKLF allele is sufficient to sustain
human erythropoiesis. These data provide the first description of inactivating
mutations in human EKLF and the first demonstration of a blood group phenotype
resulting from mutations in a transcription factor.

PMID: 18487511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Aug;32(8):966-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2008.04.014. Epub
2008 Apr 10.

Erythroid expansion and survival in response to acute anemia stress: the role of 
EPO receptor, GATA-1, Bcl-xL and caspase-3.

Aispuru GR(1), Aguirre MV, Aquino-Esperanza JA, Lettieri CN, Juaristi JA, Brandan
NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, National Northeast
University, Moreno 1240, 3400 Corrientes, Argentina.

Erythropoietic stress occurs under conditions of tissular hypoxia, such as
anemia. Functional relationships between erythroid bone marrow (BM)
proliferation, differentiation, the expression of survival and apoptotic related 
proteins, as well as the features of the BM microenvironment upon acute anemic
stress, are not fully elucidated. To achieve this aim, CF-1 Swiss mice were
injected with a single dose of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU, 150 mg/kg ip) and a
multiparametric analysis was conducted for 20 days. Apoptosis (TUNEL assay), BM
architecture organization (scanning electronic microscopy), proliferation (DNA
assay), differentiation (clonogenic cultures), expression of survival erythroid
related proteins (EPO-R, GATA-1, Bcl-xL) as well as the expression of apoptotic- 
related proteins (Bax, activated Caspase-3) by Western blotting, were evaluated. 
Experimental data showed that apoptosis, arrest of cell proliferation and
disruptions of BM architecture were maximal within the first period of acute
stress (1-3 days). Bax and caspase-3 overexpressions were also coincident during 
this acute period. Moreover, from day 5 upon drug challenge BM responds to acute 
stress through the EPO-EPO-R system, prompting expressions of GATA-1 and Bcl-xL. 
Erythroid proliferation rates and red-cell-committed progenitors enhanced in a
coordinated way to restore the size and function of the red cell compartment. A
second overexpression wave of active caspase-3 was noticed during stress
recovery. Together, these results indicate that in response to acute stress a
dramatic increase in CFU-E (erythroid colony forming units) population is
concomitant with upregulation of EPO-R, GATA-1 and Bcl-xL in the BM erythroid
compartment, and that these concurrent processes are crucial for acquiring proper
erythroid cell functionality without delayed response to tissular hypoxia.

PMID: 18485751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Hum Biol. 2007 Oct;79(5):545-62.

Single nucleotide polymorphism analysis of the nucleotide excision repair genes
XPC, XPA, and XPG in the Indian population.

Gowda S(1), Kumaran M, Suma BS, Rao MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012,
India.

We have analyzed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the XPC, XPA, and XPG 
genes of the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway in the Indian population.
In the XPC gene we observed nine polymorphisms in the coding region, four
polymorphisms in the intronic region, and two polymorphisms in the 5'
untranslated region (UTR). In the XPA gene we observed one frequent SNP (allele
frequency 0.48) within the 5' UTR at the 1665 position in a large proportion of
the sample. In addition, we observed three novel heterozygous polymorphisms (a C 
to A transversion at position 1523 and a G to A transition at positions 1418 and 
1458, with an allele frequency of 0.004) within the promoter region. In silico
PCR analysis demonstrated that all three novel polymorphisms lie within a
putative CpG island and that the variation at position 1418 falls within the
potential GATA1/2/3 transcription factor(s) binding site and also within the
negative control element. We performed a gel retardation assay with HeLa cell
nuclear extract with an oligonucleotide encompassing this region. One of the
alleles found at position 1458 of the XPA gene showed a significant change in
protein-DNA interaction. In the XPG gene we found five polymorphisms in the
coding region and one each in the 5' UTR of exon 1 and in intron 13.

PMID: 18478970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Curr Opin Immunol. 2008 Apr;20(2):139-48. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2008.03.017. Epub
2008 May 9.

Developmental plasticity of lymphocytes.

Cobaleda C(1), Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.

Experimental perturbation of signaling or transcription factor networks has been 
used to study the developmental potential of lymphoid progenitors,
lineage-committed precursors and mature lymphocytes. Common lymphoid progenitors 
and uncommitted pro-T cells can be efficiently diverted into myeloid or erythroid
lineages by ectopic cytokine signaling or retroviral expression of the myeloid
C/EBPalpha or erythroid GATA1 transcription factor. Forced C/EBPalpha expression 
furthermore induces direct transdifferentiation of immature thymocytes or B cells
into macrophages. Notably, conditional inactivation of the B cell commitment
factor Pax5 is sufficient to convert mature B cells into functional T cells via
dedifferentiation to uncommitted progenitors. Together these experiments have
uncovered an unanticipated developmental plasticity of lymphocytes, which may
account for lineage switches observed in human malignancies.

PMID: 18472258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Semin Cancer Biol. 2008 Oct;18(5):365-71. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2008.03.020.
Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Carcinogenesis in Down syndrome: what can be learned from trisomy 21?

Satgé D(1), Bénard J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier, 19012 Tulle, France.
daniel.satge@ch-tulle.fr

According to the currently prevailing perception, sporadic cancer arises as a
result of somatic mutations in a cell that lead to its uncontrolled
proliferation. It is generally accepted that somatic mutations occur randomly and
that they are generally either "spontaneous" or due to various external agents
(physical or chemical carcinogens). Constitutional genetic conditions, which
modify cancer risk, may become instrumental in opening new concepts in
carcinogenesis. For instance, evidence gathered from Down syndrome (DS)
individuals has challenged the above perceived explanation since somatic
mutations in these patients markedly differ from those arisen in the general
population, and do not seem to occur at random. There is no global increase or
decrease of somatic mutations in all genes in DS. Instead, specific mutations
have been detected on particular loci, depending on the tissue type and the age
of the DS person. In the context of constitutional trisomy 21, where cancer have 
a very particular and striking distribution, biochemical, physiological and
architectural imbalances in specific tissues may be responsible for a vulnerable 
state leading to carcinogenesis. Conversely, in tissues of DS patients which seem
resistant to cancer, the proliferative and maturation state of the cells would
lead to a refractory state of neoplastic transformation. Experimentally, we
observed that the proliferation of tumor cells in extracellular matrix produced
by trisomic 21 fibroblasts appears to be inhibited when compared to that of those
placed on an extracellular matrix produced by euploid fibroblasts. These
observations challenge the current somatic mutation theory of carcinogenesis, and
strongly suggest instead a critical role of cells and tissues in the
microenvironment where carcinogenesis occurs.

PMID: 18455928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Jul;49(7):1416-9. doi: 10.1080/10428190802087462.

GATA1 is overexpressed in patients with essential thrombocythemia and
polycythemia vera but not in patients with primary myelofibrosis or chronic
myelogenous leukemia.

Rinaldi CR, Martinelli V, Rinaldi P, Ciancia R, del Vecchio L.

PMID: 18452096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Development. 2008 Jun;135(12):2071-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.018200. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

Activation of Eklf expression during hematopoiesis by Gata2 and Smad5 prior to
erythroid commitment.

Lohmann F(1), Bieker JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Box 1020, 1 Gustave Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The hierarchical progression of stem and progenitor cells to their more-committed
progeny is mediated through cell-to-cell signaling pathways and intracellular
transcription factor activity. However, the mechanisms that govern the genetic
networks underlying lineage fate decisions and differentiation programs remain
poorly understood. Here we show how integration of Bmp4 signaling and Gata factor
activity controls the progression of hematopoiesis, as exemplified by the
regulation of Eklf during establishment of the erythroid lineage. Utilizing
transgenic reporter assays in differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells as well 
as in the murine fetal liver, we demonstrate that Eklf expression is initiated
prior to erythroid commitment during hematopoiesis. Applying phylogenetic
footprinting and in vivo binding studies in combination with newly developed
loss-of-function technology in embryoid bodies, we find that Gata2 and Smad5
cooperate to induce Eklf in a progenitor population, followed by a switch to
Gata1-controlled regulation of Eklf transcription upon erythroid commitment. This
stage- and lineage-dependent control of Eklf expression defines a novel role for 
Eklf as a regulator of lineage fate decisions during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 18448565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jul;28(13):4386-93. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00071-08. Epub 2008 Apr 
28.

A T-to-G transversion at nucleotide -567 upstream of HBG2 in a GATA-1 binding
motif is associated with elevated hemoglobin F.

Chen Z(1), Luo HY, Basran RK, Hsu TH, Mang DW, Nuntakarn L, Rosenfield CG,
Patrinos GP, Hardison RC, Steinberg MH, Chui DH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Sickle Cell Disease, Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Increased fetal hemoglobin (Hb F; alpha(2)gamma(2)) production in adults can
ameliorate the clinical severity of sickle cell disease and beta-thalassemia
major. Thus, understanding the regulation of gamma-globin gene expression and its
silencing in adults has potential therapeutic implications. We studied a father
and son in an Iranian-American family who had elevated Hb F levels and found a
novel T-to-G transversion at nucleotide (nt) -567 of the HBG2 promoter. This
mutation alters a GATA-1 binding motif to a GAGA sequence located within a
previously identified silencing element. DNA-protein binding assays showed that
the GATA motif of interest is capable of binding GATA-1 transcription factor in
vitro and in vivo. Truncation analyses of the HBG2 promoter linked to a
luciferase reporter gene revealed a negative regulatory activity present between 
nt -675 and -526. In addition, the T-to-G mutation at the GATA motif increased
the promoter activity by two- to threefold in transiently transfected erythroid
cell lines. The binding motif is uniquely conserved in simian primates with a
fetal pattern of gamma-globin gene expression. These results suggest that the
GATA motif under study has a functional role in silencing gamma-globin gene
expression in adults. The T-to-G mutation in this motif disrupts GATA-1 binding
and the associated repressor complex, abolishing its silencing effect and
resulting in the up-regulation of gamma-globin gene expression in adults.

PMCID: PMC2447137
PMID: 18443038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Stem Cells. 2008 Jul;26(7):1732-42. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0899. Epub 2008
Apr 24.

Downregulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) in
CD34+ cells promotes megakaryocytic development, whereas activation of STAT5
drives erythropoiesis.

Olthof SG(1), Fatrai S, Drayer AL, Tyl MR, Vellenga E, Schuringa JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1,
Groningen, 9700RB, The Netherlands.

Although it has been proposed that the common myeloid progenitor gives rise to
granulocyte/monocyte progenitors and megakaryocyte/erythroid progenitors (MEP),
little is known about molecular switches that determine whether MEPs develop into
either erythrocytes or megakaryocytes. We used the thrombopoietin receptor c-Mpl,
as well as the megakaryocytic marker CD41, to optimize progenitor sorting
procedures to further subfractionate the MEP (CD34(+)CD110(+)CD45RA(-)) into
erythroid progenitors (CD34(+)CD110(+)CD45RA(-)CD41(-)) and megakaryocytic
progenitors (CD34(+)CD110(+)CD45RA(-)CD41(+)) from peripheral blood. We have
identified signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) as a
critical denominator that determined lineage commitment between erythroid and
megakaryocytic cell fates. Depletion of STAT5 from CD34(+) cells by a lentiviral 
RNAi approach in the presence of thrombopoietin and stem cell factor resulted in 
an increase in megakaryocytic progenitors (CFU-Mk), whereas erythroid progenitors
(BFU-E) were decreased. Furthermore, an increase in cells expressing
megakaryocytic markers CD41 and CD42b was observed in STAT5 RNAi cells, as was an
increase in the percentage of polyploid cells. Reversely, overexpression of
activated STAT5A(1*6) mutants severely impaired megakaryocyte development and
induced a robust erythroid differentiation. Microarray and quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed changes in expression
of a number of genes, including GATA1, which was downmodulated by STAT5 RNAi and 
upregulated by activated STAT5.

PMID: 18436865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Jul-Aug;41(1):82-90. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.02.005.
Epub 2008 Apr 14.

Mast cell transcriptional networks.

Takemoto CM(1), Lee YN, Jegga AG, Zablocki D, Brandal S, Shahlaee A, Huang S, Ye 
Y, Gowrisankar S, Huynh J, McDevitt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA. ctakemot@jhmi.edu

Unregulated activation of mast cells can contribute to the pathogenesis of
inflammatory and allergic diseases, including asthma, rheumatoid arthritis,
inflammatory bowel disease, and multiple sclerosis. Absence of mast cells in
animal models can lead to impairment in the innate immune response to parasites
and bacterial infections. Aberrant clonal accumulation and proliferation of mast 
cells can result in a variety of diseases ranging from benign cutaneous
mastocytosis to systemic mastocytosis or mast cell leukemia. Understanding mast
cell differentiation provides important insights into mechanisms of lineage
selection during hematopoiesis and can provide targets for new drug development
to treat mast cell disorders. In this review, we discuss controversies related to
development, sites of origin, and the transcriptional program of mast cells.

PMCID: PMC2478671
PMID: 18406636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Leuk Res. 2008 Oct;32(10):1615-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.02.010. Epub 2008
Mar 26.

Tetrasomy 21 as a sole acquired abnormality without GATA1 gene mutation in
pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia: a case report and review of the
literature.

Shin MG(1), Choi HW, Kim HR, Kim MJ, Baek HJ, Han DK, Kook H, Hwang TJ, Kim HJ,
Kim SH, Shin JH, Suh SP, Ryang DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, Hwasun, South Korea. mgshin@chonnam.ac.kr

We report a case of pediatric acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL) showing
48,XX,+21,+21 as a sole acquired cytogenetic abnormality without the mutation of 
GATA1 gene. A physical examination showed a phenotypically normal female. Bone
marrow findings showed diffuse infiltration of leukemic blasts having scanty
cytoplasm with budding blebs and prominent nucleoli, which were negative for
myeloperoxide (MPO) stain, Sudan black B stain and periodic acid-Schiff stain.
Immunophenotyping of leukemic cells revealed positive expression of CD34, CD13,
CD33, CD117, CD41, CD61, CD7 and negative expression of TdT, anti-MPO, CD64,
CD56, CD2, CD3, CD5, CD10, CD19, CD20 and CD22. A fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis showed four distinct AML1 signals in 284 of 300 interphase
nuclei. The entire six exons of the GATA1 gene (7757bp) were directly sequenced. 
We could not find any mutations, including known polymorphisms, which are known
to be involved in transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryocytic 
leukemia of Down syndrome. After achieving complete remission, the tetrasomy 21
disappeared.

PMID: 18372039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Mar 6;2(3):264-73. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.01.013.

MLLT3 regulates early human erythroid and megakaryocytic cell fate.

Pina C(1), May G, Soneji S, Hong D, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Regulatory mechanisms of human hematopoiesis remain largely uncharacterized.
Through expression profiling of prospectively isolated stem and primitive
progenitor cells as well as committed progenitors from cord blood (CB), we
identified MLLT3 as a candidate regulator of erythroid/megakaryocytic (E/Meg)
lineage decisions. Through the analysis of the hematopoietic potential of
primitive cord blood cells in which MLLT3 expression has been knocked down, we
identify a requirement for MLLT3 in the elaboration of the erythroid and
megakaryocytic lineages. Conversely, forced expression of MLLT3 promotes the
output of erythroid and megakaryocytic progenitors, and analysis of MLLT3 mutants
suggests that this capacity of MLLT3 depends on its transcriptional regulatory
activity. Gene expression and cis-regulatory element analyses reveal
crossregulatory interactions between MLLT3 and E/Meg-affiliated transcription
factor GATA-1. Taken together, the data identify MLLT3 as a regulator of early
erythroid and megakaryocytic cell fate in the human system.

PMID: 18371451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Oct 11;1(4):416-27. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.07.004.

Reciprocal activation of GATA-1 and PU.1 marks initial specification of
hematopoietic stem cells into myeloerythroid and myelolymphoid lineages.

Arinobu Y(1), Mizuno S, Chong Y, Shigematsu H, Iino T, Iwasaki H, Graf T,
Mayfield R, Chan S, Kastner P, Akashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Oct 11;1(4):357-8.

A hierarchical hematopoietic development with myeloid versus lymphoid bifurcation
has been proposed downstream of the multipotent progenitor (MPP) stage, based on 
prospective isolation of progenitors capable of generating only myeloerythroid
cells (common myeloid progenitor, CMP) or only lymphocytes (common lymphoid
progenitor, CLP). By utilizing GATA-1 and PU.1 transcription factor reporters,
here we identified progenitor populations that are precursors for either CMPs or 
CLPs. Two independent populations expressing either GATA-1 or PU.1 resided within
the CD34(+)Sca-1(+)c-Kit(+) MPP fraction. The GATA-1(+) MPP displayed potent
myeloerythroid potential without giving rise to lymphocytes, whereas the PU.1(+) 
MPP showed granulocyte/monocyte/lymphoid-restricted progenitor activity without
megakaryocyte/erythroid differentiation. Furthermore, GATA-1(+) and PU.1(+) MPPs 
possessed huge expansion potential and differentiated into the original CMPs and 
CLPs, respectively. Thus, the reciprocal activation of GATA-1 and PU.1 primarily 
organizes the hematopoietic lineage fate decision to form the earliest
hematopoietic branchpoint that comprises isolatable myeloerythroid and
myelolymphoid progenitor populations.

PMID: 18371378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Oct 11;1(4):357-8. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.09.008.

Defining the pathways of early adult hematopoiesis.

Murre C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, 0366, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92903, USA. cmurre@ucsd.edu

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Oct 11;1(4):416-27.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Oct 11;1(4):428-42.

The journeys that hematopoietic cells take to differentiate from long-term stem
cells into committed cells have recently been a topic of debate. In this issue of
Cell Stem Cell, Arinobu et al. (2007) and Pronk et al. (2007) provide new
insights into the paths traveled by hematopoietic progenitors.

PMID: 18371371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Pharmacol Sci. 2008 Mar;106(3):332-5.

Progress in allergy signal research on mast cells: regulation of allergic airway 
inflammation through toll-like receptor 4-mediated modification of mast cell
function.

Yamashita M(1), Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Japan. yamamasa@faculty.chiba-u.jp

In a mouse experimental asthma model, the administration of bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), particularly at low doses, enhances the levels of
ovalbumin (OVA)-induced eosinophilic airway inflammation. In an effort to clarify
the cellular and molecular basis for the LPS effect, we demonstrate that the
OVA-induced eosinophilic inflammation in the lung is dramatically increased by
administration of LPS at the priming phase in wild-type mice, whereas such an
increase was not observed in mast cell deficient mice. Adoptive transfer of bone 
marrow-derived mast cells (BMMC) from wild type but not from Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)-deficient mice restored the increased eosinophilic inflammation in mast
cell-deficient mice. Moreover, in vitro analysis revealed that treatment of BMMC 
with LPS resulted in sustained up-regulation of GATA1 expression and increased
production of Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) upon restimulation. Thus,
mast cells appear to control allergic airway inflammation after their activation 
and modulation through TLR4-mediated induction of GATA1 proteins and subsequent
increase in Th2 cytokine production.

PMID: 18360088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008 Apr;8(4):279-87. doi: 10.1038/nrc2348.

GATA1-related leukaemias.

Shimizu R(1), Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

GATA1 is a prototypical lineage-restricted transcription factor that is central
to the correct differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis of erythroid and
megakaryocytic cells. Mutations in GATA1 can generate a truncated protein, which 
contributes to the genesis of transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) and
acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (AMKL) in infants with Down syndrome. Similarly,
Gata1 knockdown to 5% of its wild-type level causes high incidence of erythroid
leukaemia in mice. The GATA1-related leukaemias in both human and mouse could
provide important insights into the mechanism of multi-step leukaemogenesis.
Efforts are afoot to produce mouse models that are reflective of TMD and AMKL.

PMID: 18354416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3101-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01858-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
17.

Silencing of Agamma-globin gene expression during adult definitive erythropoiesis
mediated by GATA-1-FOG-1-Mi2 complex binding at the -566 GATA site.

Harju-Baker S(1), Costa FC, Fedosyuk H, Neades R, Peterson KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, MS 3030, University of
Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Autonomous silencing of gamma-globin transcription is an important developmental 
regulatory mechanism controlling globin gene switching. An adult stage-specific
silencer of the (A)gamma-globin gene was identified between -730 and -378
relative to the mRNA start site. A marked copy of the (A)gamma-globin gene
inserted between locus control region 5' DNase I-hypersensitive site 1 and the
epsilon-globin gene was transcriptionally silenced in adult beta-globin locus
yeast artificial chromosome (beta-YAC) transgenic mice, but deletion of the
352-bp region restored expression. This fragment reduced reporter gene expression
in K562 cells, and GATA-1 was shown to bind within this sequence at the -566 GATA
site. Further, the Mi2 protein, a component of the NuRD complex, was observed in 
erythroid cells with low gamma-globin levels, whereas only a weak signal was
detected when gamma-globin was expressed. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of fetal 
liver tissue from beta-YAC transgenic mice demonstrated that GATA-1, FOG-1, and
Mi2 were recruited to the (A)gamma-globin -566 or (G)gamma-globin -567 GATA site 
when gamma-globin expression was low (day 18) but not when gamma-globin was
expressed (day 12). These data suggest that during definitive erythropoiesis,
gamma-globin gene expression is silenced, in part, by binding a protein complex
containing GATA-1, FOG-1, and Mi2 at the -566/-567 GATA sites of the proximal
gamma-globin promoters.

PMCID: PMC2423176
PMID: 18347053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2008 Apr;135(8):1525-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.011767. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

The stepwise specification of embryonic stem cells to hematopoietic fate is
driven by sequential exposure to Bmp4, activin A, bFGF and VEGF.

Pearson S(1), Sroczynska P, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester
University, Wilmslow Road, M20 4BX, Manchester, UK.

The differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells offers a powerful approach to
study mechanisms implicated in cell fate decision. A major hurdle, however, is to
promote the directed and efficient differentiation of ES cells toward a specific 
lineage. Here, we define in serum-free media the minimal factor requirement
controlling each step of the differentiation process, resulting in the production
of highly enriched hematopoietic progenitors. Four factors - Bmp4, activin A,
bFGF (Fgf2) and VEGF (VegfA) - are sufficient to drive the selective and
efficient differentiation of mouse ES cells to hematopoiesis. Each of these
factors appears to regulate a step of the process: Bmp4 promotes the very
efficient formation of mesoderm; bFGF and activin A induce the differentiation of
these mesodermal precursors to the hemangioblast fate; and VEGF is required for
the production of fully committed hematopoietic progenitors. The stimulation of
mesodermal precursors by bFGF and activin A switches on very rapidly the
hematopoietic program, allowing us to dissect the molecular events leading to the
formation of the hemangioblast. Runx1, Scl (Tal1) and Hhex expression is
upregulated within 3 hours of stimulation, whereas upregulation of Lmo2 and Fli1 
is observed later. Interestingly, increased expression levels of genes such as
cMyb, Pu.1 (Sfpi1), Gata1 and Gata2 are not observed at the onset of
hemangioblast commitment. This stepwise control of differentiation is extremely
efficient, giving rise to a very high frequency of hematopoietic precursors, and 
provides an optimal system for understanding the molecular machineries involved
in blood progenitor commitment.

PMID: 18339678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1052-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.136. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Substitution of DNA-contacting amino acids with functional variants in the Gata-1
zinc finger: a structurally and phylogenetically guided mutagenesis.

Vonderfecht TR(1), Schroyer DC, Schenck BL, McDonough VM, Pikaart MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Hope College, 35 East 12th Street, Holland, MI 49423,
USA.

DNA-binding functionality among transcription factor proteins is afforded by a
number of structural motifs, such as the helix-turn-helix, helix-loop-helix, and 
zinc finger domains. The common thread among these diverse structures is their
sequence-specific binding to essential promoter or other genetic regulatory
sequences with high selectivity and affinity. One such motif, present in a wide
range of organisms from bacteria to vertebrates, is the Gata-type zinc finger.
This family of DNA-binding proteins is characterized by the presence of one or
two (Cys)(4) metal binding sites which recognize the protein's eponymous binding 
site, GATA. Unlike other conserved DNA-binding domains, Gata proteins appear to
be restricted to binding consensus GATA sequences, or near variations, in DNA.
Since the architecture of the Gata finger seems built around recognizing this
particular sequence, we set out to define the allowable range of amino acid
substitutions along the DNA-binding surface of a Gata finger that could continue 
to support sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. Accordingly, we set up a
one-hybrid screen in yeast based on the chicken Gata-1 C-terminal zinc finger.
Mutant libraries were generated at five amino acids identified in the Gata-DNA
structure as likely to mediate sequence-specific contacts between the Gata finger
and DNA. These libraries were designed to give as exhaustive amino acid coverage 
as possible such that almost all alternative amino acids were screened at each of
the five probed positions. Screening and characterization of these libraries
revealed several functional amino acid substitutions at two leucines which
contact the DNA at the 3' and 5' flanks of the GATA binding site, but no
functional substituents for amino acids near the core of the binding site. This
pattern is consistent with amino acid sequences of known DNA-binding Gata
fingers.

PMCID: PMC2443638
PMID: 18328814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008;40(8):1481-93. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2007.11.004.
Epub 2007 Nov 17.

MafK/NF-E2 p18 is required for beta-globin genes activation by mediating the
proximity of LCR and active beta-globin genes in MEL cell line.

Du MJ(1), Lv X, Hao DL, Zhao GW, Wu XS, Wu F, Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, PR China.

Evidences indicate that locus control region (LCR) of beta-globin spatially
closes to the downstream active gene promoter to mediate the transcriptional
activation by looping. DNA binding proteins may play an important role in the
looping formation. NF-E2 is one of the key transcription factors in beta-globin
gene transcriptional activation. To shed light on whether NF-E2 is involved in
this process, DS19MafKsiRNA cell pools were established by specifically knocked
down the expression of MafK/NF-E2 p18, one subunit of NF-E2 heterodimer. In the
above cell pools, it was observed that the occupancy efficiency of NF-E2 on
beta-globin gene locus and the expression level of beta-globin genes were
decreased. H3 acetylation, H3-K4 methylation and the deposition of RNA polymerase
II, but not the recruitment of GATA-1, were also found reduced at the beta-globin
gene cluster. Chromosome Conformation Capture (3C) assay showed that the
cross-linking frequency between the main NF-E2 binding site HS2 and downstream
structural genes was reduced compared to the normal cell. This result
demonstrated that MafK/NF-E2 p18 recruitment was involved in the physical
proximity of LCR and active beta-globin genes upon beta-globin gene
transcriptional activation.

PMID: 18308612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 4;105(9):3333-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0712312105.
Epub 2008 Feb 26.

A GATA-1-regulated microRNA locus essential for erythropoiesis.

Dore LC(1), Amigo JD, Dos Santos CO, Zhang Z, Gai X, Tobias JW, Yu D, Klein AM,
Dorman C, Wu W, Hardison RC, Paw BH, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and The University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) control tissue development, but their mechanism of regulation 
is not well understood. We used a gene complementation strategy combined with
microarray screening to identify miRNAs involved in the formation of erythroid
(red blood) cells. Two conserved miRNAs, miR 144 and miR 451, emerged as direct
targets of the critical hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1. In vivo,
GATA-1 binds a distal upstream regulatory element to activate RNA polymerase
II-mediated transcription of a single common precursor RNA (pri-miRNA) encoding
both mature miRNAs. Zebrafish embryos depleted of miR 451 by using antisense
morpholinos form erythroid precursors, but their development into mature
circulating red blood cells is strongly and specifically impaired. These results 
reveal a miRNA locus that is required for erythropoiesis and uncover a new
regulatory axis through which GATA-1 controls this process.

PMCID: PMC2265118
PMID: 18303114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Exp Med. 2008 Mar 17;205(3):611-24. doi: 10.1084/jem.20070544. Epub 2008 Feb
25.

Antagonism of FOG-1 and GATA factors in fate choice for the mast cell lineage.

Cantor AB(1), Iwasaki H, Arinobu Y, Moran TB, Shigematsu H, Sullivan MR, Akashi
K, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. alan.cantor@childrens.harvard.edu

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1 requires direct physical interaction 
with the cofactor friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) for its essential role in erythroid
and megakaryocytic development. We show that in the mast cell lineage, GATA-1
functions completely independent of FOG proteins. Moreover, we demonstrate that
FOG-1 antagonizes the fate choice of multipotential progenitor cells for the mast
cell lineage, and that its down-regulation is a prerequisite for mast cell
development. Remarkably, ectopic expression of FOG-1 in committed mast cell
progenitors redirects them into the erythroid, megakaryocytic, and granulocytic
lineages. These lineage switches correlate with transcriptional down-regulation
of GATA-2, an essential mast cell GATA factor, via switching of GATA-1 for GATA-2
at a key enhancer element upstream of the GATA-2 gene. These findings illustrate 
combinatorial control of cell fate identity by a transcription factor and its
cofactor, and highlight the role of transcriptional networks in lineage
determination. They also provide evidence for lineage instability during early
stages of hematopoietic lineage commitment.

PMCID: PMC2275384
PMID: 18299398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(8):2825-39. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02076-07. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

DOT1L/KMT4 recruitment and H3K79 methylation are ubiquitously coupled with gene
transcription in mammalian cells.

Steger DJ(1), Lefterova MI, Ying L, Stonestrom AJ, Schupp M, Zhuo D, Vakoc AL,
Kim JE, Chen J, Lazar MA, Blobel GA, Vakoc CR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Abramson Research Center 315A, The Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, 3400 Civic Center Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The histone H3 lysine 79 methyltransferase DOT1L/KMT4 can promote an oncogenic
pattern of gene expression through binding with several MLL fusion partners found
in acute leukemia. However, the normal function of DOT1L in mammalian gene
regulation is poorly understood. Here we report that DOT1L recruitment is
ubiquitously coupled with active transcription in diverse mammalian cell types.
DOT1L preferentially occupies the proximal transcribed region of active genes,
correlating with enrichment of H3K79 di- and trimethylation. Furthermore, Dot1l
mutant fibroblasts lacked H3K79 di- and trimethylation at all sites examined,
indicating that DOT1L is the sole enzyme responsible for these marks.
Importantly, we identified chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay conditions 
necessary for reliable H3K79 methylation detection. ChIP-chip tiling arrays
revealed that levels of all degrees of genic H3K79 methylation correlate with
mRNA abundance and dynamically respond to changes in gene activity. Conversion of
H3K79 monomethylation into di- and trimethylation correlated with the transition 
from low- to high-level gene transcription. We also observed enrichment of H3K79 
monomethylation at intergenic regions occupied by DNA-binding transcriptional
activators. Our findings highlight several similarities between the patterning of
H3K4 methylation and that of H3K79 methylation in mammalian chromatin, suggesting
a widespread mechanism for parallel or sequential recruitment of DOT1L and MLL to
genes in their normal "on" state.

PMCID: PMC2293113
PMID: 18285465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Br J Haematol. 2008 Mar;140(5):552-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2007.06971.x.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (AMKL) in children: a comparison of AMKL with
and without Down syndrome.

Hama A(1), Yagasaki H, Takahashi Y, Nishio N, Muramatsu H, Yoshida N, Tanaka M,
Hidaka H, Watanabe N, Yoshimi A, Matsumoto K, Kudo K, Kato K, Horibe K, Kojima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

To characterize childhood acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (AMKL), we reviewed 45
children with AMKL diagnosed between 1986 and 2005 at Nagoya University Hospital 
and Japanese Red Cross Nagoya First Hospital. Twenty-four patients (53%) had AMKL
associated with Down syndrome (DS-AMKL) and 21 (47%) had non-DS-AMKL. The median 
age of the DS-AMKL patients was 21 months (range, 8-38 months) and that of
non-DS-AMKL patients was 15 months (range, 2-185 months). The morphology of blast
cells was categorized into three groups according to the stage of megakaryocyte
maturation. The blast cells were more immature in DS-AMKL than in non-DS-AMKL in 
terms of morphology and immunophenotyping. Cytogenetic abnormalities of leukaemic
cells were classified into seven categories: normal karyotype including
constitutional trisomy 21 in DS-AMKL; numerical abnormalities only;
t(1;22)(p13;q13); 3q21q26 abnormalities; t(16;21)(p11;q22); -5/del(5q) and/or
-7/del(7q); and other structural changes. The outcome of children with either
DS-AMKL or non-DS-AMKL is excellent. The 10-year overall survival estimate was
79% [95% confidence interval (CI): 54-90] for DS-AMKL and 76% (95% CI: 58-91) for
non-DS-AMKL (P = 0.81) with a median follow-up of 78 months (range, 20-243
months). Our study shows the diverse heterogeneity of childhood AMKL and the need
for subclassification according to cytogenetic and morphological features.

PMID: 18275433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):4375-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-115121. Epub 2008
Feb 7.

Ablation of Gata1 in adult mice results in aplastic crisis, revealing its
essential role in steady-state and stress erythropoiesis.

Gutiérrez L(1), Tsukamoto S, Suzuki M, Yamamoto-Mukai H, Yamamoto M, Philipsen S,
Ohneda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical College, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

The transcription factor Gata1 is expressed in several hematopoietic lineages and
plays essential roles in normal hematopoietic development during embryonic
stages. The lethality of Gata1-null embryos has precluded determination of its
role in adult erythropoiesis. Here we have examined the effects of Gata1 loss in 
adult erythropoiesis using conditional Gata1 knockout mice expressing either
interferon- or tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase (Mx-Cre and Tx-Cre,
respectively). Mx-Cre-mediated Gata1 recombination, although incomplete, resulted
in maturation arrest of Gata1-null erythroid cells at the proerythroblast stage, 
thrombocytopenia, and excessive proliferation of megakaryocytes in the spleen.
Tx-Cre-mediated Gata1 recombination resulted in depletion of the erythroid
compartment in bone marrow and spleen. Formation of the early and late erythroid 
progenitors in bone marrow was significantly reduced in the absence of Gata1.
Furthermore, on treatment with a hemolytic agent, these mice failed to activate a
stress erythropoietic response, despite the rising erythropoietin levels. These
results indicate that, in addition to the requirement of Gata1 in adult
megakaryopoiesis, Gata1 is necessary for steady-state erythropoiesis and for
erythroid expansion in response to anemia. Thus, ablation of Gata1 in adult mice 
results in a condition resembling aplastic crisis in human.

PMID: 18258797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Apr 22;33(2):159-69. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00127.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Gene Ontology-driven transcriptional analysis of CD34+ cell-initiated
megakaryocytic cultures identifies new transcriptional regulators of
megakaryopoiesis.

Fuhrken PG(1), Chen C, Apostolidis PA, Wang M, Miller WM, Papoutsakis ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University,
Evanston, Illinois, USA.

Differentiation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells is an intricate
process controlled in large part at the level of transcription. While some key
megakaryocytic transcription factors have been identified, the complete network
of megakaryocytic transcriptional control is poorly understood. Using global gene
expression microarray analysis, Gene Ontology-based functional annotations, and a
novel interlineage comparison with parallel, isogenic granulocytic cultures as a 
negative control, we closely examined the mRNA level of transcriptional
regulators in megakaryocytes derived from human mobilized peripheral blood
CD34(+) hematopoietic cells. This approach identified 199 differentially
expressed transcription factors or transcriptional regulators. We identified and 
detailed the transcriptional kinetics of most known megakaryocytic transcription 
factors including GATA1, FLI1, and MAFG. Furthermore, many genes with
transcription factor activity or transcription factor binding activity were
identified in megakaryocytes that had not previously been associated with that
lineage, including BTEB1, NR4A2, FOXO1A, MEF2C, HDAC5, VDR, and several genes
associated with the tumor suppressor p53 (HIPK2, FHL2, and TADA3L). Protein
expression and nuclear localization were confirmed in megakaryocytic cells for
four of the novel candidate megakaryocytic transcription factors: FHL2, MXD1,
E2F3, and RFX5. In light of the hypothesis that transcription factors expressed
in a particular differentiation program are important contributors to such a
program, these data substantially expand our understanding of transcriptional
regulation in megakaryocytic differentiation of stem and progenitor cells.

PMID: 18252802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):4075-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-05-091637. Epub 2008
Feb 4.

Runx1 is involved in primitive erythropoiesis in the mouse.

Yokomizo T(1), Hasegawa K, Ishitobi H, Osato M, Ema M, Ito Y, Yamamoto M,
Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Targeted disruption of the Runx1/ AML1 gene in mice has demonstrated that it is
required for the emergence of definitive hematopoietic cells but that it is not
essential for the formation of primitive erythrocytes. These findings led to the 
conclusion that Runx1 is a stage-specific transcription factor acting only during
definitive hematopoiesis. However, the zebrafish and Xenopus homologs of Runx1
have been shown to play roles in primitive hematopoiesis, suggesting that mouse
Runx1 might also be involved in the development of primitive lineages. In this
study, we show that primitive erythrocytes in Runx1(-/-) mice display abnormal
morphology and reduced expression of Ter119, Erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF,
KLF1), and GATA-1. These results suggest that mouse Runx1 plays a role in the
development of both primitive and definitive hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 18250229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(8):2675-89. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01945-07. Epub 2008 Feb
4.

Identification of ZBP-89 as a novel GATA-1-associated transcription factor
involved in megakaryocytic and erythroid development.

Woo AJ(1), Moran TB, Schindler YL, Choe SK, Langer NB, Sullivan MR, Fujiwara Y,
Paw BH, Cantor AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston/Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

A complete understanding of the transcriptional regulation of developmental
lineages requires that all relevant factors be identified. Here, we have taken a 
proteomic approach to identify novel proteins associated with GATA-1, a
lineage-restricted zinc finger transcription factor required for terminal
erythroid and megakaryocytic maturation. We identify the Krüppel-type zinc finger
transcription factor ZBP-89 as being a component of multiprotein complexes
involving GATA-1 and its essential cofactor Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1). Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show that GATA-1 and ZBP-89 cooccupy
cis-regulatory elements of certain erythroid and megakaryocyte-specific genes,
including an enhancer of the GATA-1 gene itself. Loss-of-function studies in
zebrafish and mice demonstrate an in vivo requirement for ZBP-89 in
megakaryopoiesis and definitive erythropoiesis but not primitive erythropoiesis, 
phenocopying aspects of FOG-1- and GATA-1-deficient animals. These findings
identify ZBP-89 as being a novel transcription factor involved in erythroid and
megakaryocytic development and suggest that it serves a cooperative function with
GATA-1 and/or FOG-1 in a developmental stage-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC2293107
PMID: 18250154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Blood. 2008 Apr 15;111(8):4092-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-122150. Epub 2008
Feb 1.

Survivin overexpression alone does not alter megakaryocyte ploidy nor interfere
with erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage development in transgenic mice.

McCrann DJ(1), Yezefski T, Nguyen HG, Papadantonakis N, Liu H, Wen Q, Crispino
JD, Ravid K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 15 Stoughton St, K225, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

The level of survivin was reported to be scarce in mouse megakaryocytes (MKs)
compared with erythroid cells. Considering this finding and previously reported
in vitro data showing decreased MK ploidy upon retroviral-mediated overexpression
of survivin, we sought to examine whether ectopic survivin expression in the MK
lineage might alter ploidy level in vivo. Here we report the generation of 2
tissue specific hematopoietic transgenic mouse models, one expressing survivin in
both the erythroid and MK lineages and the other expressing survivin solely in
the MK lineage. Survivin protein overexpression was confirmed in MKs and
erythrocytes. Surprisingly, analysis of both transgenic mouse lines showed no
detectable changes in MK number, ploidy level, and platelet and erythrocyte
counts, as compared with control mice. We conclude that elevated survivin
expression does not alter MK/erythroid lineage development and that elevated
survivin, alone, does not interfere with MK ploidy in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2288720
PMID: 18245663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Exp Hematol. 2008 Apr;36(4):424-32. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2007.11.015. Epub 2008 
Feb 4.

Combinatorial regulation of novel erythroid gene expression in zebrafish.

Galloway JL(1), Wingert RA, Thisse C, Thisse B, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Mass., USA.

OBJECTIVE: The specification and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells into
red blood cells requires precise coordination by multiple transcription factors. 
Most genes important for erythroid maturation are regulated by the Gata family of
DNA-binding proteins. Previously, we identified three novel genes kelch-repeat
containing protein (krcp), kiaa0650, and testhymin/glucocorticoid inducible
transcript 1 (glcci1) to be expressed in erythroid cells in a Gata-independent
manner, and we sought to further understand how these transcripts are regulated
during zebrafish hematopoiesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We employed a loss-of-function approach, using
combinations of antisense morpholinos to hematopoietic transcription factors and 
assayed for changes in gene expression in zebrafish embryos.
RESULTS: Upon examination of embryos deficient for Gata1, Gata2, Biklf, and/or
Scl, we found distinct gene combinations were required for expression of the
novel genes. While krcp expression was dependent upon Gata1 and Biklf, kiaa0650
expression was greatly reduced and glcci1 was maintained in
Gata1/Gata2/Biklf-deficient embryos. As with the gata1 gene, kiaa0650 and krcp
required Scl for blood expression. Although reduced, glcci1 was expressed in
posterior blood precursors in the absence of Scl and Gata2.
CONCLUSIONS: This work identifies glcci1 as having Scl-independent expression in 
the posterior hematopoietic mesoderm, suggesting that its posterior expression is
activated by factors upstream or parallel to Scl and Gata2. Additionally, these
studies establish that blood gene expression programs are regulated by
transcription factors acting in combination during erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC2390894
PMID: 18243489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):232-42. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.11.020.

Exchange of GATA factors mediates transitions in looped chromatin organization at
a developmentally regulated gene locus.

Jing H(1), Vakoc CR, Ying L, Mandat S, Wang H, Zheng X, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):154-6.

Enhancers can regulate designate promoters over long distances by forming
chromatin loops. Whether chromatin loops are lost or reconfigured during gene
repression is largely unexplored. We examined the chromosome conformation of the 
Kit gene that is expressed during early erythropoiesis but is downregulated upon 
cell maturation. Kit expression is controlled by sequential occupancy of two GATA
family transcription factors. In immature cells, a distal enhancer bound by
GATA-2 is in physical proximity with the active Kit promoter. Upon cell
maturation, GATA-1 displaces GATA-2 and triggers a loss of the enhancer/promoter 
interaction. Moreover, GATA-1 reciprocally increases the proximity in nuclear
space among distinct downstream GATA elements. GATA-1-induced transitions in
chromatin conformation are not simply the consequence of transcription inhibition
and require the cofactor FOG-1. This work shows that a GATA factor exchange
reconfigures higher-order chromatin organization, and suggests that de novo
chromatin loop formation is employed by nuclear factors to specify repressive
outcomes.

PMCID: PMC2254447
PMID: 18243117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):154-6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.008.

Linking differential chromatin loops to transcriptional decisions.

Apostolou E(1), Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Genetics and Biotechnology, Biomedical
Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, 4 Soranou Efesiou Street, Athens, Greece.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):232-42.

GATA-1 and GATA-2 control proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic
progenitor cells via transcriptional regulation. In this issue of Molecular Cell,
Jing et al. (2008) demonstrate that GATA factor exchange on the Kit locus directs
a transcriptional switch by reconfiguring chromatin loops.

PMID: 18243110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Feb;31(2):305-8.

Novel method for selecting immunosuppressive histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors with minimal thrombocytopenia.

Matsuoka H(1), Fujimura T, Unami A, Yamada T, Noto T, Takata Y, Yoshizawa K, Mori
H, Aramori I, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc., Yodogawa-ku, Osaka, 
Japan. hideaki.mtsuoka@us.astellas.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors repress interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene
expression in T cells and possess immunosuppressive activity in vivo. In addition
to its immunosuppressive activity, HDAC inhibitors block GATA binding protein-1
(GATA-1) gene expression in megakaryocytes and elicit thrombocytopenia. In this
report we state that for a given immunosuppressive dose of HDAC inhibitor, the
ratio of GATA-1 reporter gene activity relative to IL-2 reporter gene assay (G/I 
ratio of measured IC(50)) can be predictive of a HDAC inhibitor's
thrombocytopenic effect. This study utilized nine HDAC inhibitors at a minimal
effective dose in a rat heterotopic cardiac transplantation model and the
resultant G/I ratios and platelet depletion rates were highly correlated
(r=0.933). These results indicate that calculation of G/I ratio can be a novel
method for selecting immunosuppressive HDAC inhibitor having minimal
thrombocytopenic effect which will benefit the search for new immunosuppressants 
of greater safety and efficacy.

PMID: 18239292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Exp Hematol. 2008 Feb;36(2):158-71. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2007.10.001.

Altered SDF-1/CXCR4 axis in patients with primary myelofibrosis and in the Gata1 
low mouse model of the disease.

Migliaccio AR(1), Martelli F, Verrucci M, Migliaccio G, Vannucchi AM, Ni H, Xu M,
Jiang Y, Nakamoto B, Papayannopoulou T, Hoffman R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
Sanità, Rome, Italy. migliar@iss.it

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether alterations in the stromal cell-derived factor-1
(SDF-1)/CXCR4 occur in patients with primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and in Gata1 low
mice, an animal model for myelofibrosis, and whether these abnormalities might
account for increased stem/progenitor cell trafficking.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the mouse, SDF-1 mRNA levels were assayed in liver,
spleen, and marrow. SDF-1 protein levels were quantified in plasma and marrow and
CXCR4 mRNA and protein levels were evaluated on stem/progenitor cells and
megakaryocytes purified from the marrow. SDF-1 protein levels were also evaluated
in plasma and in marrow biopsy specimens obtained from normal donors and PMF
patients.
RESULTS: In Gata1 low mice, the plasma SDF-1 protein was five times higher than
normal in younger animals. Furthermore, SDF-1 immunostaining of marrow sections
progressively increased with age. Similar abnormalities were observed in PMF
patients. In fact, plasma SDF-1 levels in PMF patients were significantly higher 
(by twofold) than normal (p < 0.01) and SDF-1 immunostaining of marrow biopsy
specimens demonstrated increased SDF-1 deposition in specific areas. In two of
the patients, SDF-1 deposition was normalized by curative therapy with allogenic 
stem cell transplantation. Similar to what already has been reported for PMF
patients, the marrow from Gata1 low mice contained fewer CXCR4 pos CD117 pos
cells and these cells expressed low levels of CXCR4 mRNA and protein.
CONCLUSION: Similar abnormalities in the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis are observed in PMF
patients and in the Gata1 low mice model of myelofibrosis. We suggest that these 
abnormalities contribute to the increased stem/progenitor cell trafficking
observed in this mouse model as well as patients with PMF.

PMCID: PMC2747096
PMID: 18206727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Jan;24(1):37-40. doi: 10.1051/medsci/200824137.

[Hsp 70, guardian angel of GATA-1 during erythroid differentiation].

[Article in French]

Vandekerckhove J(1), Ribeil JA, Zermati Y, Garrido C, Courtois G, Solary E,
Hermine O.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8147 et Département d'Hématologie, Faculté de Médecine et Université 
René Descartes Paris V, Hôpital Necker, Paris Cedex 15, France.

PMID: 18198108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Cell Res. 2008 Feb;18(2):302-10. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.10.

Involvement of Sp1/Sp3 in the activation of the GATA-1 erythroid promoter in K562
cells.

Hou CH(1), Huang J, He QY, Zhang CN, Zhang XJ, Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

GATA-1 is a hematopoietic transcription factor that is essential for the terminal
maturation of proerythroblasts, megakaryocytic cells and mast cells. The
erythroid-specific promoter of the human GATA-1 gene directs the high expression 
of a reporter gene in K562 cells. Multiple putative transcription factor binding 
sites were identified in the promoter from the -860 to the -1 base pair (bp). For
a better understanding of the transcriptional control of human GATA-1 gene
expression, we tested the transcriptional activity of a series of deletions from 
the 5' end of the 860-bp promoter. A region between -221 and -128 bp retains most
of the transcriptional activity of the full-length promoter. Deletion of the
CGCCC box at -195 bp reduced reporter gene activity to 60.4%. Further deletion of
the CACCC box at -173 bp nearly abolished reporter gene expression, indicating
that the CACCC box is more critical. In vitro experiments of electrophoretic
mobility shifts and in vivo studies using chromatin immuno-precipitation (ChIP)
assays show that the Sp1/Sp3 proteins bind the CACCC site in the nuclei of K562
cells. Coincidently, hyperacetylation of histones in the GATA-1 erythroid
promoter was also shown by ChIP assay. Co-transfection of Sp1 expression plasmids
and plasmids with a wild-type promoter showed enhanced reporter gene activity in 
a dose-dependent manner. The combined data demonstrate that Sp1/Sp3, but not
EKLF, is involved in the activation of the GATA-1 erythroid promoter, and that
histones H3 and H4 are highly acetylated in this promoter region for an actively 
transcribed GATA-1 gene in K562 cells in which EKLF is barely detectable.

PMID: 18195733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Gene. 2008 Feb 15;409(1-2):83-91. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2007.11.010. Epub 2007 Dec 
4.

GATA-1 binding sites in exon 1 direct erythroid-specific transcription of PPOX.

de Vooght KM(1), van Wijk R, van Solinge WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We investigated erythroid-specific expression of the human PPOX gene. This gene
encodes protoporphyrinogen oxidase, which is involved in synthesizing heme for
red blood cells and heme as a cofactor for the respiratory cytochromes. In vitro 
luciferase transfection assays in human uninduced and hemin induced
erythroleukemic K562 cells showed that the presence of exon 1 increased promoter 
activity fourfold as compared to reporter constructs lacking this exon. This
transcriptional regulation was mediated by two GATA-1 sites in exon 1.
Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that both GATA sites were able to bind GATA-1 in vitro and in vivo. 
Exon 1 did not affect promoter activity in human hepatoma HepG2 cells and U937
monocytic cells but its presence decreased promoter activity in HeLa human
cervical carcinoma cells. We conclude that the GATA-1 binding sites in exon 1
constitute key regulatory elements in differential expression of PPOX in
erythroid and non-erythroid cells.

PMID: 18191920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Evol Dev. 2008 Jan-Feb;10(1):89-105. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2007.00216.x.

Developmental expression of foxA and gata genes during gut formation in the
polychaete annelid, Capitella sp. I.

Boyle MJ(1), Seaver EC.

Author information: 
(1)Kewalo Marine Laboratory, Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of
Hawaii, 41 Ahui Street, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA.

Most bilaterian animals have evolved a through gut that is regionally specialized
along the anterior-posterior axis. In the polychaete annelid, Capitella sp. I,
the alimentary canal is subdivided into a buccal cavity, pharynx, esophagus,
midgut, and hindgut. Members of the Fox and GATA families of transcription
factors have conserved functions in patterning ectodermal and endodermal gut
components. We have isolated and characterized expression of one FoxA gene
(CapI-foxA) and four GATA genes (CapI-gataB1, CapI-gataB2, CapI-gataB3, and
CapI-gataA1) from Capitella sp. I. Both gene families are expressed in the
developing gut of this polychaete. CapI-foxA, an ortholog of the FoxA subgroup,
is expressed in vegetal hemisphere micromeres of cleavage-stage embryos, in
multiple blastomeres within and surrounding the blastopore during gastrulation,
and throughout morphogenesis of the pharynx, esophagus, and hindgut. The
CapI-gataB genes group within the vertebrate GATA4/5/6 subfamily, appear to be
products of lineage-specific gene duplication, and are expressed in specific
domains of endomesoderm. CapI-gataB1 is expressed in endoderm precursors and
throughout developing midgut endoderm, and is particularly prominent at anterior 
and posterior midgut boundaries. CapI-gataB2 is co-expressed with CapI-gataB1 in 
midgut endoderm, and is also expressed in visceral mesoderm. CapI-gataB3 is
limited to and coexpressed with CapI-gataB2 in visceral mesoderm. CapI-gataA1
groups within the vertebrate GATA1/2/3 subfamily and is expressed primarily in
ectodermal tissues of the brain, ventral nerve cord, lateral trunk, and both
pharyngeal and esophageal regions of the foregut. Collectively, the CapI-foxA and
CapI-gata genes show patterns of expression that span almost the entire length of
the developing alimentary canal, consistent with a role in gut development.

PMID: 18184360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Apr;22(4):781-98. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0513. Epub 2008 Jan
3.

Role of the GATA family of transcription factors in endocrine development,
function, and disease.

Viger RS(1), Guittot SM, Anttonen M, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, Room T1-49, CHUQ Research Centre, 2705
Laurier Boulevard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.
robert.viger@crchul.ulaval.ca

The WGATAR motif is a common nucleotide sequence found in the transcriptional
regulatory regions of numerous genes. In vertebrates, these motifs are bound by
one of six factors (GATA1 to GATA6) that constitute the GATA family of
transcriptional regulatory proteins. Although originally considered for their
roles in hematopoietic cells and the heart, GATA factors are now known to be
expressed in a wide variety of tissues where they act as critical regulators of
cell-specific gene expression. This includes multiple endocrine organs such as
the pituitary, pancreas, adrenals, and especially the gonads. Insights into the
functional roles played by GATA factors in adult organ systems have been hampered
by the early embryonic lethality associated with the different Gata-null mice.
This is now being overcome with the generation of tissue-specific knockout models
and other knockdown strategies. These approaches, together with the increasing
number of human GATA-related pathologies have greatly broadened the scope of
GATA-dependent genes and, importantly, have shown that GATA action is not
necessarily limited to early development. This has been particularly evident in
endocrine organs where GATA factors appear to contribute to the transcription of 
multiple hormone-encoding genes. This review provides an overview of the GATA
family of transcription factors as they relate to endocrine function and disease.

PMCID: PMC2276466
PMID: 18174356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Development. 2008 Jan;135(2):401-10.

AML1-ETO reprograms hematopoietic cell fate by downregulating scl expression.

Yeh JR(1), Munson KM, Chao YL, Peterson QP, Macrae CA, Peterson RT.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Cardiovascular Research Center,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. jyeh1@partners.org

AML1-ETO is one of the most common chromosomal translocation products associated 
with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Patients carrying the AML1-ETO fusion gene
exhibit an accumulation of granulocyte precursors in the bone marrow and the
blood. Here, we describe a transgenic zebrafish line that enables inducible
expression of the human AML1-ETO oncogene. Induced AML1-ETO expression in
embryonic zebrafish causes a phenotype that recapitulates some aspects of human
AML. Using this highly tractable model, we show that AML1-ETO redirects
myeloerythroid progenitor cells that are developmentally programmed to adopt the 
erythroid cell fate into the granulocytic cell fate. This fate change is
characterized by a loss of gata1 expression and an increase in pu.1 expression in
myeloerythroid progenitor cells. Moreover, we identify scl as an early and
essential mediator of the effect of AML1-ETO on hematopoietic cell fate. AML1-ETO
quickly shuts off scl expression, and restoration of scl expression rescues the
effects of AML1-ETO on myeloerythroid progenitor cell fate. These results
demonstrate that scl is an important mediator of the ability of AML1-ETO to
reprogram hematopoietic cell fate decisions, suggesting that scl may be an
important contributor to AML1-ETO-associated leukemia. In addition, treatment of 
AML1-ETO transgenic zebrafish embryos with a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
Trichostatin A, restores scl and gata1 expression, and ameliorates the
accumulation of granulocytic cells caused by AML1-ETO. Thus, this zebrafish model
facilitates in vivo dissection of AML1-ETO-mediated signaling, and will enable
large-scale chemical screens to identify suppressors of the in vivo effects of
AML1-ETO.

PMID: 18156164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biochemistry. 2008 Jan 22;47(3):859-69. Epub 2007 Dec 23.

Differential GATA factor stabilities: implications for chromatin occupancy by
structurally similar transcription factors.

Lurie LJ(1), Boyer ME, Grass JA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, 1300 University Avenue, 385 Medical Sciences Center, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Whereas the transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 function both uniquely and
redundantly to control blood cell development, the process termed hematopoiesis, 
mechanisms underlying their unique versus common functions are poorly understood.
We used two independent assays to demonstrate that GATA-1 is considerably more
stable than GATA-2 in multiple cellular contexts, even though both factors are
subject to degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Studies with GATA
factor mutants and novel chimeric GATA factors provided evidence that both GATA-1
and GATA-2 have highly unstable zinc finger core modules. The GATA-1 and GATA-2
N-termini both confer stabilization to their respective zinc finger core modules.
In contrast, the GATA-1 and GATA-2 C-termini confer stabilization and
destabilization, respectively. As GATA-2 stabilization via proteasome inhibition 
impairs the capacity of GATA-1 to displace GATA-2 from endogenous chromatin
sites, we propose that differential GATA factor stability is an important
determinant of chromatin target site occupancy and therefore the establishment of
genetic networks that control hematopoiesis.

PMID: 18154321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Leukemia. 2008 Mar;22(3):521-9. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

The role of the proto-oncogene ETS2 in acute megakaryocytic leukemia biology and 
therapy.

Ge Y(1), LaFiura KM, Dombkowski AA, Chen Q, Payton SG, Buck SA, Salagrama S,
Diakiw AE, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in Down syndrome (DS) children has several unique
features including a predominance of the acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL)
phenotype, higher event-free survivals compared to non-DS children using cytosine
arabinoside (ara-C)/anthracycline-based protocols and a uniform presence of
somatic mutations in the X-linked transcription factor gene, GATA1. Several
chromosome 21-localized transcription factor oncogenes including ETS2 may
contribute to the unique features of DS AMkL. ETS2 transcripts measured by
real-time RT-PCR were 1.8- and 4.1-fold, respectively, higher in DS and non-DS
megakaryoblasts than those in non-DS myeloblasts. In a doxycycline-inducible
erythroleukemia cell line, K562pTet-on/ETS2, induction of ETS2 resulted in an
erythroid to megakaryocytic phenotypic switch independent of GATA1 levels.
Microarray analysis of doxycycline-induced and doxycycline-uninduced cells
revealed an upregulation by ETS2 of cytokines (for example, interleukin 1 and
CSF2) and transcription factors (for example, TAL1), which are key regulators of 
megakaryocytic differentiation. In the K562pTet-on/ETS2 cells, ETS2 induction
conferred differences in sensitivities to ara-C and daunorubicin, depending on
GATA1 levels. These results suggest that ETS2 expression is linked to the biology
of AMkL in both DS and non-DS children, and that ETS2 acts by regulating
expression of hematopoietic lineage and transcription factor genes involved in
erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis, and in chemotherapy sensitivities.

PMCID: PMC3809919
PMID: 18094719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Cell. 2007 Dec 14;28(5):810-22.

A positive role for NLI/Ldb1 in long-range beta-globin locus control region
function.

Song SH(1), Hou C, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Long-range interactions between distant regulatory elements, such as enhancers,
and their target genes underlie the specificity of gene expression in many
developmentally regulated gene families. NLI/Ldb1, a widely expressed nuclear
factor, is a potential mediator of long-range interactions. Here, we show that
NLI/Ldb1 and erythroid-binding partners GATA-1/SCL/LMO2 bind in vivo to the
beta-globin locus control region (LCR). The C-terminal LIM interaction domain of 
NLI is required for formation of the complex on chromatin. Loss of the LIM domain
converts NLI into a dominant-negative inhibitor of globin gene expression, and
knockdown of NLI by using shRNA results in failure to activate beta-globin
expression. Kinetic studies reveal that the NLI/GATA-1/SCL/LMO2 complex is
detected at the beta-globin promoter coincident with RNA Pol II recruitment,
beta-globin transcription, and chromatin loop formation during erythroid
differentiation, providing evidence that NLI facilitates long-range gene
activation.

PMCID: PMC2195932
PMID: 18082606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Aug;28(8):537-40.

[Expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in the bone marrow of patients with Monge's
disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JP(1), Jia NY, Li ZQ, Wang HX, Su J, Li YL, Li XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Qinghai University, Xining,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To find out how GATA-1 and GATA-2 behave in the bone marrow of
patients with Monge's disease.
METHODS: The levels of mRNA in mononuclear cells (MNC) and proteins of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 in the bone marrow of patients with Monge's disease and controls were
determined by RT-PCR and immune cytolysis chemical method.
RESULTS: (1) All patients and controls expressed GATA-1 mRNA (Monge's disease
1.033 +/- 0.146, Control 0.458 +/- 0.076) and GATA-2 mRNA (Monge's disease 0.451 
+/- 0.073, Control 0.185 +/- 0.074). All patients expressed both GATA-1 (positive
cell counts 77.3 +/- 33.3, positive score 135.4 +/- 75.4) and GATA-2 ( positive
cell counts 29.4 +/- 11.4, positive score 48.4 +/- 19.7). All the controls
expressed GATA-1 (positive cell counts 18.1 +/- 11.3, positive score 24.2 +/-
13.4) while 12 of 20 controls expressed GATA-2 ( positive cell counts 5.4 +/-
3.0, positive score 7.3 +/- 4.2). The expression of mRNA and proteins of GATA-1
and GATA-2 in Monge's disease were higher than in controls (P < 0.01). (2) There 
was a positive correlation between GATA-1 and Hb (P < 0.01), as did between mRNA 
and proteins of GATA-1 and GATA-2. (3) Both the proteins of GATA-1 and GATA-2
located only in the cytoplasm but not the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Two of inherent genes, GATA-1 and GATA-2 which were expressed at
higher levels in patients with Monge's disease than in controls might play
significant roles in the pathogenesis of Monge's disease.

PMID: 18078130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 May-Jun;40(3):381-7. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Cre recombinase expression controlled by the hematopoietic regulatory domain of
Gata-1 is erythroid-specific.

Yoon D(1), Kim B, Prchal JT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84132, USA.

Available data suggest that gene regulation by the Gata-1 Hematopoietic
Regulatory Domain (Gata-1-HRD) is limited to cells derived from the erythroid
lineage. This characteristic makes Gata-1-HRD a candidate for control of cre
expression in conditional knock-in and knock-out models in which
erythroid-specific gene expression is essential. To characterize the specificity 
of Gata-1 HRD regulation of cre, transgenic mice expressing improved cre
recombinase (iCre) under the control of Gata-1-HRD were generated. The founders
were crossbred with mice that have an inactive loxP-containing beta-galactosidase
gene that can be rescued by the cre recombinase. The beta-galactosidase activity 
was detected in the marrow of this crossbred mouse, but no activity was observed 
in other organs. To identify the cre expressing cells in marrow,
double-immunostaining of marrow sections with anti-beta-galactosidase, and
antibodies against various hematopoietic lineage markers or erythropoietin
receptor (epor) was performed. The epor positive cells in marrow expressed
beta-galactosidase, but megakaryocytic precursors and nonerythroid epor-positive 
cells in brain and spleen did not. We conclude that when cre is under control of 
Gata-1-HRD, its expression/function is limited to erythroid progenitors. The
knock-in and knock-out models utilizing Gata-1-HRD-iCre, can be explored for the 
studies of erythroid-specific gene expression.

PMID: 18077194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Jan 1;180(1):74-8.

Mutations of GATA1, FLT3, MLL-partial tandem duplication, NRAS, and RUNX1 genes
are not found in a 7-year-old Down syndrome patient with acute myeloid leukemia
(FAB-M2) having a good prognosis.

Kawamura M(1), Kaku H, Taketani T, Taki T, Shimada A, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, 3-18-22
Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8677, Japan. m.kawamura@cick.jp

The prognosis of leukemia developed in Down syndrome (DS) patients has improved
markedly. Most DS leukemia occurs before 3 years of age and is classified as
acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL). Mutations in the GATA1 gene have been found
in almost all DS patients with AMKL. In contrast, it has been shown that
occurrence of DS acute myeloid leukemia (DS-AML) after 3 years of age may
indicate a higher risk for a poor prognosis, but its frequency is very low. Age
is one of the significant prognostic indicators in DS-AML. The prognostic factor 
of gene alterations has not been reported in older DS-AML patients. We here
describe the case of a 7-year-old DS boy with AML-M2, who had no history of
transient abnormal myelopoiesis or any clinical poor prognostic factors, such as 
high white blood cell counts or extramedullary infiltration. We molecularly
analyzed the GATA1, FLT3, MLL-partial tandem duplication, NRAS, and RUNX1
(previously AML1) genes and did not detect any alterations. The patient has lived
for more than 5 years after treatment on the AML99-Down protocol in Japan. This
suggests that a patient lacking these genes alterations might belong to a
subgroup of older DS-AML patients with good prognosis. Accumulation of more data 
on older pediatric DS-AML patients is needed.

PMID: 18068539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Blood. 2008 Feb 15;111(4):1924-32. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Differential context-dependent effects of friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) on mast-cell
development and differentiation.

Sugiyama D(1), Tanaka M, Kitajima K, Zheng J, Yen H, Murotani T, Yamatodani A,
Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Pathology, Medical School, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) is a binding partner of GATA-1, a zinc finger
transcription factor with crucial roles in erythroid, megakaryocytic, and
mast-cell differentiation. FOG-1 is indispensable for the function of GATA-1
during erythro/megakaryopoiesis, but FOG-1 is not expressed in mast cells. Here, 
we analyzed the role of FOG-1 in mast-cell differentiation using a combined
experimental system with conditional gene expression and in vitro hematopoietic
induction of mouse embryonic stem cells. Expression of FOG-1 during the
progenitor period inhibited the differentiation of mast cells and enhanced the
differentiation of neutrophils. Analysis using a mutant of PU.1, a transcription 
factor that positively or negatively cooperates with GATA-1, revealed that this
lineage skewing was caused by disrupted binding between GATA-1 and PU.1, which is
a prerequisite for mast-cell differentiation. However, FOG-1 expression in mature
mast cells brought approximately a reversible loss of the mast-cell phenotype. In
contrast to the lineage skewing, the loss of the mast-cell phenotype was caused
by down-regulation of MITF, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
required for mast-cell differentiation and maturation. These results indicate
that FOG-1 inhibits mast-cell differentiation in a differentiation
stage-dependent manner, and its effects are produced via different molecular
mechanisms.

PMID: 18063754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Blood. 2008 Feb 15;111(4):1946-50. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Hls5 regulated erythroid differentiation by modulating GATA-1 activity.

Endersby R(1), Majewski IJ, Winteringham L, Beaumont JG, Samuels A, Scaife R, Lim
E, Crossley M, Klinken SP, Lalonde JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine, Western Australian Institute for Medical
Research, Centre for Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Crawley, 
Australia.

Hemopoietic lineage switch (Hls) 5 and 7 were originally isolated as genes
up-regulated during an erythroid-to-myeloid lineage switch. We have shown
previously that Hls7/Mlf1 imposes a monoblastoid phenotype on erythroleukemic
cells. Here we show that Hls5 impedes erythroid maturation by restricting
proliferation and inhibiting hemoglobin synthesis; however, Hls5 does not
influence the morphology of erythroid cells. Under the influence of GATA-1, Hls5 
relocates from cytoplasmic granules to the nucleus where it associates with both 
FOG-1 and GATA-1. In the nucleus, Hls5 is able to suppress GATA-1-mediated
transactivation and reduce GATA-1 binding to DNA. We conclude that Hls5 and
Hls7/Mlf1 act cooperatively to induce biochemical and phenotypic changes
associated with erythroid/myeloid lineage switching.

PMID: 18063753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Clin Invest. 2007 Dec;117(12):3890-9.

STAT1 promotes megakaryopoiesis downstream of GATA-1 in mice.

Huang Z(1), Richmond TD, Muntean AG, Barber DL, Weiss MJ, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Thrombocytosis is associated with inflammation, and certain inflammatory
cytokines, including IFN-gamma, stimulate megakaryocyte and platelet production. 
However, the roles of IFN-gamma and its downstream effector STAT1 in
megakaryocyte development are poorly understood. We previously reported that
STAT1 expression was significantly downregulated in Gata1-knockdown murine
megakaryocytes, which also have impaired terminal maturation. Here, we show that 
ectopic expression of STAT1, or its target effector IRF-1, rescued multiple
defects in Gata1-deficient megakaryopoiesis in mice, inducing polyploidization
and expression of a subset of platelet-expressing genes. Enforced expression of
STAT1, IRF-1, or GATA-1 enhanced phosphorylation of STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5 in
cultured Gata1-deficient murine megakaryocytes, with concomitant megakaryocyte
maturation. In contrast, enhanced thrombopoietin signaling, conferred by enforced
expression of constitutively active JAK2 or c-MPL, induced phosphorylation of
STAT3 and STAT5, but not STAT1, and failed to rescue megakaryocyte maturation.
Finally, megakaryocytes from Stat1(-/-) mice were defective in polyploidization. 
Together, these findings reveal a unique role for STAT1 in megakaryopoiesis and
provide new insights into how GATA-1 regulates this process. Our studies
elucidate potential mechanisms by which various inflammatory disorders can cause 
elevated platelet counts.

PMCID: PMC2096448
PMID: 18060035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Leukemia. 2008 Jul;22(7):1428-30. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Myeloid leukemia in children 4 years or older with Down syndrome often lacks
GATA1 mutation and cytogenetics and risk of relapse are more akin to sporadic
AML.

Hasle H, Abrahamsson J, Arola M, Karow A, O'Marcaigh A, Reinhardt D, Webb DK, van
Wering E, Zeller B, Zwaan CM, Vyas P.

PMID: 18059480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Platelets. 2007 Dec;18(8):620-7.

Platelet pathology in carriers of the X-linked GATA-1 macrothrombocytopenia.

White JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology and Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, MN, USA. white003@umn.edu

Previous investigations from our laboratory have characterized the
ultrastructural and cytochemical pathology of platelets in male members of a
family with X-linked GATA-1 G208S macrothrombocytoenia. A large proportion of
their circulating platelets were hypogranular macrothrombocytes, resembling cells
from patients with the Gray Platelet Syndrome. However, most of the GATA-1
macrothrombocytes contained some alpha granules, and a small number had as many
as are present in normal platelets. GATA-1 macrothrombocytes also contained
tubular inclusions formed from elements of the dense tubular system wrapped
around each other like scrolls. Many macrothrombocytes contained flat tubular
membrane sheets connected to channels of the open canalicular system, platelets
in platelets and platelets attached to platelets forming very large
macrothrombocytes. The present study has examined one obligate and three
potential female carriers in this family. Thin sections of their platelets
examined in the electron microscope revealed features consistent with the
pathology observed in male family members. Most of their platelets were
normal-sized, discoid cells containing the usual complement of alpha and delta
storage organelles and channels of the dense tubular system and OCS. However, a
significant number of giant platelets containing the usual frequency of alpha and
delta granules and hypogranular and agranular giant platelets were observed. The 
frequency of the macrothrombocytes varied in each of the four women studied, but 
were present in all. The ability of their platelets to bind multimers of vWF, in 
contrast to male family members, did not differ from normal controls. Near normal
as well as normal platelet counts and the ability of their platelets to bind vWF 
multimers may protect them from the serious bleeding problems of males with the
X-linked GATA-1 G208S mutation. Our findings indicate that obligate female
carriers of the GATA-1 gene can be detected by examination of their platelets in 
the electron microscope and distinguished from the pathology of other giant
platelet disorders.

PMID: 18041654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Seikagaku. 2007 Oct;79(10):941-52.

[Function and gene expression regulation of GATA-1 and GATA-2 transcription].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimizu R(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for TARA and Institute for Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

PMID: 18027572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Blood. 2008 Feb 15;111(4):1885-93. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

PACAP and its receptor VPAC1 regulate megakaryocyte maturation: therapeutic
implications.

Freson K(1), Peeters K, De Vos R, Wittevrongel C, Thys C, Hoylaerts MF, Vermylen 
J, Van Geet C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. kathleen.freson@med.kuleuven.be

Megakaryocytes and platelets express the Gs-coupled VPAC1 receptor, for which the
pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) and the vasointestinal
peptide (VIP) are agonists. We here demonstrate a regulatory role for VPAC1
signaling during megakaryopoiesis. A total of 2 patients with trisomy 18p with
PACAP overexpression and transgenic mice overexpressing PACAP in megakaryocytes
have thrombopathy, a mild thrombocytopenia, and a reduced number of mature
megakaryocytes in their bone marrow. In vitro differentiation of hematopoietic
stem cells from the patient and transgenic mice shows a reduced number of
megakaryocyte colonies compared with controls. The addition of PACAP, VIP, or the
adenylyl cyclase activator forskolin to CD34(+) cells inhibits megakaryocyte
differentiation. In contrast, neutralizing monoclonal anti-PACAP (PP1A4) or
anti-VPAC1 (23A11) antibodies inhibit cAMP formation and stimulate
megakaryopoiesis in a thrombopoietin-independent manner. Moreover, wild-type mice
obtain an increased platelet count after subcutaneous injection of PP1A4 or
23A11. These antibodies also elevate platelet numbers in animal models of
myelosuppressive therapy and in GATA1-deficient mice with congenital
thrombocytopenia. Furthermore, 23A11 stimulates the in vitro megakaryocyte
differentiation of both normal and GATA1-deficient human CD34(+) cells. Together,
our data strongly suggest that VPAC1 signaling tempers normal megakaryopoiesis,
and that inhibition of this pathway stimulates megakaryocyte differentiation,
enhancing platelet recovery after myelosuppressive therapy and in GATA1
deficiency.

PMID: 18000164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 20;104(47):18642-7. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Clonogenic mast cell progenitors and their excess numbers in chimeric BALB/c mice
with inactivated GATA-1.

Metcalf D(1), Majewski I, Mifsud S, Di Rago L, Alexander WS.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville 3050, Victoria, Australia. metcalf@wehi.edu.au

In agar cultures of marrow cells from adult female BALB/c chimeric
GATA-1(Plt13/+) mice, a high frequency of unusual dispersed colonies was noted.
Analysis showed that these were colonies of mast cells and that mast cell
colony-forming cells (progenitors) could be detected in clonal cultures of adult 
marrow, neonatal marrow, or fetal liver if the combined stimulus of stem cell
factor and interleukin-3 was used. Mast cell progenitors were in active cell
cycle and showed an extensive capacity for self-generation. Mast cell colonies
both from control GATA-1(+/+) mice and GATA-1(Plt13/+) mice could generate growth
factor-dependent cloned cell lines that grew for >18 months. Surprisingly, the
majority of the excessive numbers of mast cell progenitors in chimeric
GATA-1(Plt13/+) mice were transcribing the inactive Plt13 allele of GATA-1,
suggesting that GATA-1 normally acts to restrict the emergence of committed mast 
cell progenitors. In sharp contrast, all eosinophil progenitors in these mice
were transcribing the normal GATA-1 allele. No excess tissue mast cells were
observed in GATA-1(Plt13/+) mice, suggesting that the excess mast cell
progenitors in these mice might be generating mast cells with a defective in vivo
proliferative or tissue homing capacity.

PMCID: PMC2141830
PMID: 18000035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Int J Hematol. 2007 Oct;86(3):250-2.

Distinct clones are associated with the development of transient
myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryocytic leukemia in a patient with
Down syndrome.

Kanegane H(1), Watanabe S, Nomura K, Xu G, Ito E, Miyawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Toyama,
Toyama, Japan. kanegane@med.u-toyama.ac.jp

Children with Down syndrome (DS) have an approximately 20-fold higher incidence
of leukemia than unaffected children, and most leukemia cases with DS present as 
acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL). At least 10% of neonates with DS develop
transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD), and 20% to 30% of patients with TMD 
develop AMKL. Mutations in the GATA1 gene are identified not only in AMKL
patients but also in TMD patients; however, sequential analysis of GATA1 is not
often performed in the same patients. We describe a child with DS who developed
TMD followed by AMKL and have identified different mutations in the GATA1 gene
during the course of TMD and AMKL. Distinct clones were associated with the
development of TMD and AMKL in this patient.

PMID: 17988992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(2):575-86. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

GATA-1 modulates the chromatin structure and activity of the chicken alpha-globin
3' enhancer.

Escamilla-Del-Arenal M(1), Recillas-Targa F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apartado Postal 70-242, México D.F.
04510, México. .

Long-distance regulatory elements and local chromatin structure are critical for 
proper regulation of gene expression. Here we characterize the chromatin
conformation of the chicken alpha-globin silencer-enhancer elements located 3' of
the domain. We found a characteristic and erythrocyte-specific structure between 
the previously defined silencer and the enhancer, defined by two nuclease
hypersensitive sites, which appear when the enhancer is active during erythroid
differentiation. Fine mapping of these sites demonstrates the absence of a
positioned nucleosome and the association of GATA-1. Functional analyses of
episomal vectors, as well as stably integrated constructs, revealed that GATA-1
plays a major role in defining both the chromatin structure and the enhancer
activity. We detected a progressive enrichment of histone acetylation on critical
enhancer nuclear factor binding sites, in correlation with the formation of an
apparent nucleosome-free region. On the basis of these results, we propose that
the local chromatin structure of the chicken alpha-globin enhancer plays a
central role in its capacity to differentially regulate alpha-globin gene
expression during erythroid differentiation and development.

PMCID: PMC2223419
PMID: 17984219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Genes Dev. 2007 Nov 1;21(21):2832-44.

The TR2 and TR4 orphan nuclear receptors repress Gata1 transcription.

Tanabe O(1), Shen Y, Liu Q, Campbell AD, Kuroha T, Yamamoto M, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

When the orphan nuclear receptors TR2 and TR4, the DNA-binding subunits of the
DRED repressor complex, are forcibly expressed in erythroid cells of transgenic
mice, embryos exhibit a transient mid-gestational anemia as a consequence of a
reduction in the number of primitive erythroid cells. GATA-1 mRNA is specifically
diminished in the erythroid cells of these TR2/TR4 transgenic embryos as it is in
human CD34(+) progenitor cells transfected with forcibly expressed TR2/TR4. In
contrast, in loss-of-function studies analyzing either Tr2- or Tr4-germline-null 
mutant mice or human CD34(+) progenitor cells transfected with force-expressed
TR2 and TR4 short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs), GATA-1 mRNA is induced. An
evolutionarily conserved direct repeat (DR) element, a canonical binding site for
nuclear receptors, was identified in the GATA1 hematopoietic enhancer (G1HE), and
TR2/TR4 binds to that site in vitro and in vivo. Mutation of that DR element led 
to elevated Gata1 promoter activity, and reduced promoter responsiveness to
cotransfected TR2/TR4. Thus, TR2/TR4 directly represses Gata1/GATA1 transcription
in murine and human erythroid progenitor cells through an evolutionarily
conserved binding site within a well-characterized, tissue-specific Gata1
enhancer, thereby providing a mechanism by which Gata1 can be directly silenced
during terminal erythroid maturation.

PMCID: PMC2045135
PMID: 17974920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mech Dev. 2007 Nov-Dec;124(11-12):830-9. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

Isolation of cardiac cells from E8.5 yolk sac by ALCAM (CD166) expression.

Murakami Y(1), Hirata H, Miyamoto Y, Nagahashi A, Sawa Y, Jakt M, Asahara T,
Kawamata S.

Author information: 
(1)Foundation of Biomedical Research and Innovation, 2-2 Minatojima-Minamimachi, 
Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

It is known that the adhesion molecule ALCAM (CD166) mediates metastasis of
malignant cells and organogenesis in embryos. We show here that embryonic day 8.5
(E8.5) murine yolk sac cells express ALCAM protein and that ALCAM expression can 
be used to define endothelial and cardiac precursors from hematopoietic
precursors in E8.5 yolk sacs. ALCAM high+ cells exclusively give rise to
endothelial and cardiac cells in matrigel assays but generate no hematopoietic
colonies in methylcellulose assays. ALCAM low+ and ALCAM- populations
predominantly give rise to hematopoietic cells in methylcellulose, but do not
generate any cell clusters in matrigel. The ALCAM high+ population contains both 
Flk-1+ and Flk-1- cells. The former population exclusively contains endothelial
cells whereas the latter give rise to cardiac cells when cultured on OP9 stromal 
cells. We also show that cardiac lineage marker genes such as Nkx-2.5, and the
endothelial marker VE-cadherin are expressed in the ALCAM high+ fraction, whereas
the hematopoietic marker GATA1 and Runx1 are expressed in the ALCAM low+/-
fraction. However, we did not detect expression of the cardiac structural protein
cTn-T in cells from yolk sac cells until these had had been differentiated on OP9
for 5 days. Altogether, these results indicate that cells retaining a potential
to differentiate to the cardiac lineage are present in E8.5 yolk sacs and can be 
isolated as ALCAM high+, Flk-1- cells. Our report provides novel insights into
the origin and differentiation process of cardiac cells in the formation of the
circulatory system.

PMID: 17964124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Development. 2007 Dec;134(23):4147-56. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Definitive hematopoiesis initiates through a committed erythromyeloid progenitor 
in the zebrafish embryo.

Bertrand JY(1), Kim AD, Violette EP, Stachura DL, Cisson JL, Traver D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0380, USA.

Shifting sites of blood cell production during development is common across
widely divergent phyla. In zebrafish, like other vertebrates, hematopoietic
development has been roughly divided into two waves, termed primitive and
definitive. Primitive hematopoiesis is characterized by the generation of
embryonic erythrocytes in the intermediate cell mass and a distinct population of
macrophages that arises from cephalic mesoderm. Based on previous gene expression
studies, definitive hematopoiesis has been suggested to begin with the generation
of presumptive hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) along the dorsal aorta that
express c-myb and runx1. Here we show, using a combination of gene expression
analyses, prospective isolation approaches, transplantation, and in vivo
lineage-tracing experiments, that definitive hematopoiesis initiates through
committed erythromyeloid progenitors (EMPs) in the posterior blood island (PBI)
that arise independently of HSCs. EMPs isolated by coexpression of fluorescent
transgenes driven by the lmo2 and gata1 promoters exhibit an immature, blastic
morphology and express only erythroid and myeloid genes. Transplanted EMPs home
to the PBI, show limited proliferative potential, and do not seed subsequent
hematopoietic sites such as the thymus or pronephros. In vivo fate-mapping
studies similarly demonstrate that EMPs possess only transient proliferative
potential, with differentiated progeny remaining largely within caudal
hematopoietic tissue. Additional fate mapping of mesodermal derivatives in
mid-somitogenesis embryos suggests that EMPs are born directly in the PBI. These 
studies provide phenotypic and functional analyses of the first hematopoietic
progenitors in the zebrafish embryo and demonstrate that definitive hematopoiesis
proceeds through two distinct waves during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2735398
PMID: 17959717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007 Dec;49(7 Suppl):1066-9.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in Down syndrome.

Hitzler JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ont., Canada M5G 1X8. johann.hitzler@sickkids.da

Children with Down syndrome (DS) have a 10- to 20-fold increased risk of
developing acute leukemia. An estimated 10% of newborns with DS develop Transient
Myeloproliferative Disease (TMD) or Transient Leukemia (TL), a clonal
accumulation of megakaryoblasts that resolves spontaneously within months. Acute 
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) develops in approximately 20% of cases of TMD/TL
by 4 years of age. Both the blasts of AMKL and TMD/TL in DS harbor somatic
mutations of GATA1, an essential transcriptional regulator of megakaryocytic
differentiation. The distinct phenotypes of megakaryoblastic leukemia in DS are a
unique biological model of the incremental process of leukemic transformation.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17943965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Ann Ig. 2007 Jul-Aug;19(4):303-14.

[Identification of candidate genes and expression profiles, as doping
biomarkers].

[Article in Italian]

Paparini A(1), Impagnatiello F, Pistilli A, Rinaldi M, Gianfranceschi G, Signori 
E, Stabile AM, Fazio V, Rende M, Romano Spica V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Unità di Sanità Pubblica, Istituto
Universitario Scienze Motorie, Roma.

Administration of prohibited substances to enhance athletic performance
represents an emerging medical, social, ethical and legal issue. Traditional
controls are based on direct detection of substances or their catabolites.
However out-of-competition doping may not be easily revealed by standard
analytical methods. Alternative indirect control strategies are based on the
evaluation of mid- and long-term effects of doping in tissues. Drug-induced
long-lasting changes of gene expression may be taken as effective indicators of
doping exposure. To validate this approach, we used real-time PCR to monitor the 
expression pattern of selected genes in human haematopoietic cells exposed to
nandrolone, insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) or growth hormone (GH). Some
candidate genes were found significantly and consistently modulated by
treatments. Nandrolone up-regulated AR, ESR2 and PGR in K562 cells, and SRD5A1,
PPARA and JAK2 in Jurkat cells; IGF-I up-regulated EPOR and PGR in HL60 cells,
and SRD5A1 in Jurkat; GH up-regulated SRD5A1 and GHR in K562. GATA1 expression
was down-regulated in IGF-1-treated HL60, ESR2 was down-regulated in
nandrolone-treated Jurkat, and AR and PGR were down-regulated in GH-treated
Jurkat. This pilot study shows the potential of molecular biology-based
strategies in anti-doping controls.

PMID: 17937323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Blood. 2008 Feb 1;111(3):1138-46. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

The role of Ikaros in human erythroid differentiation.

Dijon M(1), Bardin F, Murati A, Batoz M, Chabannon C, Tonnelle C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Thérapie Cellulaire et Génique, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille,
France.

Ikaros--a factor that positively or negatively controls gene transcription--is
active in murine adult erythroid cells, and involved in fetal to adult globin
switching. Mice with Ikaros mutations have defects in erythropoiesis and anemia. 
In this paper, we have studied the role of Ikaros in human erythroid development 
for the first time. Using a gene-transfer strategy, we expressed Ikaros 6
(Ik6)--a known dominant--negative protein that interferes with normal Ikaros
activity-in cord blood or apheresis CD34(+) cells that were induced to
differentiate along the erythroid pathway. Lentivirally induced Ik6-forced
expression resulted in increased cell death, decreased cell proliferation, and
decreased expression of erythroid-specific genes, including GATA1 and fetal and
adult globins. In contrast, we observed the maintenance of a residual myeloid
population that can be detected in this culture system, with a relative increase 
of myeloid gene expression, including PU1. In secondary cultures, expression of
Ik6 favored reversion of sorted and phenotypically defined erythroid cells into
myeloid cells, and prevented reversion of myeloid cells into erythroid cells. We 
conclude that Ikaros is involved in human adult or fetal erythroid
differentiation as well as in the commitment between erythroid and myeloid cells.

PMID: 17934067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biol Pharm Bull. 2007 Oct;30(10):1826-32.

Production and regulation of eotaxin-2/CCL24 in a differentiated human leukemic
cell line, HT93.

Yoshida N(1), Aizu-Yokota E, Sonoda Y, Moriwaki Y, Kishi K, Kasahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyoritsu University of Pharmacy, Minato-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

When a human leukemic cell line, HT93 was incubated with all-trans retinoic acid 
(ATRA), IL-5, or both, this cell line was differentiated into eosinophic lineage,
in that an eosinophilic specific granule proteins, major basic protein (MBP) and 
eosinophil peroxidase (EPO) appeared. Both CD11b and CC chemokine receptor, CCR3 
expression were upregulated, while CD71 expression was downregulated by ATRA or
ATRA+IL-5. Concomitantly, marked production of eotaxin-2/CCL24 was observed, but 
no production of eotaxin-1/CCL11 and eotaxin-3/CCL26 was detected. Since only 20 
to 30% cells incubated with ATRA became positive for CCR3, CCR3(+) population was
enriched by a magnetic activated cell sorter (MACS). Enriched CCR3(+) population 
produced higher eotaxin-2/CCL24 than the CCR3(-) population, indicating that
differentiated eosinophils are capable of producing eotaxin-2/CCL24. During the
ATRA-induced differentiation, expression of a transcriptional factor, GATA-1 was 
significantly increased. Introduction of siRNA against GATA-1 markedly reduced
the ATRA-induced differentiation markers including CD11b and CCR3, as well as
reduced eotaxin-2/CCL24 production. Finally, ATRA-induced differentiation and
eotaxin-2/CCL24 production were greatly enhanced in the GATA-1-overexpressed
clones. These results indicate that the ability to produce eotaxin-2/CCL24 is
acquired during the differentiation into eosinophilic lineage which is dependent 
on GATA-1 expression.

PMID: 17917245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2007 Sep-Oct;65(5):569-73.

[Transient myeloproliferative disorder in a neonate without Down syndrome].

[Article in French]

Adam M(1), Vincenot A, Gouraud F, Harvel C, Perot C, Portnoi MF, Andre-Kerneis E,
Giraudier S, Leverger G, Favier R.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Services d'hématologie biologique et clinique, Hôpital d'enfants Armand
Trousseau, Paris.

We report a new case of transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) in a non Down
syndrome neonate. The cytogenetic and molecular studies within from the blood
blast cells identified a trisomy 21 and a partial deletion in exon 2 of the
transcription factor GATA1. Spontaneous regression of the TMD was achieved at the
age of 1 month as the clonal and molecular abnormalities. A survey by periodic
cytological examinations of peripheral blood cells and GATA1 mutation analysis
was instituted since three years and has not detected up to date acute leukaemia.

PMID: 17913678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Sep 20;8:82.

Structural and functional analysis of the Entamoeba histolytica EhrabB gene
promoter.

Romero-Díaz M(1), Gómez C, López-Reyes I, Martínez MB, Orozco E, Rodríguez MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patología Experimental, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios 
Avanzados del IPN, A,P, 14-740 México, DF 07360, México. rdmoni@yahoo.com.mx

BACKGROUND: The Entamoeba histolytica EhrabB gene encodes for a Rab GTPase
involved in phagocytosis. It is located at a virulence locus where the Ehcp112
gene is in the complementary strand at 332 bp of EhrabB start codon, suggesting a
finely regulated transcription of both genes. However, the transcription
regulation in this parasite is poorly understood.
RESULTS: To initiate the knowledge of EhrabB gene expression regulation, here we 
studied the structural characteristics of its gene promoter and its control
transcription elements. In silico searches of the EhrabB 5'-flanking region
revealed that it contains a motif similar to the upstream regulatory element 1
(URE1) of the E. histolytica hgl5 gene. It also has sequences with homology to
C/EBP and GATA1 binding sites, and heat shock elements (HSE). Primer extension
experiments revealed that EhrabB has at least four transcription initiation
sites. The elements at the 5'-flanking region that drive EhrabB gene expression
were detected and characterized using transitory transfected trophozoites with a 
plasmid carrying the CAT reporter gene. EhrabB transcription is negatively
regulated by a sequence located between positions -491 to -428 with respect to
the first transcription initiation site. We also showed that the URE1-like motif 
activates EhrabB transcription. In addition, heat shock activated the EhrabB
promoter in episomal constructs and lead to an increase in de novo EhrabB
transcription.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that EhrabB transcription is controlled negatively
by an unidentified sequence, but it is activated by an URE1-like motif. Our
analyses also revealed the presence of activator HSE that function under stress.

PMCID: PMC2064931
PMID: 17883848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2770-1; author reply 2771.

Why the disorder induced by GATA1 Arg216Gln mutation should be called "X-linked
thrombocytopenia with thalassemia" rather than "X-linked gray platelet syndrome".

Balduini CL, De Candia E, Savoia A.

Comment on
    Blood. 2007 Apr 15;109(8):3297-9.

PMCID: PMC1988927
PMID: 17881640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7918-34. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

EWS/FLI-1 induces rapid onset of myeloid/erythroid leukemia in mice.

Torchia EC(1), Boyd K, Rehg JE, Qu C, Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Hartwell Center, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, 332 N. Lauderdale St., Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

EWS/FLI-1 is a chimeric oncogene generated by chromosomal translocation in Ewing 
tumors, a family of poorly differentiated pediatric tumors arising predominantly 
in bone but also in soft tissue. The fusion gene combines sequences encoding a
strong transactivating domain from the EWS protein with the DNA binding domain of
FLI-1, an ETS transcription factor. A related fusion, TLS/ERG, has been found in 
myeloid leukemia. To determine EWS/FLI-1 function in vivo, we engineered mice
with Cre-inducible expression of EWS/FLI-1 from the ubiquitous Rosa26 locus. When
crossed with Mx1-cre mice, Cre-mediated activation of EWS/FLI-1 resulted in the
rapid development of myeloid/erythroid leukemia characterized by expansion of
primitive mononuclear cells causing hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, severe anemia,
and death. The disease could be transplanted serially into naïve recipients. Gene
expression profiles of primary and transplanted animals were highly similar,
suggesting that activation of EWS/FLI-1 was the primary event leading to disease 
in this model. The Cre-inducible EWS/FLI-1 mouse provides a novel model system to
study the contribution of this oncogene to malignant disease in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2169157
PMID: 17875932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Drug Metab Rev. 2007;39(2-3):539-56.

Thermodynamics of ligand binding to P450 2B4 and P450eryF studied by isothermal
titration calorimetry.

Muralidhara BK(1), Halpert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas 77555, USA. bkmurali@utmb.edu

Structural plasticity and cooperativity in ligand recognition are two key aspects
of the catalytic diversity of cytochrome P450 enzymes. As more mammalian P450
crystal structures have emerged, computational modeling has become a major tool
to predict drug metabolism and interactions. There is a need for real solution
thermodynamic data to support modeling and crystallographic observations. Using
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) we successfully evaluated the
conformational flexibility of P450 2B4 in binding imidazole inhibitors of
different size and chemistry and dissected the stoichiometry and energetics of
ligand binding allostery in P450eryF. Thermodynamic signatures obtained by ITC
nicely correlated with structural and modeling results. Thus, ITC is a powerful
tool to study structure-function relationships in P450s.

PMID: 17786637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Aug;16(4):605-13.

GATA factors induce mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation toward
extraembryonic endoderm.

Zhang C(1), Ye X, Zhang H, Ding M, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing, China.

The GATA family of transcription factors are implicated in early embryonic
development. There are six factors in this family in vertebrates. GATA4 and GATA6
have been demonstrated to induce mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm (ExE). We investigated the effect of GATA3 on the 
differentiation of mES cells both in the ES cell and in the embryoid body (EB)
states. The results demonstrate that GATA3 overexpression can initiate the ES
cell differentiation program toward ExE. Furthermore, overexpression of GATA1 and
GATA2 in ES cells and EBs resulted in similar effects. We believe this finding
can augment our understanding of mouse ES cell differentiation.

PMID: 17784834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Platelets. 2007 Sep;18(6):436-50.

Platelet pathology in sex-linked GATA-1 dyserythropoietic macrothrombocytopenia
II. Cytochemistry.

White JG(1), Nichols WL, Steensma DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology and Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. white003@umn.edu

A previous investigation detailed the pathology of platelets in a family with the
X-linked GATA-1 G208S mutation causing dyserythropoiesis and
megathrombocytopenia. The present study has used ultrastructural
immunocytochemistry, cytochemistry, and tannic acid staining to answer questions 
raised in the original investigation. Earlier studies, as well as ours, had shown
that GATA-1 megathrombocytes are hypogranular, but did not definitively determine
which organelles are decreased. Cytochemical localization of aryl sulfatase
revealed that lysosomes were present in normal numbers, and the whole mount
technique showed a normal frequency of dense bodies rich in arlenine nucleotides 
and serotonin. Thus alpha granules were the only organelles deficient in GATA-1
platelets. Tannic acid staining confirmed that the membranes wrapped around each 
other to form tubular inclusions come from elements of the dense tubular system. 
The unique tubular membrane inclusions in GATA-1 megathrombocytes, thought
originally to derive from endoplasmic reticulum in the parent cell, were shown to
be in direct continuity with elements of the surface connected open canalicular
system (OCS), and to drive from the demarcation membrane system (DMS) of the
megakaryocyte. Platelets in platelets and platelets in platelets in platelets
were independent cells, and not derived by cytoplasmic sequestration in the
enclosing macrothrombocytes. Fully spread GATA-1 platelets incubated with
fibrinogen coated gold (Fgn/Au) particles before or after fixation bound as many 
Fgn/Au particles as normal spread platelets and moved the Fgn/Au- GPIIb/IIIa
complexes from peripheral margins to cell centers and into channels of the OCS as
efficiently. Exposure of spread normal platelets to bovine vWF resulted in
coverage of the surface from edge to edge with multimers detected by anti-vWF
antibody and protein A gold. Spread GATA-1 platelets bound very few vWF
multimers, which were much smaller in size than those on normal spread cells, but
were able to move then to cell centers. These findings support the concept that
GATA-1 platelets are macrothrombocytes because they are not able to detach
normally from each other during separation from megakaryocyte proplatelets. The
marked decrease in the number and abnormal distribution of GPIb/IX receptors may 
play a role in GATA-1 megathrombocyte formation.

PMID: 17763153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2007;17(4):271-80.

Regulation of RUNX1 transcriptional function by GATA-1.

Elagib KE(1), Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, PO Box
800904, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. ka8b@virginia.edu

Runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and GATA-1 are both transcription
factors known to play essential roles in hematopoiesis. Genetic alterations of
each are associated with abnormal platelet development, as well as predisposition
to leukemia. In addition, in vitro and animal studies indicate that both factors 
are involved in megakaryopoiesis. We and others have previously shown that RUNX1 
and GATA-1 physically interact and cooperate in the activation of megakaryocytic 
promoters such as alpha IIb integrin and glycoprotein Ibalpha. Moreover,
transcriptional cooperation of RUNX1 with GATA-1 is conserved back to Drosophila 
in which RUNX1 and GATA-1 homologs cooperate in crystal cell development. In this
article, we will review the molecular and functional significance of the
transcriptional cross talk between RUNX1 and GATA-1. In particular, we will
elaborate on recent data which suggest that GATA-1 targets RUNX1 for
modification, in particular phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinases.
Furthermore, targeting of RUNX1 by GATA-1 for phosphorylation may convert RUNX1
from a repressor to an activator. This is a potential mechanism of
transcriptional cooperation and may be an essential step in megakaryocytic
differentiation.

PMID: 17725493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Leukemia. 2008 Feb;22(2):432-4. Epub 2007 Aug 23.

Congenital transfusion-dependent anemia and thrombocytopenia with myelodysplasia 
due to a recurrent GATA1(G208R) germline mutation.

Kratz CP, Niemeyer CM, Karow A, Volz-Fleckenstein M, Schmitt-Gräff A, Strahm B.

PMID: 17713552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. DNA Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;26(8):577-87.

Transcription factors GATA-1 and Fli-1 regulate human HOXA10 expression in
megakaryocytic cells.

Gosiengfiao Y(1), Horvat R, Thompson A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology-Stem Cell Transplantation, Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Memorial Hospital, Feinberg School of Medicine of
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

HOXA10 is a member of the HOX family of regulatory genes that are involved in
hematopoiesis. Its role in megakaryopoiesis has been suggested by its expression 
in immature megakaryocytes and by the proliferation of megakaryocyte-primitive
blast colonies upon HOXA10 overexpression. We sought to understand the role of
HOXA10 in megakaryopoiesis better, by investigating its transcriptional
regulation. Analysis of the 5' untranslated region and transfection of
promoter/plasmids into human tissue culture cell lines identified
transcriptionally active sequences that contain GATA-1 and Ets-1 sites and a
putative binding site for its neighboring gene, HOXA11. Gel shift assays
confirmed protein-DNA interactions at these sites. Mutation of the GATA-1 and the
Ets-1 motifs amplified the expression of HOXA10 in HEL and K562 cells, confirming
the importance of these cis-acting elements in regulating HOXA10 expression in
megakaryocytic cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase (CAT) assays confirm that HOXA11 binds to the putative binding
site, resulting in repression of HOXA10 expression. These data taken together
give insight into the regulation of HOXA10 expression in megakaryocytic
differentiation.

PMID: 17688409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Inflamm Res. 2007 Aug;56(8):345-51.

Thymoquinone suppressses in vitro production of IL-5 and IL-13 by mast cells in
response to lipopolysaccharide stimulation.

El Gazzar MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
CO 80262, USA. melgazza@wfubmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Activated mast cells produce Th2 cytokines that regulate allergic
inflammation. We have previously shown that thymoquinone (TQ) attenuated airway
inflammation in a mouse model of allergic airway inflammation. The present study 
investigated whether TQ affects Th2 cytokine response in vitro in
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated rat mast cells, RBL-2H3.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RBL-2H3 cells were stimulated for 12 h with 0.1 microg/ml 
LPS in the presence or absence of 10 microM TQ. Th2 cytokine production was
measured in the culture supernatants by ELISA. The mRNA expression of IL-5, IL-
13 and GATA transcription factors was determined by RT-PCR. The expression of the
transcription proteins c-Fos, c- Jun and phospho-c-Jun were determined by western
blotting. The in vivo binding of GATA, AP-1 and NF-AT transcription factors to
IL-5 promoter was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis.
RESULTS: TQ significantly (p <0.05) inhibited LPS-induced IL-5 and IL-13 mRNA
expression and protein production. However, TQ did not affect IL-10 production.
GATA transcription factors are involved in the transcription of IL-5 and IL-13.
TQ had no effect on the expression of AP-1 protein subunits, c-Jun and c-Fos, but
markedly reduced the transcription of GATA-1 and -2 genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that GATA, AP-1 and NF-AT binding to IL-5 promoter
was induced by LPS stimulation and that TQ inhibited GATA binding at the IL-5
promoter but did not affect AP-1 and NF-AT binding.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that TQ inhibits LPS-induced proinflammatory
cytokine production in RBL-2H3 cells by blocking GATA transcription factor
expression and promoter binding which demonstrates the anti-inflammatory effect
of TQ.

PMID: 17687519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Oct;27(10):2135-41. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Ischemia is not required for arteriogenesis in zebrafish embryos.

Gray C(1), Packham IM, Wurmser F, Eastley NC, Hellewell PG, Ingham PW, Crossman
DC, Chico TJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
UK.

OBJECTIVE: The role of ischemia in collateral vessel development (arteriogenesis)
is a contentious issue that cannot be addressed using mammalian models. To
investigate this, we developed models of arteriogenesis using the zebrafish
embryo, which gains sufficient oxygenation via diffusion to prevent ischemia in
response to arterial occlusion.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied gridlock mutant embryos that suffer a permanently
occluded aorta and show that these restore aortic blood flow by collateral
vessels. We phenocopied gridlock mutants by laser-induced proximal aortic
occlusion in transgenic Fli1:eGFP/GATA1:dsRED embryos. Serial imaging showed
these restore aortic blood flow via collateral vessels by recruitment of
preexisting endothelium in a manner similar to gridlocks. Collateral aortic blood
flow in gridlock mutants was dependent on both nitric oxide and myeloid cells.
Confocal microscopy of transgenic gridlock/Fli1:eGFP mutants demonstrated no
aberrant angiogenic response to the aortic occlusion. qPCR of HIF1alpha
expression confirmed the absence of hypoxia in this model system.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that NO and myeloid cell-dependent collateral vessel
development is an evolutionarily ancient response to arterial occlusion and is
able to proceed in the absence of ischemia.

PMCID: PMC2517163
PMID: 17656667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Hematology. 2007 Aug;12(4):331-5.

GATA-1, -2 and -3 genes expression in bone marrow microenviroment with chronic
aplastic anemia.

Wu X(1), Li Y, Zhu K, Wang Z, Chen S, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Institute of Hematology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, PR
China.

Both bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and transcription factors (GATA-1, GATA-2 
and GATA-3) are important in the normal hematopoiesis and the pathogenesis of
hematopoietic disease. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
expression of GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 genes in the bone marrow (BM)
microenvironment from patients with chronic aplastic anemia (cAA) and normal
individuals. Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were isolated from BM of patients with cAA 
(8 cases) and normal controls (9 cases). Adherent cells (i.e. BMSCs) were
collected after long-term culture in vitro. The semi-quantitative expression
levels of GATA genes were analyzed by using RT-PCR-enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay (RT-PCR-ELISA). The BMSCs with cAA grew slowly compared with the normal
BMSCs. In BMSCs, only the expression ratio of GATA-3 gene from cAA group (50.0%) 
was significant lower than the normal controls (P < 0.05), the expression ratios 
of other GATA genes from cAA group were similar to the normal controls. There was
no difference in the expression level of GATA-1 gene in the BMSCs between normal 
controls and cAA group. The expression level of GATA-2 gene in BMSCs from cAA was
significantly lower than that from normal controls (P < 0.05). The expression
level of GATA-3 gene in BMSCs from cAA was significantly higher than that from
normal controls (P < 0.05). The dominant expression of GATA-3 gene was found in
the BMSCs from cAA and normal controls. GATA genes can be expressed in the BMSCs 
and may play a role in the regulation of hematopoiesis in normal individuals, as 
well as in patients with cAA. The change of expression levels of GATA genes may
influence the hematopoiesis in BM microenvironment and relate to the pathogenesis
and development of aplastic anemia.

PMID: 17654061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 1;179(3):1693-9.

Eosinophils from lineage-ablated Delta dblGATA bone marrow progenitors: the
dblGATA enhancer in the promoter of GATA-1 is not essential for differentiation
ex vivo.

Dyer KD(1), Czapiga M, Foster B, Foster PS, Kang EM, Lappas CM, Moser JM, Naumann
N, Percopo CM, Siegel SJ, Swartz JM, Ting-De Ravin S, Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases/National Institutes of Health (NIAID/NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
kdyer@niaid.nih.gov

A critical role for eosinophils in remodeling of allergic airways was observed in
vivo upon disruption of the dblGATA enhancer that regulates expression of GATA-1,
which resulted in an eosinophil-deficient phenotype in the DeltadblGATA mouse. We
demonstrate here that bone marrow progenitors isolated from DeltadblGATA mice can
differentiate into mature eosinophils when subjected to cytokine stimulation ex
vivo. Cultured DeltadblGATA eosinophils contain cytoplasmic granules with
immunoreactive major basic protein and they express surface Siglec F and
transcripts encoding major basic protein, eosinophil peroxidase, and GATA-1, -2, 
and -3 to an extent indistinguishable from cultured wild-type eosinophils.
Fibroblast coculture and bone marrow cross-transplant experiments indicate that
the in vivo eosinophil deficit is an intrinsic progenitor defect, and remains
unaffected by interactions with stromal cells. Interestingly, and in contrast to 
those from the wild type, a majority of the GATA-1 transcripts from cultured
DeltadblGATA progenitors express a variant GATA-1 transcript that includes a
first exon (1E(B)), located approximately 3700 bp downstream to the previously
described first exon found in hemopoietic cells (1E(A)) and approximately 42 bp
upstream to another variant first exon, 1E(C). These data suggest that cultured
progenitors are able to circumvent the effects of the DeltadblGATA ablation by
using a second, more proximal, promoter and use this mechanism to generate
quantities of GATA-1 that will support eosinophil growth and differentiation.

PMID: 17641035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Exp Hematol. 2007 Sep;35(9):1321-32. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

mNotch1 signaling and erythropoietin cooperate in erythroid differentiation of
multipotent progenitor cells and upregulate beta-globin.

Henning K(1), Schroeder T, Schwanbeck R, Rieber N, Bresnick EH, Just U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel,
Germany.

OBJECTIVE: In many developing tissues, signaling mediated by activation of the
transmembrane receptor Notch influences cell-fate decisions, differentiation,
proliferation, and cell survival. Notch receptors are expressed on hematopoietic 
cells and cognate ligands on bone marrow stromal cells. Here, we investigate the 
role of mNotch1 signaling in the control of erythroid differentiation of
multipotent progenitor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Multipotent FDCP-mix cell lines engineered to permit the
conditional induction of the constitutively active intracellular domain of
mNotch1 (mN1(IC)) by the 4-hydroxytamoxifen (OHT)-inducible system were used to
analyze the effects of activated mNotch1 on erythroid differentiation and on
expression of Gata1, Fog1, Eklf, NF-E2, and beta-globin. Expression was analyzed 
by Northern blotting and real-time polymerase chain reaction. Enhancer activity
of reporter constructs was determined with the dual luciferase system in
transient transfection assays.
RESULTS: Induction of mN1(IC) by OHT resulted in increased and accelerated
differentiation of FDCP-mix cells along the erythroid lineage. Erythroid
maturation was induced by activated Notch1 also under conditions that normally
promote self-renewal, but required the presence of erythropoietin for
differentiation to proceed. While induction of Notch signaling rapidly
upregulated Hes1 and Hey1 expression, the expression of Gata1, Fog1, Eklf, and
NF-E2 remained unchanged. Concomitantly with erythroid differentiation, activated
mNotch1 upregulated beta-globin RNA. Notch signaling transactivated a reporter
construct harboring a conserved RBP-J (CBF1) binding site in the hypersensitive
site 2 (HS2) of human beta-globin. Transactivation by activated Notch was
completely abolished when this RBP-J site was mutated to prevent RBP-J binding.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that activation of mNotch1 induces erythroid
differentiation in cooperation with erythropoietin and upregulates beta-globin
expression.

PMID: 17637499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Oct 1;571(2-3):88-96. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Mechanisms of HDAC inhibitor-induced thrombocytopenia.

Matsuoka H(1), Unami A, Fujimura T, Noto T, Takata Y, Yoshizawa K, Mori H,
Aramori I, Mutoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma Inc., 2 1-6 Kashima,
Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8514, Japan. hideaki.matsuoka@us.astellas.com

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDAC inhibitors) are an emerging class of
anticancer agents. To elucidate the mechanism of HDAC inhibitor-induced
thrombocytopenia, we focused on the effects of HDAC inhibitors on megakaryocyte
differentiation and performed Affymetrix GeneChip analysis of human
megakaryocytic HEL cells treated with or without HDAC inhibitors. Here, we report
that GATA-1 and 10 haematopoietic factors (SCL, NF-E2, EKLF, Pleckstrin,
Thrombin-R, LMO2, PU.1, Fli-1, AML1, and TCF11) are transcriptionally repressed
by HDAC inhibitors in a similar pattern (R>0.98), and putative GATA-1-binding
sites are found in almost all promoters of these genes. In addition, luciferase
reporter assays reveal that mutations of GATA-1-binding sites in the GATA-1
promoter abolish its sensitivity to HDAC inhibitor-mediated down-regulation in
HEL cells. Further, this report also asserts that HDAC inhibitor increases
megakaryocyte counts and inhibits GATA-1 gene expression in rat spleen. Together,
these results suggest that HDAC inhibitors inhibit GATA-1 gene expression by
decreasing the transactivation function of GATA-1 itself, and that this may in
turn lead to a delay in megakaryocyte maturation and finally cause
thrombocytopenia. Our findings may help our understanding of the molecular
mechanism of HDAC inhibitor-mediated GATA-1 transcriptional repression and to
reduce the risk of HDAC inhibitor-induced thrombocytopenia.

PMID: 17628529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Feb;214(2):322-33.

Impairment of erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation by a
leukemia-associated and t(9;9)-derived fusion gene product,
SET/TAF-Ibeta-CAN/Nup214.

Saito S(1), Nouno K, Shimizu R, Yamamoto M, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

SET-CAN associated with the t(9;9) in acute undifferentiated leukemia encodes
almost the entire sequence of SET and the C-terminal two-third portion of CAN,
including the FG repeat region. To clarify a role(s) of SET-CAN in
leukemogenesis, we developed transgenic mice expressing SET-CAN under the control
of the Gata1 gene hematopoietic regulatory domain that is active in distinct sets
of hematopoietic cells. SET-CAN transgenic mice showed anemia, thrombocytopenia, 
and splenomegaly. A significant number of transgenic mice started dying after 6
months post-birth, being in good agreement with the fact that red blood cells and
platelets decreased. We found that a significant number of c-kit+ myeloid cells
appeared in peripheral blood in transgenic mice. Characterization of the bone
marrow cells of transgenic mice indicated impairment in hematopoietic
differentiation of erythroid, megakaryocytic, and B cell lineages by SET-CAN.
Transgenic mice, in particular, exhibited a high population of the
c-kit+Sca-1+Lin- fraction in bone marrow cells compared with that of the control 
littermates. Our results demonstrate that SET-CAN blocks the hematopoietic
differentiation program--one of the characteristics of acute myeloid leukemia.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17620317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007 Sep;43(3):243-53. Epub 2007 May 18.

BMPER is a conserved regulator of hematopoietic and vascular development in
zebrafish.

Moser M(1), Yu Q, Bode C, Xiong JW, Patterson C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Freiburg, Internal Medicine III, Hugstetter Strasse 55, 79106
Freiburg, Germany. Martin.Moser@uniklinik-freiburg.de

For the proper development of vertebrate embryos as well as for survival of the
adult organism, it is essential to form a functional vascular system. Molecules
involved in this process are members of highly conserved families of proteins
that exert conserved functions across species. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) 
are extracellular factors that are regulated by extracellular modulators and bind
to BMP receptors, which in turn activate intracellular signaling cascades. BMPs
are necessary not only for induction of endothelial and hematopoietic lineages
but also for further endothelial and hematopoietic cell differentiation.
Previously, we identified BMPER (BMP endothelial cell precursor derived
regulator) and demonstrated its spatiotemporal expression at sites of
vasculogenesis and direct modulation of BMP activity. To directly investigate the
role of BMPER in vascular development, we cloned the BMPER ortholog in zebrafish 
(zbmper). It is expressed at sites of high BMP activity, including vascular
precursor cells located in the aortic arches and the intermediate cell mass
during zebrafish embryonic development. Knockdown of zbmper results in a
dorsalized phenotype, a reduced number of gata1 expressing hematopoietic
precursor cells and of circulating blood cells as well as in a vascular
phenotype. The generation of the caudal vein is compromised and the pattern
guiding of the intersomitic vessels is disturbed, indicating that zbmper is
required for early steps in vascular pattern formation and hematopoiesis in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC2709533
PMID: 17618647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. BMC Genomics. 2007 Jul 5;8:215.

Transcriptome profiling of the small intestinal epithelium in germfree versus
conventional piglets.

Chowdhury SR(1), King DE, Willing BP, Band MR, Beever JE, Lane AB, Loor JJ,
Marini JC, Rund LA, Schook LB, Van Kessel AG, Gaskins HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
USA. shankarc@uiuc.edu <shankarc@uiuc.edu>

BACKGROUND: To gain insight into host-microbe interactions in a piglet model, a
functional genomics approach was used to address the working hypothesis that
transcriptionally regulated genes associated with promoting epithelial barrier
function are activated as a defensive response to the intestinal microbiota.
Cesarean-derived germfree (GF) newborn piglets were colonized with adult swine
feces, and villus and crypt epithelial cell transcriptomes from colonized and GF 
neonatal piglets were compared using laser-capture microdissection and
high-density porcine oligonucleotide microarray technology.
RESULTS: Consistent with our hypothesis, resident microbiota induced the
expression of genes contributing to intestinal epithelial cell turnover, mucus
biosynthesis, and priming of the immune system. Furthermore, differential
expression of genes associated with antigen presentation (pan SLA class I, B2M,
TAP1 and TAPBP) demonstrated that microbiota induced immune responses using a
distinct regulatory mechanism common for these genes. Specifically, gene network 
analysis revealed that microbial colonization activated both type I (IFNAR) and
type II (IFNGR) interferon receptor mediated signaling cascades leading to
enhanced expression of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(STAT1), STAT2 and IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) transcription factors and the
induction of IFN-inducible genes as a reflection of intestinal epithelial
inflammation. In addition, activated RNA expression of NF-kappa-B inhibitor alpha
(NFkappaBIA; a.k.a I-kappa-B-alpha, IKBalpha) and toll interacting protein
(TOLLIP), both inhibitors of inflammation, along with downregulated expression of
the immunoregulatory transcription factor GATA binding protein-1 (GATA1) is
consistent with the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis.
CONCLUSION: This study supports the concept that the intestinal epithelium has
evolved to maintain a physiological state of inflammation with respect to
continuous microbial exposure, which serves to sustain a tight intestinal barrier
while preventing overt inflammatory responses that would compromise barrier
function.

PMCID: PMC1949829
PMID: 17615075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Exp Mol Med. 2007 Jun 30;39(3):278-83.

Capsaicin promotes the development of burst-forming units--erythroid (BFU-E) from
mouse bone marrow cells.

Lee SA(1), Ryu YS, Choi HI, Han IS.

Author information: 
(1)Immunomodulation Research Center, Department of Biological Science, University
of Ulsan, Ulsan 680-749, Korea.

Capsaicin, the pungent component of chilli peppers, is known to induce mediators 
of hematopoiesis. We investigated the effect of capsaicin on hematopoiesis in
mouse progenitor cells. Treatment of mouse bone marrow cells with capsaicin
induced the formation of colony of burst-forming units-erythroid (BFU-E). We also
found that the number of erythropoietin receptor (EpoR)-positive cells was
increased by capsaicin. To clarify the effect of capsaicin on erythroid lineage, 
BFU-E colonies were separated from non-BFU-E colonies by colony-picking after in 
vitro culture of mouse bone marrow cells. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed
that capsaicin stimulated the expression of the erythroid-specific genes encoding
EpoR, glycophorin A (GPA), beta-globin (Hbb-b1), GATA-1, PU.1, nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2 (NF-E2), and Krüppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) in the BFU-E
colonies. Furthermore, capsaicin could effectively stimulate the transfected
GATA-1 promoter in K562 cells. GATA-1 is known as an essential transcription
factor for the development of erythroid cells. Our results show that development 
of the erythroid lineage from bone marrow cells can be induced by treatment with 
capsaicin, and that GATA-1 seems to play a role in this induced erythroid
maturation.

PMID: 17603282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2007 Jul;4(7):433-8.

Severe TMD/AMKL with GATA1 mutation in a stillborn fetus with Down syndrome.

Heald B(1), Hilden JM, Zbuk K, Norton A, Vyas P, Theil KS, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Personalized Genetic Healthcare, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
44195, USA.

BACKGROUND: A 34-year-old woman was referred for evaluation of a recent stillborn
male fetus, gestational age 27 6/7 weeks, found to have congenital myeloid
leukemia at autopsy. Autopsy findings included high weight for gestational age,
hepatomegaly, and extensive intravascular leukemic infiltrates in the placenta,
heart, liver, thymus, lung, kidneys, and brain. Genetic consultation and
examination of photographs of the fetus revealed dysmorphic features.
INVESTIGATIONS: Immunoperoxidase staining of placental tissue, fluorescence in
situ hybridization of paraffin-embedded sections of the placenta using probes for
t(12;21)(p13;q22), t(8;21)(q22;q22) and t/del(11q23), cytogenetic analysis of
fetal tissue (tendon), sequence analysis of GATA1 in placental leukemic cells,
and parental chromosome studies.
DIAGNOSIS: Down syndrome with in utero onset of GATA1 mutation-positive severe
transient myeloproliferative disorder/acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.
MANAGEMENT: Genetic counseling for the recurrence risk of Down syndrome on the
basis of maternal age.

PMID: 17597708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Leuk Res. 2008 Jan;32(1):121-30. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

PU.1 is dispensable to block erythroid differentiation in Friend erythroleukemia 
cells.

Fernández-Nestosa MJ(1), Hernández P, Schvartzman JB, Krimer DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 28040-Madrid, Spain.

Friend murine erythroleukemia cell lines derive from erythroblasts transformed
with the Friend complex where the spleen-focus forming virus integrated in the
vicinity of the Sfpi-1 locus. Erythroleukemia cells do not differentiate and grow
indefinitely in the absence of erythropoietin. Activation of the transcription
factor PU.1, encoded by the Sfpi-1 gene, is thought to be responsible for the
transformed phenotype. These cells can overcome the blockage and reinitiate their
differentiation program when exposed to some chemical inducers such as
hexamethylene bisacetamide. In this study, we established cell cultures that were
capable to proliferate unconstrained in the presence of the inducer. Resistant
cell lines restart erythroid differentiation, though, if forced to exit the cell 
cycle or by overexpressing the transcription factor GATA-1. Unexpectedly,
expression of PU.1 was suppressed in the resistant clones albeit the spleen-focus
forming virus was still integrated in the proximity of the Sfpi-1 locus. Exposure
to 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine activates PU.1 expression suggesting that the PU.1
coding gene is highly methylated in the resistant cells. Altogether these results
suggest that PU.1 is dispensable to block erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 17586044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2718-26. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Functional conservation of erythropoietin signaling in zebrafish.

Paffett-Lugassy N(1), Hsia N, Fraenkel PG, Paw B, Leshinsky I, Barut B, Bahary N,
Caro J, Handin R, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell 
Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Erythropoietin (Epo) and its cognate receptor (EpoR) are required for maintaining
adequate levels of circulating erythrocytes during embryogenesis and adulthood.
Here, we report the functional characterization of the zebrafish epo and epor
genes. The expression of epo and epor was evaluated by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and whole-mount in situ
hybridization, revealing marked parallels between zebrafish and mammalian gene
expression patterns. Examination of the hypochromic mutant, weissherbst, and
adult hypoxia-treated hearts indicate that zebrafish epo expression is induced by
anemia and hypoxia. Overexpression of epo mRNA resulted in severe polycythemia,
characterized by a striking increase in the number of cells expressing scl,
c-myb, gata1, ikaros, epor, and betae1-globin, suggesting that both the erythroid
progenitor and mature erythrocyte compartments respond to epo.
Morpholino-mediated knockdown of the epor caused a slight decrease in primitive
and complete block of definitive erythropoiesis. Abrogation of STAT5 blocked the 
erythropoietic expansion by epo mRNA, consistent with a requirement for STAT5 in 
epo signaling. Together, the characterization of zebrafish epo and epor
demonstrates the conservation of an ancient program that ensures proper red blood
cell numbers during normal homeostasis and under hypoxic conditions.

PMCID: PMC1988930
PMID: 17579187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):357-64.

Abrogation of prostaglandin E2/EP4 signaling impairs the development of rag1+
lymphoid precursors in the thymus of zebrafish embryos.

Villablanca EJ(1), Pistocchi A, Court FA, Cotelli F, Bordignon C, Allende ML,
Traversari C, Russo V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Gene Therapy Unit, Cancer Immunotherapy and Gene Therapy Program,
Scientific Institute H. San Raffaele, Via Olgettina 58, Milan, Italy.

PGE(2) is involved in a wide variety of physiological and pathological processes;
however, deciphering its role in early mammalian development has been difficult
due to the maternal contribution of PGE(2). To overcome this limitation we have
investigated the role of PGE(2) during T cell development in zebrafish. In this
study, we show that zebrafish ep4a, a PGE(2) receptor isoform of EP4, is
expressed at 26 h postfertilization in the dorsal aorta-posterior cardinal vein
joint region, which has a high homology with the mammal aorta-gonad-mesonephros
area and where definitive hemopoiesis arises. Furthermore, it is expressed in the
presumptive thymus rudiment by 48 h postfertilization. Supplementation of PGE(2) 
results in a strong increase in rag1 levels and cell proliferation in the thymus.
In contrast, the inhibition of PGE(2) production, as well as EP4 blockade,
abrogates the expression of rag1 in the thymus and that of the lymphoid precursor
marker ikaros, not only in the dorsal aorta-posterior cardinal vein joint region 
but also in the newly identified caudal hemopoietic tissue without affecting
early hemopoietic (scl, gata2) and erythropoietic (gata1) markers. These results 
identify ep4a as the earliest thymus marker and define a novel role for the
PGE(2)/EP4 pathway in controlling T cell precursor development in zebrafish.

PMID: 17579056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Blood. 2007 Sep 15;110(6):2128-31. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Incidence and clinical implications of GATA1 mutations in newborns with Down
syndrome.

Pine SR(1), Guo Q, Yin C, Jayabose S, Druschel CM, Sandoval C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Maria Fareri
Children's Hospital and Westchester Medical Center, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Somatic mutations in the GATA1 gene are present in almost all cases of Down
syndrome (DS)-associated acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) and transient
leukemia (TL). An in utero origin of the GATA1 mutation suggests it is an early
leukemogenic event. To determine the detectable incidence and clinical relevance 
of GATA1 mutations in DS newborns, we screened Guthrie cards from 590 DS infants 
for mutations in the GATA1 gene. Twenty-two (3.8%) of 585 evaluable infants
harbored a predicted functional GATA1 mutation; 2 were identified exclusively
within intron 1. Hispanic newborns were 2.6 times more likely to have a mutated
GATA1 gene than non-Hispanics (P = .02). Two newborns with a GATA1 mutation
subsequently developed AMKL, and none of the infants without a functional GATA1
mutation were reported to have developed leukemia. In addition to screening for
TL, a GATA1 mutation at birth might serve as a biomarker for an increased risk of
DS-related AMKL.

PMID: 17576817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Am J Hematol. 2007 Oct;82(10):887-92.

GATA-1 transcription factor is up-regulated in bone marrow hematopoietic
progenitor CD34(+) and erythroid CD71(+) cells in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Maratheftis CI(1), Bolaraki PE, Voulgarelis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical School, National University of Athens, 
Greece.

GATA-1 is a transcription factor governing the production of erythroid and
megakaryocytic cells. Unobstructed GATA-1 expression in early progenitor cells
commits them to the myeloid lineage, channeling its differentiation towards
erythrocytes and megakaryocytes. Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) are clonal
disorders of the hematopoietic stem cell frequently presenting dysplasia in
erythroid and/or megakaryocytic lineage. We reasoned that measurement of GATA-1
expression levels in hematopoietic progenitor CD34(+) and the committed erythroid
CD71(+) cells, from various MDS subcategories, could demonstrate GATA-1
involvement in the pathogenesis of the syndrome. In this study, MDS patients
displayed significantly elevated GATA-1 mRNA expression, in bone marrow
mononuclear cells (BMMCs), progenitor CD34(+) and erythroid CD71(+) cells in
contrast to the control population (P < 0.001). Additionally, GATA-1 mRNA
expression in MDS CD71(+) cells was positively correlated with their apoptotic
levels (rho = 0.58, P = 0.03). Furthermore, GATA-1 expression levels were found
to correlate with the disease progression. MDS patients in high/INT-2 IPSS risk
group expressed significantly higher GATA-1 mRNA levels, in both CD34(+) and
CD71(+) cells, as opposed to low/INT-1 patients (P < 0.001). Moreover, the former
displayed increased apoptosis in the CD71(+) cells and significantly reduced
neutrophil and platelet numbers and hemoglobin levels compared with the latter.
We conclude that MDS patients display an increase of GATA-1 mRNA expression in BM
cells, with high/INT-2 patients showing significantly higher levels. The higher
level of GATA-1 mRNA in erythroid cells was positively correlated with their
degree of apoptosis. These findings suggest that the up-regulation of GATA-1 may 
be responsible for the peripheral cytopenias in MDS.

PMID: 17570514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biochem. 2007 Jul;142(1):1-10. Epub 2007 Jun 13.

Regulation of GATA1 gene expression.

Kobayashi M(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences; ERATO Environmental Response Project, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan.
makobayashi@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

GATA1 is one of the most fascinating transcription factors for biologists. It
regulates many haematopoietic genes and interacts with a number of other
transcription factors. Its functions are mostly conserved among vertebrates. Upon
disruption of the GATA1 gene, mice show a drastic bloodless phenotype. GATA1
knockdown mice are predisposed to tumour development, the extent of which varies 
depending on the level of knockdown. When GATA1 is overexpressed, certain cells
face an altered cell fate. These observations suggest the importance of
regulation on the expression level and timing of GATA1. Deciphering such
regulation is the key to understanding the commitment and differentiation of
blood cells. There are so many splendid reviews describing GATA1 as a
transcription factor. We therefore focus our topics on GATA1 gene regulation in
this review.

PMID: 17567656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Blood. 2007 Sep 15;110(6):1824-30. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

The role of jak2a in zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Ma AC(1), Ward AC, Liang R, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) transduces signals from hematopoietic cytokines, and a
gain-of-function mutation (Jak2(617V>F)) is associated with myeloproliferative
diseases, particularly polycythemia vera. In this study, we examined the role of 
jak2a in zebrafish embryos in knock-down and overexpression studies using
morpholinos (MOs) targeting the 5' untranslated region (UTR) (jak2a(UTR)-MO) and 
splice-site junction (jak2a(SS)-MO) of jak2a, a Jak inhibitor AG490 and a
constitutive-active form of jak2a (jak2a(ca)). At 18 and 24 hours after
fertilization (hpf), jak2a is expressed predominantly in the intermediate cell
mass (ICM; site of primitive hematopoiesis) of wild-type and chordin morphant
embryos (characterized by expansion of ICM). Both jak2a MOs and AG490 reduced
gata1(+) (erythroid) cells in Tg(gata1:GFP) embryos, signal transducer and
activation of transcription 5 (stat5) phosphorylation, and gene expression
associated with early progenitors (scl and lmo2) and erythroid (gata1, alphahe1
and betahe1) and myeloid (spi1 [early] and mpo [late]) lineages. The chordin
morphant is associated with increased stat5 phosphorylation, and both jak2a MOs
and treatment with AG490 significantly ameliorated ICM expansion and
hematopoietic gene up-regulation in these embryos. Injection of plasmid encoding 
jak2a(ca) significantly increased erythropoiesis and expression of gata1,
alphahe1 and betahe1, spi1, mpo, and l-plastin. In conclusion, zebrafish jak2a is
involved in primitive hematopoiesis under normal and deregulated conditions.

PMID: 17545503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Platelets. 2007 Jun;18(4):273-83.

Platelet pathology in sex-linked GATA-1 dyserythropoietic macrothrombocytopenia I
ultrastructure.

White JG(1), Nichols WL, Steensma DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology and Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, MN, USA. white003@umn.edu

Various mutations in the X-linked transcription factor, GATA-1, may result in
dyserythropoietic anemia, macrothrombocytopenia and/or erythropoietic porphyria. 
The present study has carried out detailed ultrastructural studies of abnormal
platelet morphology in one, previously described family with a GATA-1 G208S
mutation. The ultrastructural investigations revealed a large proportion of their
circulating platelets were hypogranular macrothrombocytes, resembling cells from 
patients with the Gray Platelet Syndrome. However, most of their platelets
contained some alpha granules and a small number contained as many as are present
in normal platelets. GATA-1 platelets from family members also contained tubular 
inclusions formed from elements of the dense tubular system like those observed
in the Medich Giant Platelets Disorder. The unique pathology of the GATA-1 family
platelets found in this study involved features never observed previously in
normal or abnormal platelets. Many of their cells contained unusual flat, tubular
membrane sheets, often in parallel association and differing from all other
membrane systems in normal platelets and megakaryocytes. In some
macrothrombocytes the unusual membranes appeared to isolate areas of cytoplasm.
The sequestered areas were platelets within platelets. On rare occasion there
were two platelets within one platelet, or, even more rarely, a platelet within a
platelet within a platelet. Another unique feature, probably related to platelets
within platelets, was the frequent attachment of non-activated platelets to each 
other to form macrothrombocytes. GATA-1 platelets within platelets and attached
to platelets, as well as giant platelets, suggest that proplatelet formation may 
be abnormal, or that GATA-1 platelets are unable to pinch off from megakaryocyte 
proplatelets in a normal manner.

PMID: 17538848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2007 Sep-Oct;39(2):156-9. Epub 2007 May 29.

Trisomy of chromosome 21 in leukemogenesis.

Izraeli S(1), Rainis L, Hertzberg L, Smooha G, Birger Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Section of Childhood Malignancies, Department of Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, and the Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Hospital,
Tel-Hashomer, Ramat-Gan 52621, Israel. sizraeli@sheba.health.gov.il

Extra copies of chromosome 21 are often found in sporadic leukemias.
Constitutional trisomy 21 of Down syndrome (DS) is associated with markedly
increased risk for childhood leukemia. Thus the oncogenic role of trisomy 21 in
the more common sporadic childhood leukemias may be revealed through the
investigations of the relatively rare leukemias of DS. Recent studies of the
megakaryoblastic leukemias of Down syndrome have uncovered a developmental
leukemogenic mechanism characterized by a unique pre-natal collaboration between 
overexpressed genes from chromosome 21 and an acquired mutation in the
transcription factor GATA1. The base of the markedly enhanced risk for acute
lymphoblastic leukemia conferred by trisomy 21 is still unclear. Studies of the
leukemias of DS are likely to contribute to the general understanding of the
oncogenic mechanisms of chromosomal aneuploidies, the most common abnormalities
in cancer.

PMID: 17532652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Blood. 2007 Sep 15;110(6):1933-41. Epub 2007 May 15.

Gata1 regulates dendritic-cell development and survival.

Gutiérrez L(1), Nikolic T, van Dijk TB, Hammad H, Vos N, Willart M, Grosveld F,
Philipsen S, Lambrecht BN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Dendritic cells are key initiators and regulators of the immune response.
Dendritic cell commitment and function require orchestrated regulation of
transcription. Gata1 is a transcription factor expressed in several hematopoietic
lineages. However, Gata1 function has not been explored in the monocytic or
dendritic cell compartment. Here, we show that Gata1 is expressed in myeloid and 
plasmacytoid dendritic cells and that Gata1 ablation affects the survival of
dendritic cells. Furthermore, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation of dendritic
cells prompts Gata1 up-regulation, which is accompanied by increased levels of
BclX and Ifng. Our findings show that Gata1 is a transcriptional regulator of
dendritic cell differentiation and suggest that Gata1 is involved in the
dendritic cell and macrophage lineage separation.

PMCID: PMC1975828
PMID: 17505015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 May 10;8:31.

Exploring cellular memory molecules marking competent and active transcriptions.

Xin L(1), Zhou GL, Song W, Wu XS, Wei GH, Hao DL, Lv X, Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)From National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, PR China. xlgene@263.net <xlgene@263.net>

BACKGROUND: Development in higher eukaryotes involves programmed gene expression.
Cell type-specific gene expression is established during this process and is
inherited in succeeding cell cycles. Higher eukaryotes have evolved elegant
mechanisms by which committed gene-expression states are transmitted through
numerous cell divisions. Previous studies have shown that both DNase I-sensitive 
sites and the basal transcription factor TFIID remain on silenced mitotic
chromosomes, suggesting that certain trans-factors might act as bookmarks,
maintaining the information and transmitting it to the next generation.
RESULTS: We used the mouse globin gene clusters as a model system to examine the 
retention of active information on M-phase chromosomes and its contribution to
the persistence of transcriptional competence of these gene clusters in murine
erythroleukemia cells. In cells arrested in mitosis, the erythroid-specific
activator NF-E2p45 remained associated with its binding sites on the globin gene 
loci, while the other major erythroid factor, GATA-1, was removed from
chromosome. Moreover, despite mitotic chromatin condensation, the distant
regulatory regions and promoters of transcriptionally competent globin gene loci 
are marked by a preserved histone code consisting in active histone modifications
such as H3 acetylation, H3-K4 dimethylation and K79 dimethylation. Further
analysis showed that other active genes are also locally marked by the preserved 
active histone code throughout mitotic inactivation of transcription.
CONCLUSION: Our results imply that certain kinds of specific protein factors and 
active histone modifications function as cellular memory markers for both
competent and active genes during mitosis, and serve as a reactivated core for
the resumption of transcription when the cells exit mitosis.

PMCID: PMC1884170
PMID: 17493269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Haematologica. 2007 May;92(5):597-604.

Pericyte coverage of abnormal blood vessels in myelofibrotic bone marrows.

Zetterberg E(1), Vannucchi AM, Migliaccio AR, Vainchenker W, Tulliez M, Dickie R,
Hasselbalch H, Rogers R, Palmblad J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Center for Inflammation and Hematology Research,
Department of Medicine, The Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University
Hospital, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2007 May;92(5):577-9.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Myelofibrotic bone marrow displays abnormal
angiogenesis but the pathogenic mechanisms of this are poorly understood. Since
pericyte abnormalities are described on solid tumor vessels we studied whether
vessel morphology and pericyte coverage in bone marrow samples from patients with
myelofibrosis differed from that in samples from controls.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed the microvascular density (MVD), vessel
morphology and pericyte coverage in bone marrows from 19 myelofibrosis patients
and nine controls. We also studied the same parameters in two mouse models of
myelofibrosis, with genetic alterations affecting megakaryocyte differentiation
(i.e. one model with low GATA-1 expression and the other with over-expression of 
thrombopoietin).
RESULTS: In myelofibrotic marrows, MVD was 3.8-fold greater than in controls
(p<0.001) and vessels displayed 5.9-fold larger mean perimeters (p<0.001). MVD
was 1.8-fold greater in JAK2 V617F-positive than in negative patients (p=0.026). 
Moreover, 92+/-11 % of vessels in patients with myelofibrosis were
pericyte-coated but only 51+/-20 % of vessels in controls (p<0.001). In the two
mouse models of myelofibrosis caused by targeting megakaryocytopoesis, wide,
pericyte-coated and morphologically aberrant vessels were detected. MVD was
significantly greater in bone marrow and spleen samples from animals with
myelofibrosis than in wild-type mice.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that angiogenesis is similarly
abnormal in human and murine myelofibrosis with intense pericyte coating,
presumably related to abnormal megakaryocytopoiesis.

PMID: 17488682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nihon Rinsho. 2007 Jan 28;65 Suppl 1:136-40.

[The molecular mechanism of leukemogenesis in Down syndrome-related acute
megakaryocytic leukemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito E(1), Toki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine.

PMID: 17476742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1106:152-74. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Role of thrombopoietin in mast cell differentiation.

Migliaccio AR(1), Rana RA, Vannucchi AM, Manzoli FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy. migliar@iss.it

Mast cells are important elements of the body response to foreign antigens, being
those represented either by small molecules (allergic response) or harbored by
foreign microorganisms (response to parasite infection). These cells derive from 
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells present in the marrow. However, in contrast
with most of the other hematopoietic lineages, mast cells do not differentiate in
the marrow but in highly vascularized extramedullary sites, such as the skin or
the gut. Mast cell differentiation in the marrow is activated as part of the body
response to parasites. We will review here the mast cell differentiation pathway 
and what is known of its major intrinsic and extrinsic control mechanisms. It
will also be described that thrombopoietin, the ligand for the Mpl receptor, in
addition to its pivotal rule in the control of thrombocytopoiesis and of
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell proliferation, exerts a regulatory function in
mast cell differentiation. Some of the possible implications of this newly
described biological activity of thrombopoietin will be discussed.

PMID: 17468237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1106:30-40. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Inference, validation, and dynamic modeling of transcription networks in
multipotent hematopoietic cells.

Soneji S(1), Huang S, Loose M, Donaldson IJ, Patient R, Göttgens B, Enver T, May 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Molecular Haematology Unit,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Identifying the transcription factor interactions that are responsible for
cell-specific gene expression programs is key to understanding the regulation of 
cell behaviors, such as self-renewal, proliferation, differentiation, and death. 
The rapidly increasing availability of microarray-derived global gene expression 
data sets, coupled with genome sequence information from multiple species, has
driven the development of computational methods to reverse engineer and
dynamically model genetic regulatory networks. An understanding of the
architecture and behavior of transcriptional networks should lend insight into
how the huge number of potential gene expression programs is constrained and
facilitates efforts to direct or redirect cell fate.

PMID: 17442775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;27(12):4551-65. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Dissecting molecular steps in chromatin domain activation during hematopoietic
differentiation.

Kim SI(1), Bultman SJ, Jing H, Blobel GA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, 383
Medical Sciences Center, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

GATA factors orchestrate hematopoiesis via multistep transcriptional mechanisms, 
but the interrelationships and importance of individual steps are poorly
understood. Using complementation analysis with GATA-1-null cells and mice
containing a hypomorphic allele of the chromatin remodeler BRG1, we dissected the
pathway from GATA-1 binding to cofactor recruitment, chromatin loop formation,
and transcriptional activation. Analysis of GATA-1-mediated activation of the
beta-globin locus, in which GATA-1 assembles dispersed complexes at the promoters
and the distal locus control region (LCR), revealed molecular intermediates,
including GATA-1-independent and GATA-1-containing LCR subcomplexes, both
defective in promoting loop formation. An additional intermediate consisted of an
apparently normal LCR complex and a promoter complex with reduced levels of total
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and Pol II phosphorylated at serine 5 of the
carboxy-terminal domain. Reduced BRG1 activity solely compromised Pol II and
serine 5-phosphorylated Pol II occupancy at the promoter, phenocopying the
LCR-deleted mouse. These studies defined a hierarchical order of GATA-1-triggered
events at a complex locus and establish a novel mechanism of long-range gene
regulation.

PMCID: PMC1900038
PMID: 17438135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Genes Dev. 2007 Apr 15;21(8):942-55.

Single-stranded DNA-binding proteins regulate the abundance of LIM domain and LIM
domain-binding proteins.

Xu Z(1), Meng X, Cai Y, Liang H, Nagarajan L, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA.

The LIM domain-binding protein Ldb1 is an essential cofactor of LIM-homeodomain
(LIM-HD) and LIM-only (LMO) proteins in development. The stoichiometry of Ldb1,
LIM-HD, and LMO proteins is tightly controlled in the cell and is likely a
critical determinant of their biological actions. Single-stranded DNA-binding
proteins (SSBPs) were recently shown to interact with Ldb1 and are also important
in developmental programs. We establish here that two mammalian SSBPs, SSBP2 and 
SSBP3, contribute to an erythroid DNA-binding complex that contains the
transcription factors Tal1 and GATA-1, the LIM domain protein Lmo2, and Ldb1 and 
binds a bipartite E-box-GATA DNA sequence motif. In addition, SSBP2 was found to 
augment transcription of the Protein 4.2 (P4.2) gene, a direct target of the
E-box-GATA-binding complex, in an Ldb1-dependent manner and to increase
endogenous Ldb1 and Lmo2 protein levels, E-box-GATA DNA-binding activity, and
P4.2 and beta-globin expression in erythroid progenitors. Finally, SSBP2 was
demonstrated to inhibit Ldb1 and Lmo2 interaction with the E3 ubiquitin ligase
RLIM, prevent RLIM-mediated Ldb1 ubiquitination, and protect Ldb1 and Lmo2 from
proteasomal degradation. These results define a novel biochemical function for
SSBPs in regulating the abundance of LIM domain and LIM domain-binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC1847712
PMID: 17437998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 1;282(22):16544-52. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Beta-globin active chromatin Hub formation in differentiating erythroid cells and
in p45 NF-E2 knock-out mice.

Kooren J(1), Palstra RJ, Klous P, Splinter E, von Lindern M, Grosveld F, de Laat 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, P. O. Box 2040, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Expression of the beta-globin genes proceeds from basal to exceptionally high
levels during erythroid differentiation in vivo. High expression is dependent on 
the locus control region (LCR) and coincides with more frequent LCR-gene
contacts. These contacts are established in the context of an active chromatin
hub (ACH), a spatial chromatin configuration in which the LCR, together with
other regulatory sequences, loops toward the active beta-globin-like genes. Here,
we used recently established I/11 cells as a model system that faithfully
recapitulates the in vivo erythroid differentiation program to study the
molecular events that accompany and underlie ACH formation. Upon I/11 cell
induction, histone modifications changed, the ACH was formed, and the
beta-globin-like genes were transcribed at rates similar to those observed in
vivo. The establishment of frequent LCR-gene contacts coincided with a more
efficient loading of polymerase onto the beta-globin promoter. Binding of the
transcription factors GATA-1 and EKLF to the locus, although previously shown to 
be required, was not sufficient for ACH formation. Moreover, we used knock-out
mice to show that the erythroid transcription factor p45 NF-E2, which has been
implicated in beta-globin gene regulation, is dispensable for beta-globin ACH
formation.

PMID: 17428799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;27(12):4261-72. Epub 2007 Apr 9.

GATA-1 and Gfi-1B interplay to regulate Bcl-xL transcription.

Kuo YY(1), Chang ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Taiwan University,
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The induction of Bcl-x(L) is critical for the survival of late proerythroblasts. 
The erythroid-specific transcriptional network that regulates Bcl-x(L) expression
in erythropoiesis remains unclear. The activation of the central erythropoietic
transcriptional factor, GATA-1, leads to the early, transient induction of a
transcription repressor, Gfi-1B, followed by the late induction of Bcl-x(L)
during erythroid maturation in G1ER cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that a constant level of GATA-1 binds to the Bcl-x promoter
throughout the entire induction period, while Gfi-1B is transiently associated
with the promoter in the early phase. The sustained expression of Gfi-1B
abolished GATA-1-induced Bcl-x(L) expression. Here, we present evidence that
GATA-1 binds to the noncanonical GATT motif of the Bcl-x promoter for
trans-activation. Gfi-1B expressed at increased levels is recruited to the Bcl-x 
promoter through its association with GATA-1, suppressing Bcl-x(L) transcription.
Therefore, the down-regulation of Gfi-1B in the late phase of erythroid
maturation is necessary for Bcl-x(L) induction. Furthermore, we show that the
inhibition of Bcr-Abl kinase by treatment with imatinib caused the up-regulation 
of Gfi-1B in K562 cells, where Gfi-1B also cooperated with GATA-1 to repress
Bcl-x(L) transcription. Gfi-1B knockdown by RNA interference diminished
imatinib-induced apoptosis, while the overexpression of Gfi-1B sensitized K562
cells to arsenic-induced death. These findings illuminate the role of Gfi-1B in
GATA-1-mediated transcription in the survival aspect of erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC1900040
PMID: 17420275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Dev Biol. 2007 May 15;305(2):695-713. Epub 2007 Mar 3.

Bifurcation dynamics in lineage-commitment in bipotent progenitor cells.

Huang S(1), Guo YP, May G, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Vascular Biology Program, Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Children's Hospital, 1
Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115, USA. sui.huang@tch.harvard.edu

Lineage specification of multipotent progenitor cells is governed by a balance of
lineage-affiliated transcription factors, such as GATA1 and PU.1, which regulate 
the choice between erythroid and myelomonocytic fates. But how ratios of
lineage-determining transcription factors stabilize progenitor cells and resolve 
their indeterminacy to commit them to discrete, mutually exclusive fates remains 
unexplained. We used a simple model and experimental measurements to analyze the 
dynamics of a binary fate decision governed by a gene-circuit containing
auto-stimulation and cross-inhibition, as embodied by the GATA1-PU.1 paradigm.
This circuit generates stable attractors corresponding to erythroid and
myelomonocytic fates, as well as an uncommitted metastable state characterized by
coexpression of both regulators, explaining the phenomenon of "multilineage
priming". GATA1 and PU.1 mRNA and transcriptome dynamics of differentiating
progenitor cells confirm that commitment occurs in two stages, as suggested by
the model: first, the progenitor state is destabilized in an almost symmetrical
bifurcation event, resulting in a poised state at the boundary between the two
lineage-specific attractors; second, the cell is driven to the respective, now
accessible attractors. This minimal model captures fundamental features of binary
cell fate decisions, uniting the concepts of stochastic (selective) and
deterministic (instructive) regulation, and hence, may apply to a wider range of 
binary fate decision points.

PMID: 17412320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Br J Haematol. 2007 May;137(4):375-6. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

GATA1 mutational analysis in chronic myeloid leukaemia.

Halsey C, Fisher C, Strathdee G, Gibson B, Holyoake T, Vyas P, Graham G.

PMID: 17408401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Leuk Res. 2007 Nov;31(11):1537-43. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Segregation of megakaryocytic or erythroid cells from a megakaryocytic leukemia
cell line (JAS-R) by adhesion during culture.

Yamada H(1), Sekikawa T, Iwase S, Arakawa Y, Suzuki H, Agawa M, Akiyama M, Takeda
N, Horiguchi-Yamada J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of DNA Medicine, The Jikei
University, School of Medicine, 3-25-8 Nishi-Shinbashi, Tokyo, Japan.
hyamad@jikei.ac.jp

Adhesion is one of the important biologic characteristics of leukemic cells. We
previously reported a new megakaryocytic-erythroid cell line, JAS-R. In this
study, JAS-R cells were segregated into two types by the differences of
attachment to culture dishes. One type (designated as JAS-RAD cells) adhered to
the substratum of the culture dishes, while the other (JAS-REN cells) grew as a
single-cell suspension. Adhesion of JAS-RAD was inhibited by treatment with RGDS 
oligopeptide. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that JAS-RAD cells had high
expression of CD41a and CD61 versus low CD235a expression, and JAS-REN showed low
expression of CD41a, and CD61, and high CD235a. The two phenotypes were
reciprocally exchangeable by selecting adherent or suspended cells from each type
of culture. Microarray analysis and RT-PCR revealed that JAS-RAD cells expressed 
four major alpha-granule genes and JAS-REN cells expressed beta-globin.
Interestingly, erythropoietin was only secreted by JAS-RAD cells. With regard to 
transcription factors, it was shown that GFI1, FLI1 and RUNX1 were strongly
expressed in JAS-RAD cells while GATA1, FOG1 and NFE2 were equally expressed by
both types. These findings indicate that adhesion via integrins is related to the
phenotypic shift of JAS-R cells between megakaryocytic and erythroid lineages.

PMID: 17383723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 25;282(21):15862-71. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

GATA-1 self-association controls erythroid development in vivo.

Shimizu R(1), Trainor CD, Nishikawa K, Kobayashi M, Ohneda K, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences and Center for Tsukuba
Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tennoudai 1-1-1, Tsukuba
305-8577, Japan.

GATA-1 is the key transcription factor for the development of the erythroid,
megakaryocytic, eosinophilic, and mast cell lineages. GATA-1 possesses the
ability to self-associate, and this characteristic has been suggested to be
important for GATA-1 function. To elucidate the roles self-associated GATA-1
plays during hematopoietic cell development in vivo, in this study we prepared
GATA-1 mutants in which three lysine residues potentially contributing to the
self-association (Lys-245, Lys-246, and Lys-312) are substituted in combination
with alanines. Of the mutants, 3KA harboring alanine substitutions in all three
lysines showed reduced self-association activity without considerable
interference in the modification of GATA-1 by acetylation. We generated
transgenic mouse lines that express these GATA-1 mutants utilizing the Gata1
hematopoietic regulatory domain, and crossed the mice to Gata1 knockdown
(GATA-1.05) mutant mice. Although NKA (K245A and K246A) and CKA (K312A) mutants
almost fully rescued the GATA-1.05 mice from anemia and embryonic lethality, the 
3KA mutant only partially rescued the GATA-1.05 mutant mice. Even with the higher
than endogenous level expression, GATA-1.05/Y::3KA embryos were prone to die at
various stages in mid-to-late gestation. Live birth and an anemic phenotype were 
restored in some embryos depending on the expression level of the 3KA transgene. 
The expression of the transferrin receptor and heme biosynthesis enzymes was
impaired in the yolk sac and liver of the 3KA-rescued embryos. Immature erythroid
cells with insufficient expression of the transferrin receptor accumulated in the
livers of 3KA-rescued embryos. These results provide the first convincing line of
evidence that the self-association of GATA-1 is important for proper mammalian
erythroid development in vivo.

PMID: 17374603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Histochem Cytochem. 2007 Jul;55(7):745-52. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Expression of bone morphogenetic proteins and their receptors in the bone marrow 
megakaryocytes of GATA-1(low) mice: a possible role in osteosclerosis.

Garimella R(1), Kacena MA, Tague SE, Wang J, Horowitz MC, Anderson HC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

The mechanism of osteosclerosis associated with myelofibrosis in megakaryocyte
(MK)-related myeloproliferative disorders is largely unknown. However, growth
factors released from the bone marrow cells, including from MKs, have been
implicated in myelofibrosis, osteosclerosis, and angiogenesis. GATA-1 is a
transcription factor required for normal MK development. GATA-1 deficiency in
mice (GATA-1(low)) leads to increased megakaryocytic proliferation, followed by
osteosclerosis and myelofibrosis. In this study we investigated the expression of
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and BMP receptors and their possible role in
the development of osteosclerosis in the MKs of 12-month-old GATA-1(low) mice by 
immunohistochemistry, cytomorphometry, and quantitative real-time PCR. Marrow MKs
from both wild-type and GATA-1(low) mice showed moderate to intense staining for 
BMP-2, -4, and -6 and BMPR-IA and BMPR-II, whereas splenic MKs showed no BMP
immunostaining. Presence of BMP protein in the bone marrow of GATA-1(low) mice
was more than that seen in controls, owing to an increased number of MKs and
osteoblasts. The osteosclerosis seen in GATA-1(low) mice appeared not to be due
to a reduced number of functional osteoclasts because the number of
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-positive osteoclasts was greater in
GATA-1(low) mice than in controls. Our findings demonstrate the presence of
significant amounts of BMP-2, -4, and -6 along with their receptors in bone
marrow MKs of WT and GATA-1(low) mice. The increased levels of BMPs appear to be 
a result of increased numbers of MKs in GATA-1(low) mice and may, in part,
account for the stimulation of osteoblastic activity and resulting
osteosclerosis.

PMID: 17371937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Leukemia. 2007 May;21(5):1015-25. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

A novel transcript of the LMO2 gene, LMO2-c, is regulated by GATA-1 and PU.1 and 
encodes an antagonist of LMO2.

Wang Q(1), Zhang M, Wang X, Yuan W, Chen D, Royer-Pokora B, Zhu T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Medical College, Nankai University, Tianjin,
PR China.

Ectopic expression of LIM-only protein 2 (LMO2) in T-cells, as a result of
chromosomal translocations or retroviral insertion, plays an important role in
the onset of T-cell leukemias. Two transcripts of LMO2 gene (LMO2-a and LMO2-b)
have been reported to encode a same 158-amino-acid protein. We have previously
reported a novel transcript of human LMO2 gene (LMO2-c) encoding a 151-amino-acid
protein, and defined its promoter region. In the present study, we investigated
the regulation of the LMO2-c expression and the functions of LMO2-c. We found
that LMO2-c expression is regulated by the cooperation of two essential
hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1 and PU.1 in various hematopoietic cell
lines, suggesting an important functional role for LMO2-c in the hematopoietic
system. More importantly, we demonstrated that LMO2-c acts as an antagonist of
LMO2-a/b binding to its partners, therefore blocking the transactivation of
LMO2-a/b on its target genes. These findings provide novel evidence to the
functions of LMO2 gene in the hematopoietic system and leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2676384
PMID: 17361224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14665-74. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Context-dependent GATA factor function: combinatorial requirements for
transcriptional control in hematopoietic and endothelial cells.

Wozniak RJ(1), Boyer ME, Grass JA, Lee Y, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

GATA factors are fundamental components of developmentally important
transcriptional networks. By contrast to common mechanisms in which transacting
factors function directly at promoters, the hematopoietic GATA factors GATA-1 and
GATA-2 often assemble dispersed complexes over broad chromosomal regions. For
example, GATA-1 and GATA-2 occupy five conserved regions over approximately 100
kb of the Gata2 locus in the transcriptionally repressed and active states,
respectively, in erythroid cells. Since it is unknown whether the individual
complexes exert qualitatively distinct or identical functions to regulate Gata2
transcription in vivo, we compared the activity of the -3.9 and +9.5 kb sites of 
the Gata2 locus in transgenic mice. The +9.5 site functioned as an autonomous
enhancer in the endothelium and fetal liver of embryonic day 11 embryos, whereas 
the -3.9 site lacked such activity. Mechanistic studies demonstrated critical
requirements for a GATA motif and a neighboring E-box within the +9.5 site for
enhancer activity in endothelial and hematopoietic cells. Surprisingly, whereas
this GATA-E-box composite motif was sufficient for enhancer activity in an
erythroid precursor cell line, its enhancer function in primary human endothelial
cells required additional regulatory modules. These results identify the first
molecular determinant of Gata2 transcription in vascular endothelium, composed of
a core enhancer module active in both endothelial and hematopoietic cells and
regulatory modules preferentially required in endothelial cells.

PMID: 17347142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Blood. 2007 Jun 15;109(12):5230-3. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Friend of GATA-1-independent transcriptional repression: a novel mode of GATA-1
function.

Johnson KD(1), Boyer ME, Kang JA, Wickrema A, Cantor AB, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine,
Madison, WI, USA.

The GATA-1-interacting protein Friend Of GATA-1 (FOG-1) is essential for the
proper transcriptional activation and repression of numerous GATA-1 target genes.
Although FOG-1-independent activation by GATA-1 has been described, all known
examples of GATA-1-mediated repression are FOG-1 dependent. In the GATA-1-null
G1E cell line, estrogen receptor ligand binding domain (ER) chimeras of either
wild-type GATA-1 or a FOG-1-binding defective mutant of GATA-1 repressed several 
genes similarly upon activation with beta-estradiol. Repression also occurred in 
a FOG-1-null cell line expressing ER-GATA-1 and during ex vivo erythropoiesis. At
the Lyl1 and Rgs18 loci, we found highly restricted occupancy by GATA-1 and
GATA-2, indicating that these genes are direct targets of GATA factor regulation.
The identification of genes repressed by GATA-1 independent of FOG-1 defines a
novel mode of GATA-1-mediated transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC1890840
PMID: 17339418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 1;67(5):2114-23.

GATA-1 is essential in EGF-mediated induction of nucleotide excision repair
activity and ERCC1 expression through ERK2 in human hepatoma cells.

Andrieux LO(1), Fautrel A, Bessard A, Guillouzo A, Baffet G, Langouët S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U620, Université de 
Rennes I, Hôpital Pontchaillou, IFR 140, 2 avenue du Pr Léon Bernard, 35043
Rennes Cedex, France.

The nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway and its leading gene excision-repair
cross-complementary 1 (ERCC1) have been shown to be up-regulated in
hepatocellular carcinomas even in the absence of treatment with
chemotherapeutics. The aim of this study was to determine the mechanism involved 
in NER regulation during the liver cell growth observed in hepatocellular
carcinoma. Both NER activity and ERCC1 expression were increased after exposure
to the epidermal growth factor (EGF) in cultured normal and tumoral human
hepatocytes. These increases correlated with the activation of the kinase
signaling pathway mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) kinase (MEK)/ERK that is known to be a key regulator in the G(1) phase of
the hepatocyte cell cycle. Moreover, EGF-mediated activation of ERCC1 was
specifically inhibited by either the addition of U0126, a MEK/ERK inhibitor or
small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of ERK2. Basal expression of ERCC1 was
decreased in the presence of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor and
small hairpin RNA (shRNA) against the PI3K pathway kinase
FKBP12-rapamycin-associated protein or mammalian target of rapamycin. Transient
transfection of human hepatocytes with constructs containing different sizes of
the 5'-flanking region of the ERCC1 gene upstream of the luciferase reporter gene
showed an increase in luciferase activity in EGF-treated cells, which correlated 
with the presence of the nuclear transcription factor GATA-1 recognition
sequence. The recruitment of GATA-1 was confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. In conclusion, these results represent the first
demonstration of an up-regulation of NER and ERCC1 in EGF-stimulated
proliferating hepatocytes. The transcription factor GATA-1 plays an essential
role in the induction of ERCC1 through the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway, whereas the PI3K signaling pathway contributes to ERCC1 basal
expression.

PMID: 17332341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Blood. 2007 Jun 15;109(12):5481-90. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Dynamic regulation of Gata factor levels is more important than their identity.

Ferreira R(1), Wai A, Shimizu R, Gillemans N, Rottier R, von Lindern M, Ohneda K,
Grosveld F, Yamamoto M, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Three Gata transcription factors (Gata1, -2, and -3) are essential for
hematopoiesis. These factors are thought to play distinct roles because they do
not functionally replace each other. For instance, Gata2 messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression is highly elevated in Gata1-null erythroid cells, yet this does not
rescue the defect. Here, we test whether Gata2 and -3 transgenes rescue the
erythroid defect of Gata1-null mice, if expressed in the appropriate
spatiotemporal pattern. Gata1, -2, and -3 transgenes driven by beta-globin
regulatory elements, directing expression to late stages of differentiation, fail
to rescue erythropoiesis in Gata1-null mutants. In contrast, when controlled by
Gata1 regulatory elements, directing expression to the early stages of
differentiation, Gata1, -2, and -3 do rescue the Gata1-null phenotype. The
dramatic increase of endogenous Gata2 mRNA in Gata1-null progenitors is not
reflected in Gata2 protein levels, invoking translational regulation. Our data
show that the dynamic spatiotemporal regulation of Gata factor levels is more
important than their identity and provide a paradigm for developmental control
mechanisms that are hard-wired in cis-regulatory elements.

PMID: 17327407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Blood. 2007 Jun 15;109(12):5199-207. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Cyclin D-Cdk4 is regulated by GATA-1 and required for megakaryocyte growth and
polyploidization.

Muntean AG(1), Pang L, Poncz M, Dowdy SF, Blobel GA, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of
Chicago, IL, USA.

Endomitosis is a unique form of cell cycle used by megakaryocytes, in which the
latter stages of mitosis are bypassed so that the cell can increase its DNA
content and size. Although several transcription factors, including GATA-1 and
RUNX-1, have been implicated in this process, the link between transcription
factors and polyploidization remains undefined. Here we show that
GATA-1-deficient megakaryocytes, which display reduced size and polyploidization,
express nearly 10-fold less cyclin D1 and 10-fold increased levels of p16
compared with their wild-type counterparts. We further demonstrate that cyclin D1
is a direct GATA-1 target in megakaryocytes, but not erythroid cells. Restoration
of cyclin D1 expression, when accompanied by ectopic overexpression of its
partner Cdk4, resulted in a dramatic increase in megakaryocyte size and DNA
content. However, terminal differentiation was not rescued. Of note,
polyploidization was only modestly reduced in cyclin D1-deficient mice, likely
due to compensation by elevated cyclin D3 expression. Finally, consistent with an
additional defect conferred by increased levels of p16, inhibition of cyclin
D-Cdk4 complexes with a TAT-p16 fusion peptide significantly blocked
polyploidization of wild-type megakaryocytes. Together, these data show that
GATA-1 controls growth and polyploidization by regulating cyclin D-Cdk4 kinase
activity.

PMCID: PMC1890844
PMID: 17317855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Exp Hematol. 2007 Mar;35(3):368-73.

The role of phospholipase C gamma 1 in primitive hematopoiesis during zebrafish
development.

Ma AC(1), Liang R, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVES: Phospholipase C (PLC) gamma 1 has been shown to mediate signal
transduction of tyrosine kinases and affect function of hematopoietic cells.
However, its role in hematopoiesis during embryonic development is currently
unclear. In this study, we examined this issue using morpholino (MO) gene
knockdown in zebrafish embryos
METHODS: MO targeting at the exon-1-intron-1 junction of zebrafish PLC-gamma1 was
injected into embryos at the one- to four-cell stage (referred herein
zPLC-gamma1(MO) embryos). Primitive hematopoiesis was examined quantitatively by 
flow cytometry in Tg(gata1:GFP) embryos and by real-time quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction at 18 hours-post-fertilization (hpf), before the onset of
circulation. The embryos were also treated with receptor inhibitors of vascular
endothelial growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, and platelet-derived growth 
factor at 25, 1, and 30 micromol/L, respectively, from one cell until 48 hpf.
RESULTS: Erythropoiesis was reduced in zPLC-gamma1(MO) embryos, as shown by the
reduction in gata1(+) cells (wild-type: 4.32% +/- 0.10% vs zPLC-gamma1(MO): 2.38%
+/- 0.11%, p = 0.021) and gata1 and alpha-embryonic hemoglobin expression [0.47
+/- 0.06-fold (p = 0.013) and 0.46 +/- 0.04-fold (p = 0.013)]. Expression of scl,
lmo-2 (early hematopoietic progenitors), pu.1, and l-plastin (myelomonocytic
lineages) as well as fli1 (vascular progenitors) were unaffected. Fli1(+) cells
in Tg(fli1:GFP) embryos were also unaffected by zPLC-gamma1(MO). When embryos
were incubated with receptor inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGFRTKI), fibroblast growth factor (SU5402), or platelet-derived growth factor 
(AG1296), only VEGFRTKI reduced erythropoiesis [VEGFRTKI: 2.10% +/- 0.07% (p =
0.021) vs SU5402: 4.08% +/- 0.12% (p = 0.248) vs AG1296: 4.12% +/- 0.14% (p =
0.149)].
CONCLUSION: PLC-gamma1 is involved in the regulation of primitive hematopoiesis
in zebrafish embryos, which is distinct from its later effect on vascular
formation.

PMID: 17309817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Pediatr. 2007 Mar;150(3):e34.

Down syndrome and GATA1-related transient leukemia.

Sandoval C, Pine SR.

Comment on
    J Pediatr. 2006 May;148(5):687-9.

PMID: 17307526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Clin Chem. 2007 Apr;53(4):587-93. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Preanalytical mRNA stabilization of whole bone marrow samples.

Langebrake C(1), Günther K, Lauber J, Reinhardt D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany. claudia@langebrake.de

BACKGROUND: Gene expression profiling is a useful tool for cancer diagnosis and
basic research. A major limitation is that, even during short-term storage of
native specimens of peripheral blood or bone marrow (BM) and/or RNA isolation,
significant changes of gene expression pattern can occur because of gene
induction, repression, and RNA degradation.
METHODS: We investigated the effectiveness of a newly developed RNA stabilization
and preparation system for BM specimens (PAXgene Bone Marrow RNA System) over
time. We analyzed 256 RNA samples, processed from 64 BM specimens.
RESULTS: Although the overall RNA yield (normalized to 1 x 10(7) leukocytes) was 
not different, the RNA preparation using unstabilized reference samples had an
approximately 3 times higher failure rate. With the PAXgene system, we observed
significantly higher RNA integrity compared with the reference RNA preparation
system (P <0.01). In the stabilized samples, we found very high pairwise
correlation in gene expression (DeltaDeltaC(T) 0.16-0.53) for the analyzed genes 
(GATA1, RUNX1, NCAM1, and SPI1) after 48-h storage compared with immediate
preparation of RNA (2 h after BM collection). However, we found major differences
in half of the analyzed genes using the reference RNA isolation procedure
(DeltaDeltaC(T) 1.07 and 1.32).
CONCLUSIONS: The PAXgene system is able to stabilize RNA from clinical BM samples
and is suitable to isolate high-quality and -quantity RNA.

PMID: 17289802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Exp Hematol. 2007 Feb;35(2):230-9.

Dominant-interfering C/EBPalpha stimulates primitive erythropoiesis in zebrafish.

Liu TX(1), Rhodes J, Deng M, Hsu K, Radomska HS, Kanki JP, Tenen DG, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the role of CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-alpha
(C/EBPalpha) during zebrafish embryonic blood development.
METHODS: Whole-mount mRNA in situ hybridization was performed to determine the
spatio-temporal expression pattern of zebrafish cebpa in developing hematopoietic
progenitors. A deletion mutation of cebpa (zD420), which mimics the human
dominant-negative mutations of C/EBPalpha, was transfected into CV1 cell line to 
evaluate its transcriptional activity in vitro and injected into zebrafish
embryos at the one- to two-cell stage to examine its effects on primitive
hematopoiesis during early zebrafish development.
RESULTS: Zebrafish cebpa is expressed in the anterior and posterior lateral plate
mesoderm at 12 hours postfertilization, along with scl, pu.1, and gata1 in
developing hematopoietic progenitors. In vitro, the deletion mutation of cebpa
(zD420) prevents expression of the full-length protein, allowing the expression
of truncated isoforms from internal translational initiation sites. As in the
human, the truncated zebrafish C/EBPalpha proteins did not activate the
expression of known target granulocytic genes, and in fact suppressed
transactivation that was induced in vitro by the full-length protein. Forced
expression of the zD420 mRNA in zebrafish embryos led to an expansion of
primitive erythropoiesis, without a discernible effect on granulopoiesis.
CONCLUSION: Expression of the truncated isoforms of cebpa alters the
developmental pattern of hematopoietic progenitor cells during embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2967023
PMID: 17258072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Leukemia. 2007 Mar;21(3):574-6. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

JAK3 mutations occur in acute megakaryoblastic leukemia both in Down syndrome
children and non-Down syndrome adults.

Kiyoi H, Yamaji S, Kojima S, Naoe T.

PMID: 17252020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Evol Dev. 2007 Jan-Feb;9(1):39-50.

Ectoderm- and endomesoderm-specific GATA transcription factors in the marine
annelid Platynereis dumerilli.

Gillis WJ(1), Bowerman B, Schneider SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors appears to retain conserved roles in
early germ layer patterning in most, if not all, animals; however, the number and
structure of GATA factor genes varies substantially when different animal genomes
are compared. Thus, the origin and relationships of invertebrate and vertebrate
GATA factors, and their involvement in animal germ layer evolution, are unclear. 
We identified two highly conserved GATA factor genes in a marine annelid, the
polychaete Platynereis dumerilii. A phylogenetic analysis indicates that the two 
Platynereis GATA factors are orthologous to the GATA1/2/3 and GATA4/5/6
subfamilies present in vertebrates. We also identified conserved motifs within
each GATA class, and assigned the divergent Caenorhabditiselegans and Drosophila 
melanogaster GATA factor genes to the vertebrate classes. Similar to their
vertebrate homologs, PdGATA123 mRNA expression was restricted to ectoderm,
whereas PdGATA456 was detected only in endomesoderm. Finally, we identified in
genome databases one GATA factor gene in each of two distantly related cnidarians
that include motifs from both bilaterian GATA factor classes. Our results show
that distinct orthologs of the two vertebrate GATA factor classes exist in a
protostome invertebrate, suggesting that bilaterian GATA factors originated from 
GATA1/2/3 and 4/5/6 ancestral orthologs. Moreover, our results indicate that the 
GATA gene duplication and the functional divergence that led to these two
ancestral GATA factor genes occurred after the split of the bilaterian stem group
from the cnidarians.

PMID: 17227365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2007 Feb;19(1):9-14.

Molecular insights into Down syndrome-associated leukemia.

Vyas P(1), Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Four years ago it was discovered that nearly all cases of
transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryocytic leukemia in
children with Down syndrome acquire mutations in the hematopoietic transcription 
factor gene GATA1. Studies within the past year, described within this review,
have provided tremendous insights into the role of GATA1 mutations in these
malignancies.
RECENT FINDINGS: In the past year, our understanding of the molecular and
cellular consequences of GATA1 mutations has been greatly enhanced. Most
importantly, we have learned that these mutations, which result in the exclusive 
production of the short GATA1 isoform named GATA1s, have a distinct effect on
fetal liver progenitors. In addition, multiple studies have shown that GATA1s can
substitute for GATA1 in many aspects of megakaryocytic maturation. Finally, an
important clinical study has revealed that GATA1 mutations alone are insufficient
for leukemia.
SUMMARY: Leukemia in children with Down syndrome requires at least three
cooperating events--trisomy 21, a GATA1 mutation, and a third, as yet undefined, 
genetic alteration. Recent studies have provided tremendous insights into the
GATA1 side of the story. Future experiments with human patient samples and mouse 
models will likely increase our awareness of the role of trisomy 21 in transient 
myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryocytic leukemia.

PMID: 17224656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Dev Dyn. 2007 Mar;236(3):633-43.

fgf1 is required for normal differentiation of erythrocytes in zebrafish
primitive hematopoiesis.

Songhet P(1), Adzic D, Reibe S, Rohr KB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cologne, Institute for Developmental Biology, Köln, Germany.

Hematopoiesis in vertebrate development involves an embryonic, primitive wave and
a later, definitive wave in which embryonic blood cells are replaced with adult
blood cells. We here show that zebrafish fgf1 is involved in vivo in primitive
hematopoiesis. Fibroblast growth factor-1 (FGF1) morpholino knockdown leads to
abnormal accumulation of blood cells in the posterior intermediate cell mass at
32 hr postfertilization. Expression of the erythroid markers gata1 and ika,
normally diminishing in differentiating erythrocytes at this stage, is maintained
at abnormally high levels in primitive blood cells. The onset of erythrocyte
differentiation as assessed by o-dianisidine staining is severely delayed. Most
fgf1 morphants later recover to wild-type appearance, and primitive erythrocytes 
eventually differentiate. Zebrafish fgf1 is syntenic to human FGF1, which maps to
a critically deleted region in human del(5q) syndrome posing an increased risk of
leukemia to patients. As its knockdown in zebrafish changes expression of gata1, 
a gene involved in hematopoietic stem cell decisions, FGF1 should be considered
to play a role in the pathogenesis of del(5q) syndrome.

PMID: 17219402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Blood. 2007 Apr 15;109(8):3297-9. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

X-linked gray platelet syndrome due to a GATA1 Arg216Gln mutation.

Tubman VN(1), Levine JE, Campagna DR, Monahan-Earley R, Dvorak AM, Neufeld EJ,
Fleming MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, 320 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2770-1; author reply 2771.

We identified a family with gray platelet syndrome (GPS) segregating as a
sex-linked trait. Affected males had a mild bleeding disorder, thrombocytopenia, 
and large agranular platelets characteristic of GPS, while obligate carrier
females were asymptomatic but had dimorphic platelets on peripheral smear.
Associated findings included mild erythrocyte abnormalities in affected males.
Linkage analysis revealed a 63 cM region on the X chromosome between markers
G10578 and DXS6797, which segregated with the platelet phenotype and included the
GATA1 gene. Sequencing of GATA1 revealed a G-to-A mutation at position 759
corresponding to amino acid change Arg216Gln. This mutation was previously
described as a cause of X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia (XLTT) but not
of gray platelet syndrome. Our findings suggest that XLTT is within a spectrum of
disorders constituting the gray platelet syndrome, and we propose that GATA1 is
an upstream regulator of the genes required for platelet alpha-granule
biogenesis.

PMID: 17209061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 15;303(2):663-74. Epub 2006 Dec 15.

Runx1 selectively regulates cell fate specification and axonal projections of
dorsal root ganglion neurons.

Yoshikawa M(1), Senzaki K, Yokomizo T, Takahashi S, Ozaki S, Shiga T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 
Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Runx1-deficient mice die around embryonic day 11.5 due to impaired hematopoiesis.
This early death prevents the analysis of the role of Runx1 in the development of
sensory ganglia. To overcome the early embryonic lethality, we adopted a new
approach to utilize transgenic Runx1-deficient mice in which hematopoietic cells 
are selectively rescued by Runx1 expression under the control of GATA-1 promoter.
In Runx1-deficient mice, the total number of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons
was increased, probably because of an increased proliferative activity of DRG
progenitor cells and decreased apoptosis. In the mutant DRG, TrkA-positive
neurons and peptidergic neurons were increased, while c-ret-positive neurons were
decreased. Axonal projections were also altered, in that both central and
peripheral projections of CGRP-positive axons were increased. In the dorsal horn 
of the spinal cord, projections of CGRP-positive axons expanded to the deeper
layer, IIi, from the normal terminal area, I/IIo. Our results suggest that Runx1 
is involved in the cell fate specification of cutaneous neurons, as well as their
projections to central and peripheral targets.

PMID: 17208218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 23;353(4):978-84. Epub 2006 Dec 28.

The suppression of zfpm-1 accelerates the erythropoietic differentiation of human
CD34+ cells.

Yang HY(1), Kim SH, Kim SH, Kim DJ, Kim SU, Yu DY, Yeom YI, Lee DS, Kim YJ, Park 
BJ, Lee TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Chonnam National University, Gwangju,
Republic of Korea.

Erythropoiesis is a complex multistage process for the differentiation of mature 
erythrocytes from hematopoietic stem cells. The function of several transcription
factors has been reported in hematopoietic stem cell differentiation. However,
the molecular basis governing its functional behavior is unclear. In this study, 
we characterized the role of Zfpm-1 during the erythropoietic differentiation of 
human hematopoietic stem cells. To verify the function of Zfpm-1 during
erythropoietic differentiation, we established human CD34+ cell culture system by
using human umbilical cord blood. At day 7 of the human CD34+ cell
differentiation process to proerythocytes, Zfpm-1 was initially up-regulated and 
then dramatically down-regulated at day 9. The Zfpm-1 siRNA transfected HSCs
contained 20% more GPA+ cells than the mock transfected cells, and showed
repressed expression of the hematopoietic transcription factors, c-myc and c-myb,
but increased expression of GATA-1. In contrast, the Zfpm-1 gain-of-function is
the opposite of loss-of-function results above.

PMID: 17207461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Mol Biol. 2007 Feb 23;366(3):737-44. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Expression of GATA-1 in a non-hematopoietic cell line induces beta-globin locus
control region chromatin structure remodeling and an erythroid pattern of gene
expression.

Layon ME(1), Ackley CJ, West RJ, Lowrey CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, 
NH 03756, USA.

GATA-1 is a hematopoietic transcription factor expressed in erythroid,
megakaryocytic, mast cell and eosinophil lineages. It is required for normal
erythroid differentiation, the expression of erythroid-specific genes and for the
establishment of an active chromatin structure throughout the beta-globin gene
locus. GATA-1 is also necessary for the formation and function of the locus
control region DNase I hypersensitive site (HS) core elements. To determine
whether GATA-1 was sufficient to direct formation of the locus control region
(LCR) and an erythroid pattern of gene expression, we expressed GATA-1 in the
non-hematopoietic HeLa cell line that does not express other hematopoietic
transcription factors but does express GATA-2, GATA-3, and GATA-6. We found that 
production of the GATA-1 protein resulted in the formation of LCR DNase I HSs 1-4
in their normal locations, and that histones became hyperacetylated within these 
regulatory elements. Transcription of several erythroid-specific genes was
activated in HeLa cells expressing GATA-1, including those coding for
alpha-globin, beta-globin, the erythropoietin receptor, the erythroid
krüpple-like factor and p45 NF-E2. Despite increased expression of these genes at
the mRNA level, their protein products were not detected. These results imply
that GATA-1 is sufficient to direct chromatin structure reorganization within the
beta-globin LCR and an erythroid pattern of gene expression in the absence of
other hematopoietic transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1839823
PMID: 17196618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):360-8.

Essential role of GATA transcriptional factors in the activation of mast cells.

Masuda A(1), Hashimoto K, Yokoi T, Doi T, Kodama T, Kume H, Ohno K, Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurogenetics and Bioinformatics, Center for Neurological Diseases
and Cancer, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
amasuda@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Mast cells are pivotal effector cells in IgE-mediated allergic reactions. GATA
transcriptional factors such as GATA-1 and GATA-2 are expressed in mast cells,
and recent studies have revealed that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 are required for
mast cell development. However, the role of GATA transcriptional factors in
differentiated mast cells has remained largely unknown. In this study, we
repressed the activity of GATA-1 and GATA-2 by using three different approaches
(inducible overexpression of a dominant-negative form of GATA, pharmacological
inactivation, or small interfering RNA technology), and analyzed the molecular
mechanisms of GATA transcriptional factors in the activation of mast cells.
Surprisingly, the repression of GATA activity in differentiated mast cells led to
the impairment of cell survival, IgE-induced degranulation, and cytokine
production. Signal transduction and histone modification in the chromatin related
to protein kinase Cbeta were defective in these cells. These results identify
that GATA has a critical role in the activation of mast cell.

PMID: 17182574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2006 Nov;47(11):1415-22.

[The role of GATA1 mutation in acute megakaryocytic leukemia].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito E.

PMID: 17176883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cell Biol Int. 2007 Mar;31(3):252-6. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine inhibits erythropoietin-induced differentiation
of erythroid progenitors derived from mouse fetal liver.

Nagata M(1), Arimitsu N, Ito T, Sekimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

To determine the role of reactive oxygen species in erythroid differentiation, we
investigated the effects of an antioxidant, N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), on the
differentiation of erythroid progenitors derived from mouse fetal liver. In
response to erythropoietin (Epo), erythroid progenitors undergo differentiation
in vitro and express erythroid-specific genes such as betamajor-globin, Alas2,
MafK, p45, Eklf, and Gata1. Expression of these genes was decreased in the
presence of NAC, whereas the expression of c-myb, which is downregulated during
erythroid differentiation, remained constant. Moreover, NAC treatment inhibited
an increase in the number of cells expressing high levels of erythroid-specific
antigen TER119. Treatment with another antioxidant, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate, 
also caused the attenuation of TER119 expression. These results suggest that
reactive oxygen species are involved in Epo-mediated erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 17174578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nature. 2007 Jan 4;445(7123):102-5. Epub 2006 Dec 10.

Hsp70 regulates erythropoiesis by preventing caspase-3-mediated cleavage of
GATA-1.

Ribeil JA(1), Zermati Y, Vandekerckhove J, Cathelin S, Kersual J, Dussiot M,
Coulon S, Moura IC, Zeuner A, Kirkegaard-Sørensen T, Varet B, Solary E, Garrido
C, Hermine O.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8147, Faculté de Médecine et Université René Descartes Paris V,
Institut Fédérative Necker, 75270 Paris, France.

Caspase-3 is activated during both terminal differentiation and
erythropoietin-starvation-induced apoptosis of human erythroid precursors. The
transcription factor GATA-1, which performs an essential function in erythroid
differentiation by positively regulating promoters of erythroid and
anti-apoptotic genes, is cleaved by caspases in erythroid precursors undergoing
cell death upon erythropoietin starvation or engagement of the death receptor
Fas. In contrast, by an unknown mechanism, GATA-1 remains uncleaved when these
cells undergo terminal differentiation upon stimulation with Epo. Here we show
that during differentiation, but not during apoptosis, the chaperone protein
Hsp70 protects GATA-1 from caspase-mediated proteolysis. At the onset of caspase 
activation, Hsp70 co-localizes and interacts with GATA-1 in the nucleus of
erythroid precursors undergoing terminal differentiation. In contrast,
erythropoietin starvation induces the nuclear export of Hsp70 and the cleavage of
GATA-1. In an in vitro assay, Hsp70 protects GATA-1 from caspase-3-mediated
proteolysis through its peptide-binding domain. The use of RNA-mediated
interference to decrease the Hsp70 content of erythroid precursors cultured in
the presence of erythropoietin leads to GATA-1 cleavage, a decrease in
haemoglobin content, downregulation of the expression of the anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl-X(L), and cell death by apoptosis. These effects are abrogated by the
transduction of a caspase-resistant GATA-1 mutant. Thus, in erythroid precursors 
undergoing terminal differentiation, Hsp70 prevents active caspase-3 from
cleaving GATA-1 and inducing apoptosis.

PMID: 17167422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. EMBO J. 2007 Jan 10;26(1):184-96. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

Characterization of GATA-1(+) hemangioblastic cells in the mouse embryo.

Yokomizo T(1), Takahashi S, Mochizuki N, Kuroha T, Ema M, Wakamatsu A, Shimizu R,
Ohneda O, Osato M, Okada H, Komori T, Ogawa M, Nishikawa S, Ito Y, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for TARA, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Hemangioblasts are thought to be one of the sources of hematopoietic progenitors,
yet little is known about their localization and fate in the mouse embryo. We
show here that a subset of cells co-expressing the hematopoietic marker GATA-1
and the endothelial marker VE-cadherin localize on the yolk sac blood islands at 
embryonic day 7.5. Clonal analysis demonstrated that GATA-1(+) cells isolated
from E7.0-7.5 embryos include a common precursor for hematopoietic and
endothelial cells. Moreover, this precursor possesses primitive and definitive
hematopoietic bipotential. By using a transgenic complementation rescue approach,
GATA-1(+) cell-derived progenitors were selectively restored in Runx1-deficient
mice. In the rescued mice, definitive erythropoiesis was recovered but the
rescued progenitors did not display multilineage hematopoiesis or intra-aortic
hematopoietic clusters. These results provide evidence of the presence of
GATA-1(+) hemangioblastic cells in the extra-embryonic region and also their
functional contribution to hematopoiesis in the embryo.

PMCID: PMC1782368
PMID: 17159898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Exp Hematol. 2006 Dec;34(12):1611-5.

Hematopoietic progenitor cell deficiency in fetuses and children affected by
Down's syndrome.

Holmes DK(1), Bates N, Murray M, Ladusans EJ, Morabito A, Bolton-Maggs PH,
Johnston TA, Walkenshaw S, Wynn RF, Bellantuono I.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Group, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester,
UK.

OBJECTIVES: There is an increased risk of myeloid malignancy in individuals with 
Down's syndrome (DS), which is associated with a mutation in exon 2 of the
transcription factor GATA-1. It is recognized that there is accelerated telomere 
shortening in blood cells of children with DS similar to that in conditions such 
as Fanconi anemia and dyskeratosis congenita. The latter conditions are
associated with stem cell deficiency and clonal change, including acute myeloid
leukemia. In this study we address the questions 1) whether the accelerated
telomere shortening is associated with progenitor/stem cell deficiency in
individuals with DS, predisposing to clonal change and 2) whether the occurrence 
of reduced numbers of stem/progenitor cells precede the incidence of mutations in
exon 2 of GATA-1.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Peripheral blood from fetuses (23-35 weeks gestation)
and/or bone marrow from children affected by DS and age-matched hematologically
healthy controls were analyzed for telomere length, content of stem/progenitor
cells, and mutations in exon 2 of GATA-1.
RESULTS: We found that hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell deficiency and telomere
shortening occurs in individuals with DS in fetal life. Moreover, the presence of
a low number of progenitor cells was not associated with mutations in exon 2 of
GATA-1.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that stem cell deficiency may be a primary predisposing
event to DS leukemia development.

PMID: 17157155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Blood. 2007 Mar 15;109(6):2618-21. Epub 2006 Dec 5.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria due to a mutation in GATA1: the first
trans-acting mutation causative for a human porphyria.

Phillips JD(1), Steensma DP, Pulsipher MA, Spangrude GJ, Kushner JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City,
UT 84132, USA. john.phillips@hsc.utah.edu

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP), an autosomal recessive disorder, is
due to mutations of uroporphyrinogen III synthase (UROS). Deficiency of UROS
results in excess uroporphyrin I, which causes photosensitization. We evaluated a
3-year-old boy with CEP. A hypochromic, microcytic anemia was present from birth,
and platelet counts averaged 70 x 10(9)/L (70,000/microL). Erythrocyte UROS
activity was 21% of controls. Red cell morphology and globin chain labeling
studies were compatible with beta-thalassemia. Hb electrophoresis revealed 36.3% 
A, 2.4% A(2), 59.5% F, and 1.8% of an unidentified peak. No UROS or alpha- and
beta-globin mutations were found in the child or the parents. The molecular basis
of the phenotype proved to be a mutation of GATA1, an X-linked transcription
factor common to globin genes and heme biosynthetic enzymes in erythrocytes. A
mutation at codon 216 in the child and on one allele of his mother changed
arginine to tryptophan (R216W). This is the first report of a human porphyria due
to a mutation in a trans-acting factor and the first association of CEP with
thalassemia and thrombocytopenia. The Hb F level of 59.5% suggests a role for
GATA-1 in globin switching. A bone marrow allograft corrected both the porphyria 
and the thalassemia.

PMCID: PMC1852202
PMID: 17148589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 5;103(49):18504-9. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

The mediator complex functions as a coactivator for GATA-1 in erythropoiesis via 
subunit Med1/TRAP220.

Stumpf M(1), Waskow C, Krötschel M, van Essen D, Rodriguez P, Zhang X, Guyot B,
Roeder RG, Borggrefe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Max Planck Institute of
Immunobiology, Stübeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 23;104(4):1442.

The Mediator complex forms the bridge between transcriptional activators and RNA 
polymerase II. Mediator subunit Med1/TRAP220 is a key component of Mediator
originally found to associate with nuclear hormone receptors. Med1 deficiency
causes lethality at embryonic day 11.5 because of defects in heart and placenta
development. Here we show that Med1-deficient 10.5 days postcoitum embryos are
anemic but have normal numbers of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Med1-deficient 
progenitor cells have a defect in forming erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-E)
and colony-forming units (CFU-E), but not in forming myeloid colonies. At the
molecular level, we demonstrate that Med1 interacts physically with the erythroid
master regulator GATA-1. In transcription assays, Med1 deficiency leads to a
defect in GATA-1-mediated transactivation. In chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments, we find Mediator components at GATA-1-occupied enhancer sites. Thus,
we conclude that Mediator subunit Med1 acts as a pivotal coactivator for GATA-1
in erythroid development.

PMCID: PMC1693692
PMID: 17132730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Front Biosci. 2007 Jan 1;12:2050-62.

Megakaryopoiesis: transcriptional insights into megakaryocyte maturation.

Kostyak JC(1), Naik UP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA.

Platelets are small anucleate cells that travel near the vessel wall during
laminar flow. In response to vascular injury, platelets undergo alterations in
morphology which allow them to aggregate and cover the injured site. Platelets
are produced by megakaryocytes in a process that involves the formation of
platelet precursors called proplatelets and subsequent release of these
proplatelets into the circulation. By forming a demarcation membrane system
within the cytosol, megakaryocytes contain a membrane reservoir which allows for 
the production of thousands of platelets per mature megakaryocyte. Interestingly,
the above process known as megakaryopoiesis is not yet fully understood. However,
several groups have contributed evidence to unveil the role of thrombopoietin
(TPO), the principal regulator of megakaryopoiesis in vivo. TPO is necessary for 
megakaryocyte maturation in that TPO deficient mice display greatly reduced
megakaryocyte production as well as reduced numbers of mature megakaryocytes.
Several transcription factors have also been implicated in megakaryopoiesis
including, GATA-1, friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1), nuclear factor-erythroid 2 (NF-E2), 
and Fli-1. In fact, interactions among some of the transcription factors have
been reported to produce synergistic effects. GATA-1 and Fli-1 interactions
result in heightened GPIX and GPIb (2 components of von Willebrand Factor (vWF)
receptor) expression, while GATA-1, RUNX1 and core-binding factor beta
interactions result in improved alphaIIb promoter activity. Mutations in the vWF 
complex and alphaIIb beta3 have been linked to disorders such as Bernard-Soulier 
syndrome and Glazmann thrombasthenia respectively. Therefore, a more
comprehensive understanding of the transcriptional control of megakaryopoiesis
may lead to more effective treatments of platelet-related disorders.

PMID: 17127443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Gene. 2007 Jan 15;386(1-2):183-90. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Functional characterization of the promoter region of the chicken elongation
factor-2 gene.

Lim EJ(1), Kim CW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Nutrition Laboratory, Department of Animal and Food
Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.
eunjinlim@uky.edu

Elongation factor 2 (EF-2) plays a key role in the essential process of protein
synthesis by translocating tRNAs from the ribosomal A- and P-sites to the P- and 
E-sites. EF-2 regulates the outcome of protein synthesis in mammalian cells. This
report demonstrates that chicken EF-2 protein levels are dependent on
transcription in 8-bromo-cAMP, insulin and phorbol ester-treated cells. In order 
to delineate functional domains that control chicken EF-2 gene transcription, the
5'-flanking region of the chicken EF-2 promoter was analyzed. Deletion constructs
from -550 and -86 had the same basal level promoter activity as the whole EF-2
promoter. The sequence between nucleotides -700 and -550 was determined to be a
regulatory region for the chicken EF-2 basal promoter activity. The region
between -700 and -550 has a negative regulatory region and two regulatory
proteins (I, II). 8-bromo-cAMP increased chicken EF-2 promoter activity
(-700/+102) in Rat 1 HIR fibroblast cells more than insulin and phorbol ester
treatment. Binding of protein I and II were decreased by 8-bromo-cAMP but
restored by a protein kinase A inhibitor (KT5720). GATA consensus sequence
oligonucleotide and fragment -86/-50 prevented protein II binding of fragment
-700/-550. This result suggested that protein II is a GATA-like protein. These
observations provide a novel regulatory mechanism for the EF-2 promoter.

PMID: 17118580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):8086-94.

The Duffy antigen modifies systemic and local tissue chemokine responses
following lipopolysaccharide stimulation.

Lee JS(1), Wurfel MM, Matute-Bello G, Frevert CW, Rosengart MR, Ranganathan M,
Wong VW, Holden T, Sutlief S, Richmond A, Peiper S, Martin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 3459 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
leejs3@upmc.edu

The Duffy blood group Ag (dfy) binds selective CXC and CC chemokines at high
affinity and is expressed on erythrocytes and endothelial cells. However, it does
not transmit a signal via G proteins, as occurs with other seven-transmembrane
receptors. We hypothesized that dfy functions as a chemokine reservoir and
regulates inflammation by altering soluble chemokine concentrations in the blood 
and tissue compartments. We determined whether Duffy Ag "loss-of-function"
phenotypes (human and murine) are associated with alterations in plasma chemokine
concentrations during the innate inflammatory response to LPS. Plasma CXCL8 and
CCL2 concentrations from humans homozygous for the GATA-1 box polymorphism, a dfy
polymorphism that abrogates erythrocyte chemokine binding, were higher than in
heterozygotes following LPS stimulation of their whole blood in vitro. Similarly,
dfy(-/-) mice showed higher plasma MIP-2 concentrations than dfy(+/+) mice
following LPS stimulation of whole blood in vitro. We then determined the
relative contributions of erythrocyte and endothelial Duffy Ag in modifying
chemokine concentrations and neutrophil recruitment in the lungs following
intratracheal LPS administration in dfy(-/-) and dfy(+/+) mice reconstituted with
dfy(-/-) or dfy(+/+) marrow. Mice lacking endothelial dfy expression had higher
MIP-2 and keratinocyte chemoattractant concentrations in the airspaces. Mice
lacking erythrocyte dfy had higher MIP-2 and keratinocyte chemoattractant
concentrations in the lung tissue vascular space, but lower plasma chemokine
concentrations associated with attenuated neutrophil recruitment into the
airspaces. These data indicate that dfy alters soluble chemokine concentrations
in blood and local tissue compartments and enhances systemic bioavailability of
chemokines produced during local tissue inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2665269
PMID: 17114483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4913-23. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Novel binding partners of Ldb1 are required for haematopoietic development.

Meier N(1), Krpic S, Rodriguez P, Strouboulis J, Monti M, Krijgsveld J, Gering M,
Patient R, Hostert A, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Ldb1, a ubiquitously expressed LIM domain binding protein, is essential in a
number of tissues during development. It interacts with Gata1, Tal1, E2A and Lmo2
to form a transcription factor complex regulating late erythroid genes. We
identify a number of novel Ldb1 interacting proteins in erythroleukaemic cells,
in particular the repressor protein Eto-2 (and its family member Mtgr1), the
cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk9, and the bridging factor Lmo4. MO-mediated
knockdowns in zebrafish show these factors to be essential for definitive
haematopoiesis. In accordance with the zebrafish results these factors are
coexpressed in prehaematopoietic cells of the early mouse embryo, although we
originally identified the complex in late erythroid cells. Based on the change in
subcellullar localisation of Eto-2 we postulate that it plays a central role in
the transition from the migration and expansion phase of the prehaematopoietic
cells to the establishment of definitive haematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 17108004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007 Jan 15;73(2):175-84. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Accumulation of gamma-globin mRNA and induction of irreversible erythroid
differentiation after treatment of CML cell line K562 with new doxorubicin
derivatives.

Szulawska A(1), Arkusinska J, Czyz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of Cancer, Medical University of Lodz, 6/8
Mazowiecka Street, 92-215 Lodz, Poland.

Human chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cell line K562 can be chemically induced
to differentiate and express embryonic and fetal globin genes. In this study, the
effects of doxorubicin (DOX), an inducer of K562 cell erythroid differentiation, 
with those of epidoxorubicin (EDOX) as well as newly synthesized derivatives of
both drugs (DOXM, DOXH, and EDOXM) on cell growth and differentiation were
compared. Our results revealed that DOX, EDOX and their derivatives caused
irreversible differentiation of K562 cells into more mature hemoglobin-containing
cells. This phenomenon was linked to time-dependent inhibition of cell
proliferation. Considering the impact of the structure of newly synthesized
anthracyclines on their cellular activity, our data clearly indicated that among 
tested anthracyclines DOXM, a morpholine derivative of DOX exerted the highest
antiproliferative and differentiating activity. An increase of gamma-globin mRNA 
level caused both by high transcription rate and by mRNA stabilization, as well
as an enhancement of expression but not activity of erythroid transcription
factor GATA-1 were observed. Therefore, a high level of hemoglobin-containing
cells in the presence of DOXM resulted from transcriptional and
post-transcriptional events on gamma-globin gene regulation. The same morpholine 
modification introduced to EDOX did not cause, however, similar effects on
cellular level. Characterization of new powerful inducers of erythroid
differentiation may contribute to the development of novel compounds for
pharmacological approach by differentiation therapy to leukemia or to beta-globin
disorder, beta-thalassemia.

PMID: 17097070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8(6):R64.

GATA3 protein as a MUC1 transcriptional regulator in breast cancer cells.

Abba MC(1), Nunez MI, Colussi AG, Croce MV, Segal-Eiras A, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park--Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.
mabba777@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies have demonstrated that members of the GATA-binding
protein (GATA) family (GATA4 and GATA5) might have pivotal roles in the
transcriptional upregulation of mucin genes (MUC2, MUC3 and MUC4) in
gastrointestinal epithelium. The zinc-finger GATA3 transcription factor has been 
reported to be involved in the growth control and differentiation of breast
epithelial cells. In SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression) studies we
observed an intriguing significant correlation between GATA3 and MUC1 mRNA
expression in breast carcinomas. We therefore designed the present study to
elucidate whether MUC1 expression is regulated by GATA3 in breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Promoter sequence analysis of the MUC1 gene identified six GATA cis
consensus elements in the 5' flanking region (GATA1, GATA3 and four GATA-like
sequences). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays were employed to study the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site.
GATA3 and MUC1 expression was analyzed in vitro with a GATA3 knockdown assay.
Furthermore, expression of GATA3 and MUC1 genes was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR 
and immunohistochemistry on breast cancer-specific tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: We confirmed the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site on the MUC1
promoter region in the MCF7 cell line. We determined that GATA3 knockdown assays 
led to a decrease in MUC1 protein expression in MCF7 and T47D cells. In addition,
we detected a statistically significant correlation in expression between GATA3
and MUC1 genes at the mRNA and protein levels both in normal breast epithelium
and in breast carcinomas (p = 0.01). GATA3 expression was also highly associated 
with estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status (p = 0.0001) and tumor
grade (p = 0.004) in breast carcinomas.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence indicating that GATA3 is probably a
mediator for the transcriptional upregulation of MUC1 expression in some breast
cancers.

PMCID: PMC1797033
PMID: 17078870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Early Hum Dev. 2006 Dec;82(12):767-73. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Down myeloid disorders: a paradigm for childhood preleukaemia and leukaemia and
insights into normal megakaryopoiesis.

Vyas P(1), Roberts I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital and University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. paresh.vyas@imm.ox.ac.uk

Newborns and children with Down Syndrome are predisposed to a range of blood
disorders, which include acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and acute megakaryocytic
leukaemia (AMKL). Over the last four years there has been considerable progress
in our understanding of DS AMKL. Like other childhood leukaemias DS AMKL is
initiated in utero and can present in the neonatal period as a clinically overt
preleukaemic condition, transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD). In addition 
to trisomy 21, fetal haemopoietic progenitors acquire N-terminal truncating
mutations in the key megakaryocyte-erythroid transcription factor GATA1. These
are the minimum required events for TMD to develop. In approximately 30% of TMD
patients, additional as yet unidentified (epi)genetic mutations are required for 
progression to AMKL. Thus, DS TMD and AMKL provide a unique model of childhood
leukaemia where the preleukaemic and leukaemic phases are ascertainable and
separable allowing distinct steps in leukaemogenesis to be studied individually. 
These findings also have implications for the clinical management of DS TMD and
AMKL specifically and also of childhood leukaemia more generally.

PMID: 17064858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 1;177(9):5801-10.

Critical YxKxHxxxRP motif in the C-terminal region of GATA3 for its DNA binding
and function.

Shinnakasu R(1), Yamashita M, Shinoda K, Endo Y, Hosokawa H, Hasegawa A, Ikemizu 
S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

A zinc finger transcription factor, GATA3, plays an essential role in the
development of T cells and the functional differentiation into type 2 Th cells.
Two transactivation domains and two zinc finger regions are known to be important
for the GATA3 function, whereas the role for other regions remains unclear. In
this study we demonstrated that a conserved YxKxHxxxRP motif (aa 345-354)
adjacent to the C-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA3 plays a critical in its
DNA binding and functions, including transcriptional activity, the ability to
induce chromatin remodeling of the Th2 cytokine gene loci, and Th2 cell
differentiation. A single point mutation of the key amino acid (Y, K, H, R, and
P) in the motif abrogated GATA3 functions. A computer simulation analysis based
on the solution structure of the chicken GATA1/DNA complex supported the
importance of this motif in GATA3 DNA binding. Thus, we identified a novel
conserved YxKxHxxxRP motif adjacent to the C-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA3
that is indispensable for GATA3 DNA binding and functions.

PMID: 17056504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2006 Nov-Dec;37(3):164-72. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

The effects of lead and cadmium on GATA-1 regulated erythroid gene expression.

Ermentrout RM(1), Layon ME, Ackley CJ, Venkatesan P, Lowrey CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology and Toxicology of Dartmouth Medical
School, Hanover, NH, USA.

Lead (Pb) and cadmium (Cd) are heavy metal toxins that cause many
pathophysiologic effects, including anemia. Previous in vitro studies have shown 
that these metals are able to replace coordinated Zinc (Zn) atoms in the Zn
fingers of transcription factors and that this can alter the structure and
DNA-binding characteristics of these proteins. This has lead to the hypothesis
that one mechanism underlying the toxic effects of Pb and Cd is their ability to 
alter Zn finger transcription factor function resulting in aberrant target gene
expression. A recent report that Pb is able to replace Zn in the Zn fingers of
the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 prompted us to address this
hypothesis in the setting of MEL cell differentiation. If Pb or Cd is able to
inhibit GATA-1 function, this should be detectable through alterations in
chemically induced erythroid differentiation and GATA-1-dependent gene
expression. Despite a strong rationale for this hypothesis, we have found no
significant change in MEL differentiation, the expression of several GATA-1
target genes, or of in vitro and in vivo GATA-1 binding to DNA at concentrations 
well above those associated with toxic effects in humans. These results argue
against the hypothesis that Pb or Cd significantly alters GATA-1 function in
vivo.

PMID: 17055757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2006 Aug 15;142C(3):149-57.

Clinical manifestations of hematologic and oncologic disorders in patients with
Down syndrome.

Dixon N(1), Kishnani PS, Zimmerman S.

Author information: 
(1)Box 2916 DUMC, 222 Bell Building, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710, USA. Natalia.Dixon@duke.edu

Hematologic abnormalities are common in individuals with Down syndrome (DS).
Increased erythrocyte mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is frequently found among DS 
infants and remains elevated throughout life in two-thirds of patients, making
interpretation of red cell indices for diagnosis of nutritional anemias or bone
marrow failure disorders more challenging. Transient myeloproliferative disorder 
(TMD) associated with pancytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, and circulating immature 
WBCs, is found almost exclusively in DS infants with an incidence of
approximately 10%. In most cases, TMD regresses spontaneously within the first 3 
months of life, but in some children, it can be life threatening or even fatal.
Despite the high rate of spontaneous regression, TMD can be a preleukemic
disorder in 20-30% of children with DS. The types of malignancy, response to
therapy, and clinical outcome in children with DS are also unique. There is an
increased risk of leukemia with an equal incidence of lymphoid and myeloid
leukemia. Acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL) subtype is the most common form of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in this setting, and is uncommon in children without
DS. Somatic mutations of the gene encoding the hematopoetic growth factor GATA1
have been shown to be specific for TMD and AMKL in children with DS.
Myelodysplastic syndrome can precede AML. Children with DS and leukemia are more 
sensitive to some chemotherapeutic agents such as methotrexate than other
children which requires careful monitoring for toxicity. Although the risk for
leukemia is higher in individuals with DS, these patients have a lower risk of
developing solid tumors, with the exception of germ cell tumors, and perhaps
retinoblastoma and lymphoma.

PMID: 17048354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1451-9. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Expression analysis of primary mouse megakaryocyte differentiation and its
application in identifying stage-specific molecular markers and a novel
transcriptional target of NF-E2.

Chen Z(1), Hu M, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Megakaryocyte (MK) differentiation is well described in morphologic terms but its
molecular counterparts and the basis for platelet release are incompletely
understood. We profiled mRNA expression in populations of primary mouse MKs
representing successive differentiation stages. Genes associated with DNA
replication are highly expressed in young MKs, in parallel with endomitosis.
Intermediate stages are characterized by disproportionate expression of genes
associated with the cytoskeleton, cell migration, and G-protein signaling,
whereas terminally mature MKs accumulate hemostatic factors, including many
membrane proteins. We used these expression profiles to extract a reliable panel 
of molecular markers for MKs of early, intermediate, or advanced differentiation 
and establish the value of this marker panel using mouse models of defective
thrombopoiesis resulting from absence of GATA1, NF-E2, or tubulin beta1.
Computational analysis of the promoters of late-expressed MK genes identified new
candidate targets for NF-E2, a critical transcriptional regulator of platelet
release. One such gene encodes the kinase adaptor protein LIMS1/PINCH1, which is 
highly expressed in MKs and platelets and significantly reduced in
NF-E2-deficient cells. Transactivation studies and chromatin immunoprecipitation 
implicate Lims1 as a direct target of NF-E2 regulation. Attribution of
stage-specific genes, in combination with various applications, thus constitutes 
a powerful way to study MK differentiation and platelet biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1794061
PMID: 17047147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 24;103(43):15939-44. Epub 2006 Oct 16.

Differential sensitivities of transcription factor target genes underlie cell
type-specific gene expression profiles.

Johnson KD(1), Kim SI, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine, 383 Medical Sciences Center, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Changes in transcription factor levels and activities dictate developmental fate.
Such a change might affect the full ensemble of target genes for a factor or only
uniquely sensitive targets. We investigated the relationship among activity of
the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1, chromatin occupancy, and target
gene sensitivity. Graded activation of GATA-1 in GATA-1-null cells revealed
high-, intermediate-, and low-sensitivity targets. GATA-1 activity requirements
for occupancy and transcription often correlated. A GATA-1 amino-terminal
deletion mutant severely deregulated the low-sensitivity gene Tac-2. Thus, cells 
expressing different levels of a cell type-specific activator can have
qualitatively distinct target gene expression patterns, and factor mutations
preferentially deregulate low-sensitivity genes. Unlike other target genes,
GATA-1-mediated Tac-2 regulation was bimodal, with activation followed by
repression, and the coregulator Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) selectively mediated
repression. A GATA-1 mutant defective in FOG-1 binding occupied a Tac-2
regulatory region at levels higher than wild-type GATA-1, whereas FOG-1
facilitated chromatin occupancy at a distinct target site. These results indicate
that FOG-1 is a determinant of GATA factor target gene sensitivity by either
facilitating or opposing chromatin occupancy.

PMCID: PMC1635106
PMID: 17043224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Haematologica. 2006 Nov;91(11):1473-80. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Concomitant aberrant overexpression of RUNX1 and NCAM in regenerating bone marrow
of myeloid leukemia of Down's syndrome.

Langebrake C(1), Klusmann JH, Wortmann K, Kolar M, Puhlmann U, Reinhardt D.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Department of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover. aml.bfm@mh-hannover.de

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Myeloid leukemia of Down's syndrome (ML-DS) has
characteristic biological features (e.g. expression of the truncated GATA1s),
which are different from those of non-DS childhood acute myeloid leukemias (AML).
The objective of this study was to investigate factors predisposing to the
development of ML-DS.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed 134 bone marrow specimens from 64 children with
ML-DS and non-DS AML during chemotherapy and 7 specimens from DS children with-
out leukemia,who did not receive any chemotherapy,The specimens were analyzed by 
multiparameter flow cytometry and quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction for transcription factors involved in hematopoiesis.
RESULTS: Samples taken from children with ML-DS in complete remission during
chemotherapy aberrantly expressed CD56 (NCAM) at the surface of monocytic and
granulocytic cells. Compared to non-DS AML cases,children with ML-DS had a
statistically significant higher proportion of CD56+ cells in the CD33+ fraction:
71%+/-6% vs. 4%+/-1% (p<0.00001). A significant decrease of the amount of
CD33+/CD56+ cells was observed during and after maintenance therapy. An increased
number of CD33+/CD56+ cells was also present (>85%) in children with DS who did
not receive chemotherapy, but showed a left-shift (due to infection), compared
with DS children without left-shift (<10% CD33+/CD56+ cells). Within the
CD33+/CD56+ fraction, RUNX1 was overexpressed more than 5-fold (p<0.02) compared 
to CD33+/CD56- cells, whereas there were no differences regarding GATA1, SPI1,
ERG or ETS-2 levels.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The combined overexpression of RUNX1 and NCAM
during stress hematopoiesis in children with DS might be a key factor in the
development of overt leukemia and/or in the growth advantage of the malignant
GATA1s clone in ML- DS.

PMID: 17043020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Genome Res. 2006 Dec;16(12):1480-92. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Experimental validation of predicted mammalian erythroid cis-regulatory modules.

Wang H(1), Zhang Y, Cheng Y, Zhou Y, King DC, Taylor J, Chiaromonte F, Kasturi J,
Petrykowska H, Gibb B, Dorman C, Miller W, Dore LC, Welch J, Weiss MJ, Hardison
RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics of the Huck Institutes of
Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, USA.

Multiple alignments of genome sequences are helpful guides to functional
analysis, but predicting cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) accurately from such
alignments remains an elusive goal. We predict CRMs for mammalian genes expressed
in red blood cells by combining two properties gleaned from aligned, noncoding
genome sequences: a positive regulatory potential (RP) score, which detects
similarity to patterns in alignments distinctive for regulatory regions, and
conservation of a binding site motif for the essential erythroid transcription
factor GATA-1. Within eight target loci, we tested 75 noncoding segments by
reporter gene assays in transiently transfected human K562 cells and/or after
site-directed integration into murine erythroleukemia cells. Segments with a high
RP score and a conserved exact match to the binding site consensus are validated 
at a good rate (50%-100%, with rates increasing at higher RP), whereas segments
with lower RP scores or nonconsensus binding motifs tend to be inactive. Active
DNA segments were shown to be occupied by GATA-1 protein by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, whereas sites predicted to be inactive were not occupied. We
verify four previously known erythroid CRMs and identify 28 novel ones. Thus,
high RP in combination with another feature of a CRM, such as a conserved
transcription factor binding site, is a good predictor of functional CRMs.
Genome-wide predictions based on RP and a large set of well-defined transcription
factor binding sites are available through servers at http://www.bx.psu.edu/.

PMCID: PMC1665632
PMID: 17038566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1460-71. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

The hypomorphic Gata1low mutation alters the proliferation/differentiation
potential of the common megakaryocytic-erythroid progenitor.

Ghinassi B(1), Sanchez M, Martelli F, Amabile G, Vannucchi AM, Migliaccio G,
Orkin SH, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Recent evidence suggests that mutations in the Gata1 gene may alter the
proliferation/differentiation potential of hemopoietic progenitors. By
single-cell cloning and sequential replating experiments of prospectively
isolated progenitor cells, we demonstrate here that the hypomorphic Gata1low
mutation increases the proliferation potential of a unique class of progenitor
cells, similar in phenotype to adult common erythroid/megakaryocytic progenitors 
(MEPs), but with the "unique" capacity to generate erythroblasts, megakaryocytes,
and mast cells in vitro. Conversely, progenitor cells phenotypically similar to
mast cell progenitors (MCPs) are not detectable in the marrow from these mutants.
At the single-cell level, about 11% of Gata1low progenitor cells, including MEPs,
generate cells that will continue to proliferate in cultures for up to 4 months. 
In agreement with these results, trilineage (erythroid, megakaryocytic, and
mastocytic) cell lines are consistently isolated from bone marrow and spleen
cells of Gata1low mice. These results confirm the crucial role played by Gata1 in
hematopoietic commitment and identify, as a new target for the Gata1 action, the 
restriction point at which common myeloid progenitors become either MEPs or MCPs.

PMCID: PMC1794062
PMID: 17038527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2006 Oct;28(10):696-8.

Development of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia from a minor clone in a Down
syndrome patient with clinically overt transient myeloproliferative disorder.

Xu G(1), Kato K, Toki T, Takahashi Y, Terui K, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
Aomori, Japan.

A Down syndrome male showed leukocytosis from birth and was diagnosed as
transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD). Eight months later, his condition
had progressed to myelodysplastic syndrome after spontaneous resolution, and it
then evolved to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) at the age of 20 months.
Sequencing analysis showed that the predominant TMD and AMKL clones had different
GATA1 mutations, although a minor TMD clone identical to the AMKL clone was
present at birth. These observations suggest that a minor clone rather than the
predominant clone at the time of TMD may give rise to AMKL later on.

PMID: 17023834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Oncol Rep. 2006 Nov;16(5):1099-103.

p27KIP1 and GATA-1 are potential downstream molecules in activin A-induced
differentiation and apoptosis pathways in CML cells.

Fukuchi Y(1), Yamato K, Kawamura C, Ikeda Y, Kizaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University
School of Medicine, Shinanomachi, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

p27KIP1 is known as a regulator of cellular differentiation and apoptosis in
human cancer cells. We have previously reported that human chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) KU812 and K562 cells show inhibited cellular proliferation in
response to treatment with activin A, a member of TGF-beta superfamily. Apoptosis
and erythroid differentiation can be induced in KU812 and K562 cells,
respectively. We report herein that activin A induced the expression of p27KIP1
in CML cells along with the induction of cellular differentiation and apoptosis. 
There are putative binding sequences of erythroid-related transcription factor
GATA-1 in the promoter region of the human p27KIP1 gene. Expression of GATA-1
protein in activin A-treated KU812 and K562 cells showed dissimilar regulation in
these two cell lines. Induction of p27KIP1 was commonly observed, but it did not 
correspond to the expression levels of GATA-1 in either line of activin A-treated
CML cells. In addition, ERK protein was rapidly and transiently activated with
activin A in both types of CML cells, suggesting that phosphorylation of ERK is
required for activin A signaling in CML cells. These results indicate that both
p27KIP1 induction and regulation of GATA-1 play essential roles in activin
A-induced erythroid differentiation and apoptosis.

PMID: 17016599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Adv Anat Pathol. 2006 Sep;13(5):256-62.

Transient leukemia (transient myeloproliferative disorder, transient abnormal
myelopoiesis) of Down syndrome.

Brink DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, Saint
Louis, MO 63104-1003, USA. brinkds@slu.edu

Transient leukemia of Down syndrome (DS-TL), also known as transient
myeloproliferative disorder of Down syndrome (DS) and transient abnormal
myelopoiesis of DS, occurs in approximately 10% of DS neonates and in
phenotypically normal neonates with trisomy 21 mosaicism. In DS-TL, peripheral
blood analysis shows variable numbers of blasts and, usually, thrombocytopenia;
other cytopenias are uncommon. Bone marrow characteristics of DS-TL are,
likewise, variable, though (in contrast to other leukemias) the bone marrow blast
differential can be lower than the peripheral blood blast differential. The
blasts of DS-TL typically show light microscopic, ultrastructural, and flow
cytometric evidence of megakaryocyte differentiation. DS-TL neonates have a
approximately 15% risk of developing potentially fatal liver disease and show
<10% incidence of hydrops fetalis. Additional manifestations of DS-TL include
cutaneous involvement, hyperviscosity, myelofibrosis, cardiopulmonary failure,
splenomegaly, and spleen necrosis. Despite its typical transient nature, 20% to
30% of DS-TL patients develop overt (nontransient) acute leukemia, usually within
3 years and typically of the M7 phenotype (acute megakaryoblastic leukemia). The 
pathogenesis of DS-TL (and of subsequent acute leukemia) involves mutation of
GATA1 (on chromosome X), which normally encodes a transcription factor integral
to normal development of erythroid, megakaryocytic, and basophilic/mast cell
lines. The pathogenetic role of trisomy 21 in DS-TL is unclear. Though
indications for chemotherapy in DS-TL have not been firmly established, the
blasts of DS-TL are sensitive to low-dose cytosine arabinoside.

PMID: 16998319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 1;301(1):106-16. Epub 2006 Aug 11.

GLP-1: a novel zinc finger protein required in somatic cells of the gonad for
germ cell development.

Li S(1), Lu MM, Zhou D, Hammes SR, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Mouse gonadal development is regulated by a variety of transcription factors.
Here we report the identification and characterization of a novel nuclear zinc
finger protein called GATA like protein-1 (GLP-1), which is expressed at high
levels in the somatic cells of the developing gonads, including Leydig cells in
the testes and granulosa cells in the ovaries. Biochemical analysis of GLP-1
shows that it acts as a transcriptional repressor of GATA factor function. To
determine the necessity of GLP-1 in gonadal development, a null allele in mice
was generated by replacing all of the coding exons with the bacterial lacZ gene. 
GLP-1(lacZ) null mice are viable with no detectable defects in visceral organ
development; however, both males and females are completely infertile. Loss of
GLP-1 leads to defective sperm development in males with a marked reduction in
mature spermatids observed as early as postnatal week 1. In females, loss of
GLP-1 leads to a severe block in germ cell development as early as E17.5.
Together, these data identify GLP-1 as a critical nuclear repressor in somatic
cells of the gonad that is required for germ cell development, and highlight the 
importance of somatic-germ cell interactions in the regulation of this critical
process.

PMCID: PMC1790961
PMID: 16982049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;26(19):7056-67.

Distinct functions of dispersed GATA factor complexes at an endogenous gene
locus.

Grass JA(1), Jing H, Kim SI, Martowicz ML, Pal S, Blobel GA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Pharmacology, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The reciprocal expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 during hematopoiesis is an
important determinant of red blood cell development. Whereas Gata2 is
preferentially transcribed early in hematopoiesis, elevated GATA-1 levels result 
in GATA-1 occupancy at sites upstream of the Gata2 locus and transcriptional
repression. GATA-2 occupies these sites in the transcriptionally active locus,
suggesting that a "GATA switch" abrogates GATA-2-mediated positive
autoregulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with genomic
microarray analysis and quantitative ChIP analysis with GATA-1-null cells
expressing an estrogen receptor ligand binding domain fusion to GATA-1 revealed
additional GATA switches 77 kb upstream of Gata2 and within intron 4 at +9.5 kb. 
Despite indistinguishable GATA-1 occupancy at -77 kb and +9.5 kb versus other
GATA switch sites, GATA-1 functioned uniquely at the different regions. GATA-1
induced histone deacetylation at and near Gata2 but not at the -77 kb region. The
-77 kb region, which was DNase I hypersensitive in both active and inactive
states, conferred equivalent enhancer activities in GATA-1- and GATA-2-expressing
cells. By contrast, the +9.5 kb region exhibited considerably stronger enhancer
activity in GATA-2- than in GATA-1-expressing cells, and other GATA switch sites 
were active only in GATA-1- or GATA-2-expressing cells. Chromosome conformation
capture analysis demonstrated higher-order interactions between the -77 kb region
and Gata2 in the active and repressed states. These results indicate that
dispersed GATA factor complexes function via long-range chromatin interactions
and qualitatively distinct activities to regulate Gata2 transcription.

PMCID: PMC1592882
PMID: 16980610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 19;103(38):14146-51. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

A mutation in the translation initiation codon of Gata-1 disrupts megakaryocyte
maturation and causes thrombocytopenia.

Majewski IJ(1), Metcalf D, Mielke LA, Krebs DL, Ellis S, Carpinelli MR, Mifsud S,
Di Rago L, Corbin J, Nicola NA, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

We have generated mice from a N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis screen that carry
a mutation in the translation initiation codon of Gata-1, termed Plt13, which is 
equivalent to mutations found in patients with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
and Down syndrome. The Gata-1 locus is present on the X chromosome in humans and 
in mice. Male mice hemizygous for the mutation (Gata-1Plt13/Y) failed to produce 
red blood cells and died during embryogenesis at a similar stage to Gata-1-null
animals. Female mice that carry the Plt13 mutation are mosaic because of random
inactivation of the X chromosome. Adult Gata-1Plt13/+ females were not anemic,
but they were thrombocytopenic and accumulated abnormal megakaryocytes without a 
concomitant increase in megakaryocyte progenitor cells. Gata-1Plt13/+ mice
contained large numbers of blast-like colony-forming cells, particularly in the
fetal liver, but also in adult spleen and bone marrow, from which continuous mast
cells lines were readily derived. Although the equivalent mutation to Gata-1Plt13
in humans results in production of GATA-1s, a short protein isoform initiated
from a start codon downstream of the mutated initiation codon, Gata-1s was not
detected in Gata-1Plt13/+ mice.

PMCID: PMC1599926
PMID: 16966598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 8;281(49):37345-52. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

GATA-1-mediated transcriptional repression yields persistent transcription factor
IIB-chromatin complexes.

Martowicz ML(1), Grass JA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The hematopoietic GATA factors GATA-1 and GATA-2, which have distinct and
overlapping roles to regulate blood cell development, are reciprocally expressed 
during erythropoiesis. GATA-1 directly represses Gata2 transcription, and reduced
GATA-2 synthesis promotes red blood cell development. Gata2 repression involves
"GATA switches" in which GATA-1 displaces GATA-2 from Gata2 regulatory regions.
We show that extragenic GATA switch sites occupied by GATA-2 associate with as
much RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and basal transcription factors as present at the
active Gata2 promoters. Pol II bound to GATA switch sites in the active locus was
phosphorylated on serine 5 of the carboxyl-terminal domain, indicative of
elongation competence. GATA-1-mediated displacement of GATA-2 from GATA switch
sites reduced Pol II recruitment to all sites except the far upstream -77-kb
region. Surprisingly, TFIIB occupancy persisted at most sites upon repression.
These results indicate that GATA-2-bound extragenic regulatory elements recruit
Pol II, GATA-1 binding expels Pol II, and despite the persistent TFIIB-chromatin 
complexes, Pol II recruitment is blocked.

PMID: 16963445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2006 Sep;210(1):1-9.

GATA transcription factors and hematological diseases.

Harigae H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. harigae@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

The development of mature blood cells from hematopoietic stem cells is regulated 
by transcription factors that control and coordinate the expression of
lineage-specific genes. The GATA family consists of six transcription factors
that function in hematopoietic and endodermal development. Among them, GATA-1 is 
expressed in erythroid, megakaryocytic, eosinophil and mast cell lineages, and
GATA-2 is expressed in stem and progenitor cells, at more immature stage compared
with GATA-1. Based on the characteristic phenotypes of GATA-1 and GATA-2 mutant
mice, it has been suggested that mutations of these GATA genes in humans may
result in the onset of certain clinical diseases. To date, mutations of GATA-1
gene have been found in inherited anemia and thrombocytopenia, and Down
syndrome-related acute leukemia, which exhibits megakaryocytic phenotypes and
frequently occurs in patients with Down syndrome. In contrast, no mutation of
GATA-2 gene has been identified in hematological diseases; however, we found the 
expression level of GATA-2 is significantly decreased in CD34 positive cells in
patients with aplastic anemia. Since GATA-2 functions in the proliferation of
hematopoietic stem cells, the reduction of GATA-2 expression in CD34 positive
cells may result in the decreased number of hematopoietic stem cells, which is
the characteristic feature of aplastic anemia. Based on these lines of evidence, 
some types of hematological diseases may be defined as transcription factor
diseases.

PMID: 16960339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;26(20):7658-66. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Point mutations in two EVI1 Zn fingers abolish EVI1-GATA1 interaction and allow
erythroid differentiation of murine bone marrow cells.

Laricchia-Robbio L(1), Fazzina R, Li D, Rinaldi CR, Sinha KK, Chakraborty S,
Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago (M/C 737), 909 South Wolcott Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

EVI1 is an aggressive nuclear oncoprotein deregulated by recurring chromosomal
abnormalities in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). The expression of the
corresponding gene is a very poor prognostic marker for MDS patients and is
associated with severe defects of the erythroid lineage. We have recently shown
that the constitutive expression of EVI1 in murine bone marrow results in a fatal
disease with features characteristic of MDS, including anemia, dyserythropoiesis,
and dysmegakaryopoiesis. These lineages are regulated by the DNA-binding
transcription factor GATA1. EVI1 has two zinc finger domains containing seven
motifs at the N terminus and three motifs at the C terminus. Supported by results
of assays utilizing synthetic DNA promoters, it was earlier proposed that
erythroid-lineage repression by EVI1 is based on the ability of this protein to
compete with GATA1 for DNA-binding sites, resulting in repression of gene
activation by GATA1. Here, however, we show that EVI1 is unable to bind to
classic GATA1 sites. To understand the mechanism utilized by EVI1 to repress
erythropoiesis, we used a combination of biochemical assays, mutation analyses,
and in vitro bone marrow differentiation. The results indicate that EVI1
interacts directly with the GATA1 protein rather than the DNA sequence. We
further show that this protein-protein interaction blocks efficient recognition
or binding to DNA by GATA1. Point mutations that disrupt the geometry of two zinc
fingers of EVI1 abolish the protein-protein interaction, leading to normal
erythroid differentiation of normal murine bone marrow in vitro.

PMCID: PMC1636885
PMID: 16954386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Sep 13;128(36):11964-76.

Comparison of the specificity of interaction of cellular and viral zinc-binding
domains with 2-mercaptobenzamide thioesters.

Jenkins LM(1), Durell SR, Maynard AT, Stahl SJ, Inman JK, Appella E, Legault P,
Omichinski JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, 30602, USA.

The interactions of two 2-mercaptobenzamide thioester compounds with six diverse 
zinc-binding domains (ZBDs) have been analyzed by UV/visible spectroscopy, NMR
spectroscopy, and nucleic acid binding assays. These thioester compounds serve as
useful tools for probing the intrinsic chemical stability of ZBDs that exist
within a variety of cellular and viral proteins. In our studies, the classical
(Cys(2)His(2)) zinc finger ZBDs, the interleaved RING like ZBDs of protein kinase
C delta (Cys(2)HisCys and HisCys(3)), and the carboxyl-terminal (Cys(2)HisCys)
ZBD of Mouse Mammary Tumor Virus nucleocapsid protein (MMTV NCp10) were resistant
to reaction with the thioester compounds. In contrast, the thioester compounds
were able to efficiently eject zinc from the amino-terminal (Cys(2)HisCys) ZBD of
MMTV NCp10, a Cys(2)HisCys ZBD from Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1), and from both
Cys(4) ZBDs of GATA-1. In all cases, zinc ejection led to a loss of protein
structure. Interestingly, GATA-1 was resistant to reaction with the thioester
compounds when bound to its target DNA sequence. The electronic and steric
screening was calculated for select ZBDs to further explore their reactivity.
Based on these results, it appears that both first and second zinc-coordination
shell interactions within ZBDs, as well as nucleic acid binding, play important
roles in determining the chemical stability and reactivity of ZBDs. These studies
not only provide information regarding the relative reactivity of cysteine
residues within structural ZBDs but also are crucial for the design of future
therapeutic agents that selectively target ZBDs, such as those that occur in the 
HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein.

PMID: 16953638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Dev Cell. 2006 Sep;11(3):349-61.

Syk and Slp-76 mutant mice reveal a cell-autonomous hematopoietic cell
contribution to vascular development.

Sebzda E(1), Hibbard C, Sweeney S, Abtahian F, Bezman N, Clemens G, Maltzman JS, 
Cheng L, Liu F, Turner M, Tybulewicz V, Koretzky GA, Kahn ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Developmental studies support a common origin for blood and endothelial cells,
while studies of adult angiogenic responses suggest that the hematopoietic system
can be a source of endothelial cells later in life. Whether hematopoietic tissue 
is a source of endothelial cells during normal vascular development is unknown.
Mouse embryos lacking the signaling proteins Syk and Slp-76 develop abnormal
blood-lymphatic endothelial connections. Here we demonstrate that expression of
GFPSlp-76 in a subset of hematopoietic cells rescues this phenotype, and that
deficient cells confer focal vascular phenotypes in chimeric embryos consistent
with a cell-autonomous mechanism. Endogenous Syk and Slp-76, as well as
transgenic GFPSlp-76, are expressed in circulating cells previously proposed to
be endothelial precursors, supporting a causal role for these cells. These
studies provide genetic evidence for hematopoietic contribution to vascular
development and suggest that hematopoietic tissue can provide a source of
vascular endothelial progenitor cells throughout life.

PMID: 16950126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 27;281(43):32820-30. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

GATA-4 incompletely substitutes for GATA-1 in promoting both primitive and
definitive erythropoiesis in vivo.

Hosoya-Ohmura S(1), Mochizuki N, Suzuki M, Ohneda O, Ohneda K, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, Center for Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Vertebrate GATA transcription factors have been classified into two subgroups;
GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 are expressed in hematopoietic cells, whereas GATA-4, 
GATA-5, and GATA-6 are expressed in mesoendoderm-derived tissues. We previously
discovered that expression of GATA-2 or GATA-3 under the transcriptional control 
for the Gata1 gene eliminates lethal anemia in Gata1 germ line mutant mice
(Gata1.05/Y). Here, we show that the GATA-4 expression by the same regulatory
cassette prolongs the life span of Gata1.05/Y embryos from embryonic day 12.5 to 
15.5 but fails to abrogate its embryonic lethality. Gata1.05/Y mice bearing the
GATA-4 transgene showed impaired maturation of both primitive and definitive
erythroid cells and defective erythroid cell expansion in fetal liver. Moreover, 
the incidence of apoptosis was observed prominently in primitive erythroid cells.
In contrast, a GATA-4-GATA-1 chimeric protein prepared by linking the N-terminal 
region of GATA-4 to the C-terminal region of GATA-1 significantly promoted the
differentiation and survival of primitive erythroid cells, although this protein 
is still insufficient for rescuing Gata1.05/Y embryos from lethal anemia. These
data thus show a functional incompatibility between hematopoietic and endodermal 
GATA factors in vivo and provide evidence indicating specific roles of the
C-terminal region of GATA-1 in primitive erythropoiesis.

PMID: 16945928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Blood. 2006 Dec 15;108(13):4018-24. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Primitive erythropoiesis from mesodermal precursors expressing VE-cadherin,
PECAM-1, Tie2, endoglin, and CD34 in the mouse embryo.

Ema M(1), Yokomizo T, Wakamatsu A, Terunuma T, Yamamoto M, Takahashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan. masaema@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

Vascular endothelial (VE) cadherin, PECAM-1 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion
molecule-1, CD31), Tie2, CD34, and endoglin are established markers for adult and
embryonic endothelial cells (ECs). Here, we report that the expression of these
EC markers is initiated in the extraembryonic region at the late-streak stage
(nominal stage E6.75). Immunohistochemical analysis shows that EC marker-positive
cells arise in a subset of Flk1 (VEGF-R2) mesodermal cells. In contrast, GATA1, a
marker for primitive erythropoietic progenitors, is expressed in a more
restricted subset of Flk1-positive cells. Using flow cytometry, we observed that 
the GATA1-positive cell population existed as a subset of the EC marker-positive 
cell. Consistent with this notion, we showed with the primitive hematopoietic
colony assay that primitive erythropoietic progenitors are enriched in PECAM-1-
and Tie2-positive cells. These results suggest that primitive hematopoietic cells
arise from EC marker-positive cells. Thus, VE-cadherin, PECAM-1, CD34, endoglin, 
and Tie2 are expressed not only in adult and embryonic ECs but in extraembryonic 
Flk1-positive cells during gastrulation. The latter cell population includes
progenitors that give rise to primitive hematopoietic cells, suggesting that
primitive and definitive hematopoietic cells in the mouse embryo arise from EC
marker-positive cells.

PMID: 16926294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Feb;145(1):39-44. Epub 2006 Jun
29.

Microinjecting recombinant rainbow trout Ea4-peptide of pro-IGF-I into zebrafish 
embryos causes abnormal development in heart, red blood cells, and vasculature.

Chun CZ(1), Chen TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, U-3125
Storrs, CT 06269, USA.

E-peptides and mature insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are produced from
pre-pro-IGFs during post-translational processing and co-secreted into the
circulation. Previously, we reported that introduction of a transgene encoding
the secreted form of rainbow trout (rt) Ea4-peptide or human (h) Eb-peptide into 
newly fertilized eggs of medaka (Oryzias latipes) and zebrafish (Danio rerio)
resulted in developmental defects in heart, red blood cells and vasculature. In
addition to vasculature and red blood cell developmental defects, multiple
phenocopies of heart developmental defects categorized by developmental arrest at
cardiomyocyte, heart tube and heart looping stages were also observed. These
results raise a question of whether rtEa4- or hEb-peptide exerts pleiotropic
inhibitory effects on heart, vasculature and red blood cell development in fish
embryos. To answer this question, various amounts of recombinant rtEa4-peptide
were microinjected into zebrafish eggs at 1.5, 2.5 and 5.5 h post-fertilization
(hpf). Although a dose-dependent developmental defect in heart, vasculature and
red blood cells was observed in embryos microinjected with rtEa4-peptide at 1.5
and 2.5 hpf, the heart development in all of the microinjected embryos was
arrested at the cardiomyocyte stage. Furthermore, the mRNA levels of Nkx2.5,
GATA5, VEGF, GATA1 and GATA2 genes in defective embryos were significantly
reduced by rtEa4-peptide. These results confirm our previous findings that rtEa4-
or hEb-peptide exhibits pleiotropic effects in inhibiting heart, vasculature and 
red blood cell development in zebrafish embryos.

PMID: 16914384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;3(1-2):94-100.

Induction of signalling in non-erythroid cells by pharmacological levels of
erythropoietin.

Dunlop EA(1), Percy MJ, Boland MP, Maxwell AP, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, and
Haematology Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK.

Erythropoiesis is maintained by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) binding to its
cognate receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitor cells. The Epo-EpoR interaction
initiates a signal transduction process that regulates the survival, growth and
differentiation of these cells. Originally perceived as highly
lineage-restricted, Epo is now recognised to have pleiotropic effects extending
beyond the maintenance of red cell mass. Functional interactions between Epo and 
EpoR have been demonstrated in numerous cells and tissues. EpoR expression on
neoplastic cells leads to concern that recombinant human erythropoietin, used to 
treat anaemia in cancer patients, may augment tumour growth. Here we demonstrate 
that EPO, at pharmacological concentrations, can activate three major signalling 
cascades, viz. the Jak2/STAT5, Ras/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. EpoR synthesis is normally under the control
of GATA-1, but NSCLC cells exhibit decreased GATA-1 levels compared to GATA-2, -3
and -6, suggesting that GATA-1 is not essential for EpoR production. The
increased Epo-induced signalling was not associated with a growth advantage for
the NSCLC cells.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16909043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;338:305-23.

Isolation of transcription factor complexes by in vivo biotinylation tagging and 
direct binding to streptavidin beads.

Rodriguez P(1), Braun H, Kolodziej KE, de Boer E, Campbell J, Bonte E, Grosveld
F, Philipsen S, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Efficient tagging methodologies are an integral aspect of protein complex
characterization by proteomic approaches. Owing to the very high affinity of
biotin for avidin and streptavidin, biotinylation tagging offers an attractive
approach for the efficient purification of protein complexes. The very high
affinity of the biotin/(strept)avidin system also offers the potential for the
single-step capture of lower abundance protein complexes, such as transcription
factor complexes. The identification of short peptide tags that are efficiently
biotinylated by the bacterial BirA biotin ligase led to an approach for the
single-step purification of transcription factor complexes by specific in vivo
biotinylation tagging. A short sequence tag fused N-terminally to the
transcription factor of interest is very efficiently biotinylated by BirA
coexpressed in the same cells, as was demonstrated by the tagging of the
essential hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1. The direct binding to
streptavidin of biotinylated GATA-1 in nuclear extracts resulted in the
single-step capture of the tagged factor and associated proteins, which were
eluted and identified by mass spectrometry. This led to the characterization of
several distinct GATA-1 complexes with other transcription factors and chromatin 
remodeling cofactors, which are involved in activation and repression of gene
targets. Thus, BirA-mediated tagging is an efficient approach for the direct
capture and characterization of transcription factor complexes.

PMID: 16888367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Blood. 2006 Nov 15;108(10):3335-43. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Negative regulation of primitive hematopoiesis by the FGF signaling pathway.

Nakazawa F(1), Nagai H, Shin M, Sheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Early Embryogenesis, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Hematopoiesis is controlled by multiple signaling molecules during embryonic and 
postnatal development. The function of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) pathway
in this process is unclear. Here we show that FGF plays a key role in the
regulation of primitive hematopoiesis in chicks. Using hemoglobin mRNA expression
as a sensitive marker, we demonstrate that timing of blood differentiation can be
separated from that of initial mesoderm patterning and subsequent migration. High
FGF activity inhibits primitive blood differentiation and promotes endothelial
cell fate. Conversely, inhibition of FGFR activity leads to ectopic blood
formation and down-regulation of endothelial markers. Expression and functional
analyses indicate that FGFR2 is the key receptor mediating these effects. The FGF
pathway regulates primitive hematopoiesis by modulating Gata1 expression level
and activity. We propose that the FGF pathway mediates repression of globin gene 
expression and that its removal is essential before terminal differentiation can 
occur.

PMID: 16888091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Blood. 2006 Dec 1;108(12):3736-8. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Acetylation of GATA-1 is required for chromatin occupancy.

Lamonica JM(1), Vakoc CR, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

All 3 hematopoietic GATA transcription factors, GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3, are
acetylated, although the in vivo role of this modification remains unclear. We
examined the functions of an acetylation-defective mutant of GATA-1 in maturing
erythroid cells. We found that removal of the acetylation sites in GATA-1 does
not impair its nuclear localization, steady-state protein levels, or its ability 
to bind naked GATA elements in vitro. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) experiments revealed that mutant GATA-1 was dramatically impaired in
binding to all examined cellular target sites in vivo, including genes that are
normally activated and repressed by GATA-1. Together, these results suggest that 
acetylation regulates chromatin occupancy of GATA-1. These findings point to a
novel function for transcription factor acetylation, perhaps by facilitating
protein interactions required for stable association with chromatin templates in 
vivo.

PMCID: PMC1895476
PMID: 16888089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 13;281(41):30573-80. Epub 2006 Jul 29.

Enhancer blocking by chicken beta-globin 5'-HS4: role of enhancer strength and
insulator nucleosome depletion.

Zhao H(1), Kim A, Song SH, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The 5'-HS4 chicken beta-globin insulator functions as a positional enhancer
blocker on chromatinized episomes in human cells, blocking the HS2 enhancer of
the human beta-globin locus control region from activating a downstream
epsilon-globin gene. 5'-HS4 interrupted formation of a domain of histone H3 and
H4 acetylation encompassing the 6-kb minilocus and inhibited transfer of RNA
polymerase from the enhancer to the gene promoter. We found that the enhancer
blocking phenotype was amplified when the insulated locus contained a weakened
HS2 enhancer in which clustered point mutations eliminated interaction of the
transcription factor GATA-1. The GATA-1 mutation compromised recruitment of
histone acetyltransferases and RNA polymerase II to HS2. Enhancer blocking
correlated with a significant depletion of nucleosomes in the core region of the 
insulator as revealed by micrococcal nuclease and DNase I digestion studies.
Nucleosome depletion at 5'-HS4 was dependent on interaction of the insulator
protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and was required for enhancer blocking. These
findings provide evidence that a domain of active chromatin is formed by
spreading from an enhancer to a target gene and can be blocked by a
nucleosome-free gap in an insulator.

PMID: 16877759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 22;281(38):28296-306. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Molecular analysis of the interaction between the hematopoietic master
transcription factors GATA-1 and PU.1.

Liew CW(1), Rand KD, Simpson RJ, Yung WW, Mansfield RE, Crossley M,
Proetorius-Ibba M, Nerlov C, Poulsen FM, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, G08, University of Sydney, New 
South Wales 2006, Australia.

GATA-1 and PU.1 are transcription factors that control erythroid and myeloid
development, respectively. The two proteins have been shown to function in an
antagonistic fashion, with GATA-1 repressing PU.1 activity during erythropoiesis 
and PU.1 repressing GATA-1 function during myelopoiesis. It has also become clear
that this functional antagonism involves direct interactions between the two
proteins. However, the molecular basis for these interactions is not known, and a
number of inconsistencies exist in the literature. We have used a range of
biophysical methods to define the molecular details of the GATA-1-PU.1
interaction. A combination of NMR titration data and extensive mutagenesis
revealed that the PU.1-Ets domain and the GATA-1 C-terminal zinc finger (CF) form
a low affinity interaction in which specific regions of each protein are
implicated. Surprisingly, the interaction cannot be disrupted by single alanine
substitution mutations, suggesting that binding is distributed over an extended
interface. The C-terminal basic tail region of CF appears to be sufficient to
mediate an interaction with PU.1-Ets, and neither acetylation nor phosphorylation
of a peptide corresponding to this region disrupts binding, indicating that the
interaction is not dominated by electrostatic interactions. The CF basic tail
shares significant sequence homology with the PU.1 interacting motif from c-Jun, 
suggesting that GATA-1 and c-Jun might compete to bind PU.1. Taken together, our 
data provide a molecular perspective on the GATA-1-PU.1 interaction, resolving
several issues in the existing data and providing insight into the mechanisms
through which these two proteins combine to regulate blood development.

PMID: 16861236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. EMBO J. 2006 Jul 26;25(14):3264-74. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Acetylation and MAPK phosphorylation cooperate to regulate the degradation of
active GATA-1.

Hernandez-Hernandez A(1), Ray P, Litos G, Ciro M, Ottolenghi S, Beug H, Boyes J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Cancer Research, London,
UK.

Regulation of transcription requires mechanisms to both activate and terminate
transcription factor activity. GATA-1 is a key haemopoietic transcription factor 
whose activity is increased by acetylation. We show here that acetylated GATA-1
is targeted for degradation via the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway. Acetylation
positively signals ubiquitination, suggesting that activation by acetylation
simultaneously marks GATA-1 for degradation. Promoter-specific MAPK
phosphorylation then cooperates with acetylation to execute protein loss. The
requirement for both modifications is novel and suggests a way by which
degradation of the active protein can be specifically regulated in response to
external phosphorylation-mediated signalling. As many transcription factors are
activated by acetylation, we suggest that this might be a general mechanism to
control transcription factor activity.

PMCID: PMC1523174
PMID: 16858405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Leuk Lymphoma. 2006 Jun;47(6):986-97.

Transcription factor GATA-1 and Down syndrome leukemogenesis.

Muntean AG(1), Ge Y, Taub JW, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Mutations in transcription factors constitute one means by which normal
hematopoietic progenitors are converted to leukemic stem cells. Recently,
acquired mutations in the megakaryocytic regulator GATA1 have been found in
essentially all cases of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMkL) in children with 
Down syndrome and in the closely related malignancy transient myeloproliferative 
disorder. In all cases, mutations in GATA1 lead to the expression of a shorter
isoform of GATA-1, named GATA-1s. Because GATA-1s retains both DNA binding zinc
fingers, but is missing the N-terminal transactivation domain, it has been
predicted that the inability of GATA-1s to regulate its normal class of
megakaryocytic target genes is the mechanism by which mutations in GATA1
contribute to the disease. Indeed, several recent reports have confirmed that
GATA-1s fails to properly regulate the growth of megakaryocytic precursors,
likely through aberrant transcriptional regulation. Although the specific target 
genes of GATA-1 mis-regulated by GATA-1s that drive this abnormal growth remain
undefined, multiple candidate genes have been identified via gene array studies. 
Finally, the inability of GATA-1s to promote expression of important metabolic
genes, such as cytadine deaminase, likely contributes to the remarkable
hypersensitivity of AMkL blasts to cytosine arabinoside. Future studies to define
the entire class of genes dysregulated by mutations in GATA1 will provide
important insights into the etiology of these malignancies.

PMID: 16840187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):741-2.

GATA1s goes germline.

Mundschau G, Crispino J.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):807-12.

PMID: 16804537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 Nov;35(5):565-70. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Airway hyperreactivity in exacerbation of chronic asthma is independent of
eosinophilic inflammation.

Siegle JS(1), Hansbro N, Herbert C, Yang M, Foster PS, Kumar RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

We have developed an animal model to investigate the mechanisms underlying an
acute exacerbation of chronic asthma. Sensitized BALB/c mice were exposed to
aerosolized ovalbumin, either as chronic low-level challenge (mass concentration 
approximately 3 mg/m(3)) for 4 wk, a single moderate-level challenge
(approximately 30 mg/m(3)), or chronic low-level followed by single
moderate-level challenge (the acute exacerbation group). Compared with animals
receiving chronic challenge alone, mice in the acute exacerbation group exhibited
a more marked inflammatory response, with involvement of intrapulmonary airways
and lung parenchyma, and increased numbers of lymphocytes and eosinophils in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. They also developed airway hyperreactivity (AHR) to
methacholine, demonstrable as increased transpulmonary resistance and decreased
compliance. This pattern of AHR was absent in chronically challenged animals, but
was also present in animals given single moderate-level challenge. However,
compared with animals receiving a single moderate-level challenge, inflammation
and AHR were induced more rapidly in the acute exacerbation group.
Eosinophil-deficient GATA1 Deltadbl mice exhibited undiminished AHR in the acute 
exacerbation model. We conclude that in mice with pre-existing airway lesions
resembling mild chronic asthma, exposure to a moderately high concentration of
inhaled antigen induces features of an acute exacerbation. The inflammatory
response involves distal airways and is associated with a distinct pattern of
AHR, which develops independent of the enhanced eosinophilic inflammation.

PMID: 16794258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):807-12. Epub 2006 Jun 18.

An inherited mutation leading to production of only the short isoform of GATA-1
is associated with impaired erythropoiesis.

Hollanda LM(1), Lima CS, Cunha AF, Albuquerque DM, Vassallo J, Ozelo MC, Joazeiro
PP, Saad ST, Costa FF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hemocentro, School of Medical Science,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo 13083-970, Brazil.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):741-2.

Acquired somatic mutations in exon 2 of the hematopoietic transcription factor
GATA-1 have been found in individuals with Down syndrome with both transient
myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. These mutations 
prevent the synthesis of the full-length protein but allow the synthesis of its
short isoform, GATA-1s. Experiments in mice suggest that GATA-1s supports normal 
adult megakaryopoiesis, platelet formation and erythropoiesis. Here we report a
mutation, 332G --> C, in exon 2 of GATA1, leading to the synthesis of only the
short isoform in seven affected males from two generations of a family.
Hematological profiles of affected males demonstrate macrocytic anemia, normal
platelet counts and neutropenia in most cases. Altogether, data suggest that
GATA-1s alone, produced in low or normal levels, is not sufficient to support
normal erythropoiesis. Moreover, this is the first study to indicate that a
germline splicing mutation does not lead to leukemia in the absence of other
cooperating events, such as Down syndrome.

PMID: 16783379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2006;45(2):147-56.

Biochemical and biophysical studies on the precursor cells of mouse erythrocytes 
at different stages.

Wang J(1), Ka W, Sun D, Yao W, Wen Z, Chien S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100050, USA.

The aim of this research is to study the biochemical and biophysical properties
of the precursor cells of mouse erythrocytes at different stages and the
molecular mechanisms of their regulation. We investigated the degree of terminal 
differentiation of splenic erythroblasts obtained from mice during the acute
phase of disease caused by the anemia-inducing FVAstrain of Friend virus. We
analyzed the transcription and protein levels of alpha-globin, beta-globin
(erythroid special protein) and GATA-1 (a special erythroid transcription
factor). We also have examined the Ca2+ concentration, the distribution and
amount of F-actin, important cellular components such as nucleic acids, lipids,
and proteins, and the adhesion of precursor cells of RBC at different stages to
vascular endothelium. Our results indicated that Ca2+ concentration and the
distribution and structure of F-actin changed with the development of
proerythroblasts, and that the adhesion rate between the precursor cells and
endothelial cells can be correlated with the expression levels of ICAM-1 and
P-selectin. These alternations caused changes in biophysical properties of the
cell, such as membrane fluidity and deformability.

PMID: 16757815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Curr Opin Hematol. 2006 Jul;13(4):203-8.

Gene expression during terminal erythroid differentiation.

Ney PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA. paul.ney@stjude.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Expression profiling is a powerful technique to sample cell
state. This review shows how expression profiling is being applied to the study
of erythroid differentiation.
RECENT FINDINGS: Expression-based studies of multipotential hematopoietic
progenitor cells has shown that these cells express lineage-restricted genes from
multiple lineages at low levels, and that they are in effect 'primed' to develop 
into all hematopoietic cell types. Expression profiling of oligopotent and
committed progenitor cells has further shown that commitment to the erythroid
lineage is associated with a progressive decline in the number of expressed
genes. Lineage commitment is regulated by lineage-restricted transcription
factors, and studies show that the erythroid transcription factor GATA1, in
addition to activating a subset of genes, has global repressive effects on gene
expression. Terminal erythroid differentiation is associated with further
reduction in the number of expressed genes. The erythroid program is defined by
those genes that are still expressed, and their high-level expression depends on 
specific epigenetic modifications, recruitment of transcription factors, and
posttranscriptional effects.
SUMMARY: Expression profiling provides the means to identify novel targets for
the therapy of erythrocytes disorders, and to obtain insights into the mechanisms
of cellular differentiation.

PMID: 16755214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Pediatr. 2006 May;148(5):687-9.

Risk for leukemia in infants without Down syndrome who have transient
myeloproliferative disorder.

Cushing T(1), Clericuzio CL, Wilson CS, Taub JW, Ge Y, Reichard KK, Winter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Stanford
University Medical Center, Stanford, California, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr. 2007 Mar;150(3):e34.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) occurs in 10% of infants with Down
syndrome (DS). Down syndrome infants with resolved TMD may later develop acute
megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL). In these patients, AMKL is associated with
somatic mutations in the X-linked transcription factor gene, GATA1. AMKL also has
been described after TMD in children without DS. We report on a non-DS child
identified with trisomy 21 mosaicism and a GATA1 mutation in the original blast
cells who has been followed for 2 years without exhibiting AMKL. Currently, the
risk for such infants developing acute leukemia is uncertain. We recommend that
nondysmorphic infants with TMD undergo chromosome analysis for trisomy 21 and
testing for GATA1 mutations to aid surveillance for leukemic transformation.

PMID: 16737888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Science. 2006 May 26;312(5777):1215-7.

A regulatory SNP causes a human genetic disease by creating a new transcriptional
promoter.

De Gobbi M(1), Viprakasit V, Hughes JR, Fisher C, Buckle VJ, Ayyub H, Gibbons RJ,
Vernimmen D, Yoshinaga Y, de Jong P, Cheng JF, Rubin EM, Wood WG, Bowden D, Higgs
DR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

We describe a pathogenetic mechanism underlying a variant form of the inherited
blood disorder alpha thalassemia. Association studies of affected individuals
from Melanesia localized the disease trait to the telomeric region of human
chromosome 16, which includes the alpha-globin gene cluster, but no molecular
defects were detected by conventional approaches. After resequencing and using a 
combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression analysis on a tiled
oligonucleotide array, we identified a gain-of-function regulatory
single-nucleotide polymorphism (rSNP) in a nongenic region between the
alpha-globin genes and their upstream regulatory elements. The rSNP creates a new
promoterlike element that interferes with normal activation of all downstream
alpha-like globin genes. Thus, our work illustrates a strategy for distinguishing
between neutral and functionally important rSNPs, and it also identifies a
pathogenetic mechanism that could potentially underlie other genetic diseases.

PMID: 16728641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Stem Cells. 2006 Sep;24(9):2014-22. Epub 2006 May 25.

Tal1/Scl gene transduction using a lentiviral vector stimulates highly efficient 
hematopoietic cell differentiation from common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)
embryonic stem cells.

Kurita R(1), Sasaki E, Yokoo T, Hiroyama T, Takasugi K, Imoto H, Izawa K, Dong Y,
Hashiguchi T, Soda Y, Maeda T, Suehiro Y, Tanioka Y, Nakazaki Y, Tani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Division of Molecular and Clinical Genetics,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

The development of embryonic stem cell (ESC) therapies requires the establishment
of efficient methods to differentiate ESCs into specific cell lineages. Here, we 
report the in vitro differentiation of common marmoset (CM) (Callithrix jacchus) 
ESCs into hematopoietic cells after exogenous gene transfer using vesicular
stomatitis virus-glycoprotein-pseudotyped lentiviral vectors. We transduced
hematopoietic genes, including tal1/scl, gata1, gata2, hoxB4, and lhx2, into CM
ESCs. By immunochemical and morphological analyses, we demonstrated that
overexpression of tal1/scl, but not the remaining genes, dramatically increased
hematopoiesis of CM ESCs, resulting in multiple blood-cell lineages. Furthermore,
flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that CD34, a hematopoietic stem/progenitor 
cell marker, was highly expressed in tal1/scl-overexpressing embryoid body cells.
Similar results were obtained from three independent CM ESC lines. These results 
suggest that transduction of exogenous tal1/scl cDNA into ESCs is a promising
method to induce the efficient differentiation of CM ESCs into hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells.

PMID: 16728561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. BMC Med Genet. 2006 May 23;7:49.

Identification of novel functional sequence variants in the gene for peptidase
inhibitor 3.

Chowdhury MA(1), Kuivaniemi H, Romero R, Edwin S, Chaiworapongsa T, Tromp G.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. mchowdh@med.wayne.edu

BACKGROUND: Peptidase inhibitor 3 (PI3) inhibits neutrophil elastase and
proteinase-3, and has a potential role in skin and lung diseases as well as in
cancer. Genome-wide expression profiling of chorioamniotic membranes revealed
decreased expression of PI3 in women with preterm premature rupture of membranes.
To elucidate the molecular mechanisms contributing to the decreased expression in
amniotic membranes, the PI3 gene was searched for sequence variations and the
functional significance of the identified promoter variants was studied.
METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified by direct
sequencing of PCR products spanning a region from 1,173 bp upstream to 1,266 bp
downstream of the translation start site. Fourteen SNPs were genotyped from 112
and nine SNPs from 24 unrelated individuals. Putative transcription factor
binding sites as detected by in silico search were verified by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) using nuclear extract from Hela and amnion cell
nuclear extract. Deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) was tested by
chi2 goodness-of-fit test. Haplotypes were estimated using expectation
maximization (EM) algorithm.
RESULTS: Twenty-three sequence variations were identified by direct sequencing of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products covering 2,439 nt of the PI3 gene
(-1,173 nt of promoter sequences and all three exons). Analysis of 112 unrelated 
individuals showed that 20 variants had minor allele frequencies (MAF) ranging
from 0.02 to 0.46 representing "true polymorphisms", while three had MAF < or =
0.01. Eleven variants were in the promoter region; several putative transcription
factor binding sites were found at these sites by database searches. Differential
binding of transcription factors was demonstrated at two polymorphic sites by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, both in amniotic and HeLa cell nuclear
extracts. Differential binding of the transcription factor GATA1 at -689C>G site 
was confirmed by a supershift.
CONCLUSION: The promoter sequences of PI3 have a high degree of variability.
Functional promoter variants provide a possible mechanism for explaining the
differences in PI3 mRNA expression levels in the chorioamniotic membranes, and
are also likely to be useful in elucidating the role of PI3 in other diseases.

PMCID: PMC1508140
PMID: 16719916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2006 May;4(3):247-50.

[Effects of yisui shengxue granules on expressions of alpha-hemoglobin
stabilizing protein and erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 mRNAs in bone
marrow of patients with beta-thalassemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu YM(1), Wu ZK, Chai LM, Zhang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing 100053, China. lymsd@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of Yisui Shengxue Granules on expressions of
alpha-hemoglobin stabilizing protein (AHSP) and erythroid transcription factor
GATA-1 mRNAs in bone marrow of patients with beta-thalassemia, and to explore its
possible molecular mechanism.
METHODS: Twelve patients with beta-thalassemia intermedia were treated with Yisui
Shengxue Granules for three months. The blood indexes including hemoglobin (Hb), 
RBC, fetal hemoglobin (HbF) and reticulated corpuscles (Ret) were examined before
and after treatment. Total RNA was extracted from bone marrow karyocyte in 8
patients selected from these 12 patients before and after treatment, and the
expression levels of the AHSP and GATA-1 mRNAs were measured by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Yisui Shengxue Granules could not only obviously improve the clinical
symptoms of patients with beta-thalassemia intermedia, but also obviously
increased the contents of Hb, RBC, HbF and Ret (P<0.05, or P<0.01). The
expression levels of AHSP and GATA-1 mRNAs also significantly increased after
treatment as compared with those before treatment (P<0.05, or P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The results revealed that one of the possible molecular mechanism of 
the effects caused by Yisui Shengxue Granules is that it can up-regulate the
expression levels of AHSP and erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 mRNAs,
enhance the protein synthesis of AHSP which can bind the relative excess free
alpha-globin, prevent the formation of alpha -globin-cytotoxic precipitates in
red blood cells and decrease the hemolysis.

PMID: 16696909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Immunol. 2007 Feb;44(5):926-33. Epub 2006 May 2.

p38 MAP kinase drives the expression of mast cell-derived IL-9 via activation of 
the transcription factor GATA-1.

Stassen M(1), Klein M, Becker M, Bopp T, Neudörfl C, Richter C, Heib V,
Klein-Hessling S, Serfling E, Schild H, Schmitt E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
stassenm@uni-mainz.de

Mast cells are able to produce a huge panel of mediators including the Th2-type
cytokine IL-9, which is considered to be a key mediator for the pathogenesis of
allergic asthma, but detailed information on the regulation of IL-9 transcription
in mast cells has been scarce. Herein we provide evidence that the
erythroid/myeloid transcription factor GATA-1, which is not expressed in Th2
cells, is a potent activator of IL-9 expression in murine bone marrow-derived
mast cells (BMMC). Furthermore, in mast cells, but not in Th2 cells, production
of IL-9 is sensitive to inhibition of p38 MAP kinase. As transactivation mediated
by GATA-1 is also sensitive to inhibition of p38 MAP kinase, and GATA-1 is a
target for p38 MAP kinase-mediated phosphorylation in vitro, we conclude that
both signaling molecules represent a part of a mast cell-specific signaling
network that regulates the expression of IL-9.

PMID: 16650898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 May;26(10):3942-54.

Functional interaction of CP2 with GATA-1 in the regulation of erythroid
promoters.

Bosè F(1), Fugazza C, Casalgrandi M, Capelli A, Cunningham JM, Zhao Q, Jane SM,
Ottolenghi S, Ronchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università di Milano-Bicocca, P.za
della Scienza 2, 20126 Milano, Italy.

We observed that binding sites for the ubiquitously expressed transcription
factor CP2 were present in regulatory regions of multiple erythroid genes. In
these regions, the CP2 binding site was adjacent to a site for the erythroid
factor GATA-1. Using three such regulatory regions (from genes encoding the
transcription factors GATA-1, EKLF, and p45 NF-E2), we demonstrated the
functional importance of the adjacent CP2/GATA-1 sites. In particular, CP2 binds 
to the GATA-1 HS2 enhancer, generating a ternary complex with GATA-1 and DNA.
Mutations in the CP2 consensus greatly impaired HS2 activity in transient
transfection assays with K562 cells. Similar results were obtained by
transfection of EKLF and p45 NF-E2 mutant constructs. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation with K562 cells showed that CP2 binds in vivo to all three
regulatory elements and that both GATA-1 and CP2 were present on the same GATA-1 
and EKLF regulatory elements. Adjacent CP2/GATA-1 sites may represent a novel
module for erythroid expression of a number of genes. Additionally,
coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments
demonstrated a physical interaction between GATA-1 and CP2. This may contribute
to the functional cooperation between these factors and provide an explanation
for the important role of ubiquitous CP2 in the regulation of erythroid genes.

PMCID: PMC1489008
PMID: 16648487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Virology. 2006 Jul 20;351(1):58-72. Epub 2006 May 2.

Expression of alpha V integrin is modulated by Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen
3C and the metastasis suppressor Nm23-H1 through interaction with the GATA-1 and 
Sp1 transcription factors.

Choudhuri T(1), Verma SC, Lan K, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Tumor Virology Program of the Abramson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a lymphotrophic herpesvirus infecting most of the
world's population. It is associated with a number of human lymphoid and
epithelial tumors and lymphoproliferative diseases in immunocompromised patients.
A subset of latent EBV antigens is required for immortalization of primary
B-lymphocytes. The metastatic suppressor Nm23-H1 which is downregulated in human 
invasive breast carcinoma reduces the migration and metastatic activity of breast
carcinoma cells when expressed from a heterologous promoter. Interestingly, the
EBV nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) reverses these activities of Nm23-H1. The alpha V
integrins recognize a variety of ligands for signaling and are involved in cell
migration and proliferation and also serve as major receptors for
extracellular-matrix-mediated cell adhesion and migration. The goal of this study
was to determine if Nm23-H1 and EBNA3C can modulate alpha V integrin expression
and downstream activities. The results of our studies indicate that Nm23-H1
downregulates alpha V intregrin expression in a dose responsive manner. In
contrast, EBNA3C can upregulate alpha V integrin expression. Furthermore, the
study showed that the association of the Sp1 and GATA transcription factors with 
Nm23-H1 is required for modulation of the alpha V integrin activity. Thus, these 
results suggest a direct correlation between the alpha V integrin expression and 
the interaction of Nm23-H1 with EBNA3C.

PMID: 16631833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Apr 15;166(2):112-6.

GATA1 mutations in acute leukemia in children with Down syndrome.

Magalhães IQ(1), Splendore A, Emerenciano M, Figueiredo A, Ferrari I,
Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Hematologia/Oncologia Pediátrica SES-DF, Instituto Nacional de
Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

It has been reported that somatic mutations in the X-linked GATA1 gene are
present in hematological clonal disorders in children with Down syndrome (DS). We
analyzed retrospective samples of DS children with acute myeloid leukemia,
transient leukemia (TL), and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) to test whether the
specificity of GATA1 mutations can be helpful in distinguishing these
hematopoietic disorders. A total of 49 samples were subjected to GATA1 mutation
screening by direct sequencing and denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
(PAGE). Mutations in exon 2 of GATA1 were detected in six of eight DS-AML M7
samples and in four of six DS-TL; no mutation was detected in 13 children with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (DS-ALL), 6 with DS-AML (M0, M2, and M5), 6 with
DS-MDS and in 8 DS infants without hematological disorders and 2 children with
AML M7 without DS. Blast cells proportion in the sample represented a critical
aspect on the sensitivity of mutation detection in GATA1, and a combination of
sequence analysis and PAGE is necessary to detect mutations when blast percentage
is low. The absence of detected mutations in any of the DS-MDS cases raises the
question whether MDS in DS children is an intermediate stage between TL and AML
M7, as previously suggested.

PMID: 16631466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 26;344(1):339-45.

The effect of VEGF on blood vessels and blood cells during Xenopus development.

Koibuchi N(1), Taniyama Y, Nagao K, Ogihara T, Kaneda Y, Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Gene Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is known to play an essential role in
vascular development. We have overexpressed VEGF122 or VEGF170, which are
equivalent to mouse VEGF120 and VEGF164, in developing Xenopus embryos.
Overexpression of VEGF170 but not VEGF122 demonstrated an absence of expression
of hematopoietic markers alpha-globin and GATA-1 but only in the posterior
portion of the blood island. Interestingly, strong signals of endothelial
markers, msr, fli-1, and tie-2, were detectable in those regions, instead of
hematopoietic markers. These results suggested both that injection of VEGF170
resulted in disturbance of vasculogenesis in the posterior portion of the blood
island, with excessive production of endothelial cells at the expense of blood
cells, and that the anterior and posterior portions of the VBI may have distinct 
characteristics.

PMID: 16630570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Clin Invest. 2006 May;116(5):1327-36. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Mast cell IL-4 expression is regulated by Ikaros and influences encephalitogenic 
Th1 responses in EAE.

Gregory GD(1), Raju SS, Winandy S, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611-3010, USA.

When exposed to a pathogen, a naive CD4(+) T cell is forced to make a cell fate
decision that leads to a polarized population of Th1 IFN-gamma- or Th2 IL-4-
producing cells. Although IL-4 has traditionally been considered a factor that
promotes Th2 cell differentiation, recent evidence has demonstrated that the site
and timing of IL-4 expression in an immune response determines its ultimate
effects on CD4(+) T cell fate. Using a mast cell (MC) reconstitution model, we
demonstrate that MC-derived IL-4 promoted Th1 responses in vivo. Furthermore, MCs
from genetically disparate mouse strains varied in their potential for IL-4
expression. Independent of the activation mode, MCs from Th1-prone C57BL/6 mice
exhibited a more robust Il4 response than did the Th2-prone strain Balb/c. The
hierarchy of IL-4 expression potential was directly associated with the degree of
basal chromatin accessibility at cis-regulatory elements conserved noncoding
sequence-1 and V(A) enhancer within the Th2 locus. GATA1/2 and Ikaros, factors
with opposing roles in chromatin remodeling, acted at these sites. We propose
that GATA and Ikaros proteins coordinately fine-tune accessibility at the Il4
locus during development to variably regulate IL-4 expression. These events
likely contribute to the genetically determined heterogeneity in Th1 responses
that underlie susceptibility to many diseases.

PMCID: PMC1440706
PMID: 16628252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Leukemia. 2006 Jun;20(6):1002-8.

Physical association of the patient-specific GATA1 mutants with RUNX1 in acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia accompanying Down syndrome.

Xu G(1), Kanezaki R, Toki T, Watanabe S, Takahashi Y, Terui K, Kitabayashi I, Ito
E.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
Japan.

Mutations of the GATA1 gene on chromosome X have been found in almost all cases
of transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
(AMKL) accompanying Down syndrome (DS). Although most GATA1 mutations lead to the
expression of GATA1s lacking the N-terminal activation domain, we recently found 
two novel GATA1 proteins with defects in another N-terminal region. It has been
suggested that loss of the N-terminal portion of GATA1 might interfere with
physiological interactions with the critical megakaryocytic transcription factor 
RUNX1, and this would imply that GATA1s is not able to interact properly with
RUNX1. However, the interaction domain of GATA1 remains controversial. In this
study, we show that GATA1 binds to RUNX1 through its zinc-finger domains, and
that the C-finger is indispensable for synergy with RUNX1. All of the
patient-specific GATA1 mutants interacted efficiently with RUNX1 and retained
their ability to act synergistically with RUNX1 on the megakaryocytic GP1balpha
promoter, whereas the levels of transcriptional activities were diverse among the
mutants. Thus, our data indicate that physical interaction and synergy between
GATA1 and RUNX1 are retained in DS-AMKL, although it is still possible that
increased RUNX1 activity plays a role in the development of leukemia in DS.

PMID: 16628190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;66(8):4167-72.

Hemangioblastomas share protein expression with embryonal hemangioblast
progenitor cell.

Gläsker S(1), Li J, Xia JB, Okamoto H, Zeng W, Lonser RR, Zhuang Z, Oldfield EH, 
Vortmeyer AO.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Hemangioblastomas are central nervous system (CNS) tumors of unknown
histogenesis, which can occur sporadically or in von Hippel-Lindau disease.
Hemangioblastomas are composed of neoplastic "stromal" cells of unknown origin,
accompanied by intensive reactive angiogenesis. Failure to specify the cytologic 
origin of the stromal cell has precluded the development of nonsurgical therapies
and limits understanding of its basic biology. We report that the stromal cells
express proteins (Scl, brachyury, Csf-1R, Gata-1, Flk-1, and Tie-2) that
characterize embryonic progenitor cells with hemangioblastic differentiation
potential and conclude that embryonic progenitors with hemangioblast potential
represent a possible cytologic equivalent of the stromal cell. We also identified
a new autocrine/paracrine stimulatory loop between the receptor Tie-2 and the
hypoxia-inducible factor target Ang-1, which, combined with previous
observations, suggests that a variety of autocrine loops may be initiated in
hemangioblastomas, depending on the differentiation status of the tumor cells and
the extent of HIF downstream activation. Finally, the consistent identification
of Scl in the stromal cells may help explain the unique and characteristic
topographical distribution of hemangioblastomas within the CNS.

PMID: 16618738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 18;103(16):6338-43. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Absence of the transcription factor CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha results 
in loss of myeloid identity in bcr/abl-induced malignancy.

Wagner K(1), Zhang P, Rosenbauer F, Drescher B, Kobayashi S, Radomska HS, Kutok
JL, Gilliland DG, Krauter J, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Room 954, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

The lineage-determining transcription factor CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha) is required for myeloid differentiation. Decreased function or
expression of C/EBPalpha is often found in human acute myeloid leukemia. However,
the precise impact of C/EBPalpha deficiency on the maturation arrest in
leukemogenesis is not well understood. To address this question, we used a murine
transplantation model of a bcr/abl-induced myeloproliferative disease. The
expression of bcr/abl in C/EBPalphapos fetal liver cells led to a chronic myeloid
leukemia-like disease. Surprisingly, bcr/abl-expressing C/EBPalpha-/- fetal liver
cells failed to induce a myeloid disease in transplanted mice, but caused a
fatal, transplantable erythroleukemia instead. Accordingly, increased expression 
of the transcription factors SCL and GATA-1 in hematopoietic precursor cells of
C/EBPalpha-/-R01-EY-11298 ) fetal livers was found. The mechanism for the lineage
shift from myeloid to erythroid leukemia was studied in a bcr/abl-positive cell
line. Consistent with findings of the transplant model, expression of C/EBPalpha 
and GATA-1 was inversely correlated. Id1, an inhibitor of erythroid
differentiation, was identified as a critical direct target of C/EBPalpha.
Down-regulation of Id1 by RNA interference impaired C/EBPalpha-induced
granulocytic differentiation. Taken together, our study provides evidence that
myeloid lineage identity of malignant hematopoietic progenitor cells requires the
residual expression of C/EBPalpha.

PMCID: PMC1458879
PMID: 16606850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13733-42. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Characterization of a megakaryocyte-specific enhancer of the key hemopoietic
transcription factor GATA1.

Guyot B(1), Murai K, Fujiwara Y, Valverde-Garduno V, Hammett M, Wells S, Dear N, 
Orkin SH, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
OX3 9DU, United Kingdom.

Specification and differentiation of the megakaryocyte and erythroid lineages
from a common bipotential progenitor provides a well studied model to dissect
binary cell fate decisions. To understand how the distinct megakaryocyte- and
erythroid-specific gene programs arise, we have examined the transcriptional
regulation of the megakaryocyte erythroid transcription factor GATA1.
Hemopoietic-specific mouse (m)GATA1 expression requires the mGata1 enhancer
mHS-3.5. Within mHS-3.5, the 3' 179 bp of mHS-3.5 are required for megakaryocyte 
but not red cell expression. Here, we show mHS-3.5 binds key hemopoietic
transcription factors in vivo and is required to maintain histone acetylation at 
the mGata1 locus in primary megakaryocytes. Analysis of GATA1-LacZ reporter gene 
expression in transgenic mice shows that a 25-bp element within the 3'-179 bp in 
mHS-3.5 is critical for megakaryocyte expression. In vitro three DNA binding
activities A, B, and C bind to the core of the 25-bp element, and these binding
sites are conserved through evolution. Activity A is the zinc finger
transcription factor ZBP89 that also binds to other cis elements in the mGata1
locus. Activity B is of particular interest as it is present in primary
megakaryocytes but not red cells. Furthermore, mutation analysis in transgenic
mice reveals activity B is required for megakaryocyte-specific enhancer function.
Bioinformatic analysis shows sequence corresponding to the binding site for
activity B is a previously unrecognized motif, present in the cis elements of the
Fli1 gene, another important megakaryocyte-specific transcription factor. In
summary, we have identified a motif and a DNA binding activity likely to be
important in directing a megakaryocyte gene expression program that is distinct
from that in red cells.

PMID: 16551635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Genes Dev. 2006 Mar 15;20(6):654-9.

Multipotential differentiation ability of GATA-1-null erythroid-committed cells.

Kitajima K(1), Zheng J, Yen H, Sugiyama D, Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School and Graduate School of Frontier
Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2006 Jul 15;20(14):1974.

GATA-1, a zinc finger transcription factor, has been believed to be indispensable
for the survival of proerythroblasts. However, we found that GATA-1-null
proerythroblasts could survive and proliferate on OP9 stroma cells in the
presence of erythropoietin. Furthermore, myeloid and mast cells were induced from
the GATA-1-null proerythroblasts by the stimulation of granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-3 (IL-3), respectively, but
lymphoid differentiation was not achieved by in vivo transfer. Thus, without
activity of the transcription factor required for terminal differentiation, even 
relatively mature and committed cells proliferate continuously with the
differentiation capacity to other lineages. Our data suggest that GATA-1 is a
critical transcription factor to fix erythroid progenitors to the erythroid
lineage.

PMCID: PMC1413282
PMID: 16543218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 15;66(6):2990-6.

Erythroid inhibition by the leukemic fusion AML1-ETO is associated with impaired 
acetylation of the major erythroid transcription factor GATA-1.

Choi Y(1), Elagib KE, Delehanty LL, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Human acute myeloid leukemias with the t(8;21) translocation express the AML1-ETO
fusion protein in the hematopoietic stem cell compartment and show impairment in 
erythroid differentiation. This clinical finding is reproduced in multiple murine
and cell culture model systems in which AML1-ETO specifically interferes with
erythroid maturation. Using purified normal human early hematopoietic progenitor 
cells, we find that AML1-ETO impedes the earliest discernable steps of erythroid 
lineage commitment. Correspondingly, GATA-1, a central transcriptional regulator 
of erythroid differentiation, undergoes repression by AML1-ETO in a
nonconventional histone deacetylase-independent manner. In particular, GATA-1
acetylation by its transcriptional coactivator, p300/CBP, a critical regulatory
step in programming erythroid development, is efficiently blocked by AML1-ETO.
Fusion of a heterologous E1A coactivator recruitment module to GATA-1 overrides
the inhibitory effects of AML1-ETO on GATA-1 acetylation and transactivation.
Furthermore, the E1A-GATA-1 fusion, but not wild-type GATA-1, rescues erythroid
lineage commitment in primary human progenitors expressing AML1-ETO. These
results ascribe a novel repressive mechanism to AML1-ETO, blockade of GATA-1
acetylation, which correlates with its inhibitory effects on primary erythroid
lineage commitment.

PMID: 16540647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Blood. 2006 Jul 15;108(2):726-33. Epub 2006 Mar 14.

Real-time monitoring of stress erythropoiesis in vivo using Gata1 and beta-globin
LCR luciferase transgenic mice.

Suzuki M(1), Ohneda K, Hosoya-Ohmura S, Tsukamoto S, Ohneda O, Philipsen S,
Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, the Center for Tsukuba
Advanced Research Alliance (TARA), Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
University of Tsukuba.

Erythroid progenitors have the potential to proliferate rapidly in response to
environmental stimuli. This process is referred to as stress erythropoiesis, with
erythropoietin (EPO) playing central roles in its promotion. In this study, we
wanted to elucidate the molecular mechanisms governing the regulation of stress
erythropoiesis and the maintenance of red-cell homeostasis. This was achieved by 
our development of a noninvasive real-time monitoring system for erythropoiesis
using transgenic mouse lines expressing luciferase under the control of the mouse
Gata1 hematopoietic regulatory domain (G1-HRD-luc) or human beta-globin locus
control region (Hbb-LCR-luc). Optical bioluminescence images revealed that the
luciferase was specifically expressed in spleen and bone marrow and was induced
rapidly in response to anemia and hypoxia stimuli. The G1-HRD-luc activity
tracked the emergence and disappearance of proerythroblast-stage progenitors,
whereas the Hbb-LCR-luc activity tracked erythroblasts and later stage erythroid 
cells. Increased plasma EPO concentration preceded an increase in G1-HRD-luc,
supporting our contention that EPO acts as the key upstream signal in stress
erythropoiesis. Hence, we conclude that G1-HRD-luc and Hbb-LCR-luc reporters are 
differentially activated during stress erythropoiesis and that the transgenic
mouse lines used serve as an important means for understanding the homeostatic
regulation of erythropoiesis.

PMID: 16537808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Circulation. 2006 Mar 21;113(11):1442-50. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Important role of endogenous erythropoietin system in recruitment of endothelial 
progenitor cells in hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension in mice.

Satoh K(1), Kagaya Y, Nakano M, Ito Y, Ohta J, Tada H, Karibe A, Minegishi N,
Suzuki N, Yamamoto M, Ono M, Watanabe J, Shirato K, Ishii N, Sugamura K,
Shimokawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. shimo@cardio.med.tohoku.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have suggested that endogenous erythropoietin (Epo)
plays an important role in the mobilization of bone marrow-derived endothelial
progenitor cells (EPCs). However, it remains to be elucidated whether the Epo
system exerts protective effects on pulmonary hypertension (PH), a fatal disorder
encountered in cardiovascular medicine.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A mouse model of hypoxia-induced PH was used for study. We
evaluated right ventricular systolic pressure, right ventricular hypertrophy, and
pulmonary vascular remodeling in mice lacking the Epo receptor (EpoR) in
nonerythroid lineages (EpoR(-/-) rescued mice) after 3 weeks of exposure to
hypoxia. Those mice lack EpoR in the cardiovascular system but not in the
hematopoietic system. The development of PH and pulmonary vascular remodeling
were accelerated in EpoR(-/-) rescued mice compared with wild-type mice. The
mobilization of EPCs and their recruitment to the pulmonary endothelium were
significantly impaired in EpoR(-/-) rescued mice. By contrast, reconstitution of 
the bone marrow with wild-type bone marrow cells ameliorated PH in the EpoR(-/-) 
rescued mice. Hypoxia enhanced the expression of EpoR on pulmonary endothelial
cells in wild-type but not EpoR(-/-) rescued mice. Finally, hypoxia activated
endothelial nitric oxide synthase in the lungs in wild-type mice but not in
EpoR(-/-) rescued mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the endogenous Epo/EpoR system plays an 
important role in the recruitment of EPCs and prevents the development of PH
during chronic hypoxia in mice in vivo, suggesting the therapeutic importance of 
the system for the treatment of PH.

PMID: 16534010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Dev Genes Evol. 2006 Sep;216(9):523-9. Epub 2006 Mar 11.

Characterisation of duplicate zinc finger like 2 erythroid precursor genes in
zebrafish.

Hogan BM(1), Pase L, Hall NE, Lieschke GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria,
Australia.

In separate expression pattern and micro-array screens the zinc finger containing
factor, znfl2, has been previously implicated in hematopoiesis. Here we analysed 
znfl2 expression in detail and performed genetic epistatic analysis in a series
of hematopoietic mutants and transient gain-of-function models. znfl2 expression 
in the hematopoietic intermediate mesoderm and derived erythrocytes required
early genes cloche and spadetail, but not gata1. Expression was up-regulated in
scl gain-of-function embryos, identifying znfl2 as an early erythroid factor that
is regulated upstream or independently of gata1. Furthermore, we identified a
duplicate znfl2 gene in the genome (znfl2b) which was expressed in early
mesendoderm and weakly in the lateral plate mesoderm, overlapping in expression
with znfl2. The production of loss-of-function models for znfl2, znfl2b and
znfl2/znfl2b together suggested that these erythrocyte specific zinc finger genes
are dispensible for erythropoiesis.

PMID: 16532340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Curr Biol. 2006 Mar 7;16(5):506-11.

Specification of the primitive myeloid precursor pool requires signaling through 
Alk8 in zebrafish.

Hogan BM(1), Layton JE, Pyati UJ, Nutt SL, Hayman JW, Varma S, Heath JK, Kimelman
D, Lieschke GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Post Office Box 2008, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

In the zebrafish embryo, primitive hematopoiesis initiates in two spatially
distinct regions. Rostrally, the cells of the anterior lateral plate mesoderm
(ALPM) give rise exclusively to cells of the myeloid lineage in a pu.1-dependent 
manner. Caudally, in the posterior lateral plate mesoderm (PLPM), the expression 
of gata1 defines a precursor pool that gives rise predominantly to the embryonic 
erythrocytes. The transcription factor scl acts upstream of both gata1 and pu.1
in these precursor pools, activating a series of conserved transcription factors 
that cell-autonomously specify either myeloid or erythroid fates. However, the
mechanisms underlying the spatial separation of the hematopoietic precursor pools
and the induction of differential gene expression within these pools are not well
understood. We show here that the Bmp receptor lost-a-fin/alk8 is required for
rostral pu.1 expression and myelopoiesis, identifying an early genetic event that
distinguishes between the induction of anterior and posterior hematopoiesis.
Introducing a constitutively active version of the Alk8 receptor led to increased
pu.1 expression, but the role of alk8 was independent of the scl-dependent
cell-fate pathway. Furthermore, the role of Alk8 in myelopoiesis was genetically 
separable from its earlier role in dorsal-ventral embryonic patterning.

PMID: 16527746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Mech Dev. 2006 Apr;123(4):277-87. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Knockdown of zebrafish crim1 results in a bent tail phenotype with defects in
somite and vascular development.

Kinna G(1), Kolle G, Carter A, Key B, Lieschke GJ, Perkins A, Little MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Qld 4072, Australia.

The Crim1 gene encodes a transmembrane protein containing six cysteine-rich
repeats similar to those found in the BMP antagonist, chordin (chd). To
investigate its physiological role, zebrafish crim1 was cloned and shown to be
both maternally and zygotically expressed during zebrafish development in sites
including the vasculature, intermediate cell mass, notochord, and otic vesicle.
Bent or hooked tails with U-shaped somites were observed in 85% of morphants from
12 hpf. This was accompanied by a loss of muscle pioneer cells. While morpholino 
knockdown of crim1 showed some evidence of ventralisation, including expansion of
the intermediate cell mass (ICM), reduction in head size bent tails and
disruption to the somites and notochord, this did not mimic the classically
ventralised phenotype, as assessed by the pattern of expression of the dorsal
markers chordin, otx2 and the ventral markers eve1, pax2.1, tal1 and gata1
between 75% epiboly and six-somites. From 24 hpf, morphants displayed an
expansion of the ventral mesoderm-derived ICM, as evidenced by expansion of tal1,
lmo2 and crim1 itself. Analysis of the crim1 morphant phenotype in Tg(fli:EGFP)
fish showed a clear reduction in the endothelial cells forming the intersegmental
vessels and a loss of the dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessel (DLAV). Hence,
the primary role of zebrafish crim1 is likely to be the regulation of somitic and
vascular development.

PMID: 16524703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Blood. 2006 Jul 1;108(1):262-9. Epub 2006 Mar 7.

FOG-1 represses GATA-1-dependent FcepsilonRI beta-chain transcription:
transcriptional mechanism of mast-cell-specific gene expression in mice.

Maeda K(1), Nishiyama C, Tokura T, Nakano H, Kanada S, Nishiyama M, Okumura K,
Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center and Department of Immunology, Juntendo
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Cell-type-specific transcription of mouse high-affinity IgE receptor
(FcepsilonRI) beta-chain is positively regulated by the transcription factor
GATA-1. Although GATA-1 is expressed in erythroid cells, megakaryocytes, and mast
cells, the expression of mouse FcepsilonRI beta-chain is restricted to mast
cells. In the present study, we characterized the role of GATA-associated
cofactor FOG-1 in the regulation of the FcepsilonRI beta-chain promoter. The
expression levels of FOG-1, GATA-1, and beta-chain in each hematopoietic cell
line were analyzed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and Western blotting. FOG-1 expression was higher in the beta-chain-negative
hematopoietic progenitor cell line Ba/F3 than in the beta-chain-positive mast
cell line PT18. By contrast, GATA-1 expression was similar when comparing the 2
cell lines. A transient reporter assay demonstrated that the beta-chain promoter 
functioned in PT18 but not in Ba/F3 and that the transcription activity of the
beta-chain promoter in PT18 was markedly suppressed by overexpression of FOG-1.
Although the activity of the beta-chain promoter, which was upregulated by
coexpression of GATA-1, was significantly suppressed by coexpression of FOG-1 in 
the simian kidney CV-1 cells (beta-chain(-), GATA-1(-), and FOG-1(-)), the
transactivation of the beta-chain promoter by the GATA-1 mutant V205G, which
cannot bind FOG-1, was not affected by coexpression of FOG-1. Further,
overexpression of FOG-1 in PT18 resulted in decreases in cell surface expression 
of FcepsilonRI and beta-chain transcription. Finally, suppression of FOG-1
expression using an siRNA approach resulted in increased beta-chain promoter
activity in Ba/F3. These results suggest that FOG-1 expression level regulates
the GATA-1-dependent FcepsilonRI beta-chain promoter.

PMID: 16522818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Theor Biol. 2006 Aug 21;241(4):852-65. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Towards an understanding of lineage specification in hematopoietic stem cells: a 
mathematical model for the interaction of transcription factors GATA-1 and PU.1.

Roeder I(1), Glauche I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of 
Leipzig, Haertelstr. 16/18, D-04107 Leipzig, Germany.
ingo.roeder@imise.uni-leipzig.de

In addition to their self-renewal capabilities, hematopoietic stem cells
guarantee the continuous supply of fully differentiated, functional cells of
various types in the peripheral blood. The process which controls differentiation
into the different lineages of the hematopoietic system (erythroid, myeloid,
lymphoid) is referred to as lineage specification. It requires a potentially
multi-step decision sequence which determines the fate of the cells and their
successors. It is generally accepted that lineage specification is regulated by a
complex system of interacting transcription factors. However, the underlying
principles controlling this regulation are currently unknown. Here, we propose a 
simple quantitative model describing the interaction of two transcription
factors. This model is motivated by experimental observations on the
transcription factors GATA-1 and PU.1, both known to act as key regulators and
potential antagonists in the erythroid vs. myeloid differentiation processes of
hematopoietic progenitor cells. We demonstrate the ability of the model to
account for the observed switching behavior of a transition from a state of low
expression of both factors (undifferentiated state) to the dominance of one
factor (differentiated state). Depending on the parameter choice, the model
predicts two different possibilities to explain the experimentally suggested,
stem cell characterizing priming state of low level co-expression. Whereas
increasing transcription rates are sufficient to induce differentiation in one
scenario, an additional system perturbation (by stochastic fluctuations or
directed impulses) of transcription factor levels is required in the other case.

PMID: 16510158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 28;103(9):3339-44. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Identification of distinct molecular phenotypes in acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia by gene expression profiling.

Bourquin JP(1), Subramanian A, Langebrake C, Reinhardt D, Bernard O, Ballerini P,
Baruchel A, Cavé H, Dastugue N, Hasle H, Kaspers GL, Lessard M, Michaux L, Vyas
P, van Wering E, Zwaan CM, Golub TR, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) are predisposed to develop acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), characterized by expression of truncated GATA1 
transcription factor protein (GATA1s) due to somatic mutation. The treatment
outcome for DS-AMKL is more favorable than for AMKL in non-DS patients. To gain
insight into gene expression differences in AMKL, we compared 24 DS and 39 non-DS
AMKL samples. We found that non-DS-AMKL samples cluster in two groups,
characterized by differences in expression of HOX/TALE family members. Both of
these groups are distinct from DS-AMKL, independent of chromosome 21 gene
expression. To explore alterations of the GATA1 transcriptome, we used
cross-species comparison with genes regulated by GATA1 expression in murine
erythroid precursors. Genes repressed after GATA1 induction in the murine system,
most notably GATA-2, MYC, and KIT, show increased expression in DS-AMKL,
suggesting that GATA1s fail to repress this class of genes. Only a subset of
genes that are up-regulated upon GATA1 induction in the murine system show
increased expression in DS-AMKL, including GATA1 and BACH1, a probable negative
regulator of megakaryocytic differentiation located on chromosome 21.
Surprisingly, expression of the chromosome 21 gene RUNX1, a known regulator of
megakaryopoiesis, was not elevated in DS-AMKL. Our results identify relevant
signatures for distinct AMKL entities and provide insight into gene expression
changes associated with these related leukemias.

PMCID: PMC1413912
PMID: 16492768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Genes Cells. 2006 Mar;11(3):293-303.

Characterization of the heme synthesis enzyme coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPO) in
zebrafish erythrogenesis.

Hanaoka R(1), Katayama S, Dawid IB, Kawahara A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Molecular Genetics, Horizontal Medical Research
Organization, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Yoshida Konoe-cho,
Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan.

Hemoglobin consists of heme and globin proteins and is essential for oxygen
transport in all vertebrates. Although biochemical features of heme synthesis
enzymes have been well characterized, the function of these enzymes in early
embryogenesis is not fully understood. We found that the sixth heme synthesis
enzyme, coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPO), is predominantly expressed in the
intermediate cell mass (ICM) that is a major site of zebrafish primitive
hematopoiesis. Knockdown of zebrafish CPO using anti-sense morpholinos (CPO-MO)
leads to a significant suppression of hemoglobin production without apparent
reduction of blood cells. Injection of human CPO RNA, but not a mutant CPO RNA
that is similar to a mutant responsible for a hereditary coproporphyria (HCP),
restores hemoglobin production in the CPO-MO-injected embryos. Furthermore,
expression of CPO in the ICM is severely suppressed in both vlad tepes/gata1
mutants and in biklf-MO-injected embryos. In contrast, over-expression of biklf
and gata1 significantly induces ectopic CPO expression. The function of CPO in
heme biosynthesis is apparently conserved between zebrafish and human, suggesting
that CPO-MO-injected zebrafish embryos might be a useful in vivo assay system to 
measure the biological activity of human CPO mutations.

PMID: 16483317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Sci China C Life Sci. 2005 Dec;48(6):608-15.

Ethanol disrupts the formation of hypochord and dorsal aorta during the
development of embryonic zebrafish.

Qian L(1), Wang Y, Jiang Q, Zhong T, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Medical 
School of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

Exposure to ethanol during human embryonic period has severe teratogenic effects 
on the cardiovascular system. In our study, we demonstrated that ethanol of
gradient concentrations can interfere with the establishment of circulatory
system in embryonic zebrafish. The effective concentration to cause 50%
malformations (EC50) was 182.5 mmol/L. The ethanol pulse exposure experiment
displayed that dome stage during embryogenesis is the sensitive time window to
ethanol. It is found that 400 mmol/L ethanol pulse exposure can induce
circulatory defects in 43% treated embryos. We ruled out the possibility that
ethanol can interfere with the process of hematopoiesis in zebrafish. By
employing in situ hybridization with endothelial biomarker (Flk-1), we revealed
that ethanol disrupts the establishment of trunk axial vasculature, but has no
effect on cranial vessels. Combined with the results of semi-thin histological
sections, the in situ hybridization experiments with arterial and venous
biomarkers (ephrinB2, ephB4) suggested that ethanol mainly interrupts the
development of dorsal aorta while has little effect on axial vein. Further study 
indicated the negative influence of ethanol on the development of hypochord in
zebrafish. The consequent lack of vasculogenic factors including Radar and Ang-1 
partly explains the defects in formation and integrity of dorsal aorta. These
results provide important clues to the study of adverse effects of ethanol on the
cardiovascular development in human fetus.

PMID: 16483140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Soc Biol. 2005;199(3):219-31.

[Erythropoiesis: a paradigm for the role of caspases in cell death and
differentiation].

[Article in French]

Ribeil JA(1), Zermati Y, Vandekerckhove J, Dussiot M, Kersual J, Hermine O.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8147 et Département d'Hématologie, Faculté de Médecine et Université 
René Descartes Paris V, Hôpital Necker, France, 75743 Cedex 15.

Erythroid differentiation involves the transcription factor GATA-1 that
positively regulates promoters of erythroid genes (including haemoglobin,
glycophorin, erythropoietin receptor) and of erythropoietin. Terminal erythroid
differentiation is characterized by major morphological changes that include
chromatin condensation and cell size reduction. The morphological changes are
partially similar at least to those observed during apoptosis. The production of 
red cells depends on the apoptosis rate of erythroid progenitors and precursors. 
Upon erythropoietin starvation or engagement of the death receptor Fas, caspases 
are activated in erythroid precursors and cleave GATA-1, thus inducing maturation
arrest and apoptosis of immature erythroblasts. We have recently demonstrated
that, upon erythropoietin stimulation, caspase-3 was also activated, an event
required for human terminal erythroblast maturation. Proteins cleaved by caspases
in erythroid cells undergoing terminal differentiation include Lamin B and
Acinus, which are involved in chromatin condensation. In contrast, despite
caspase-3 activation neither GATA-1 degradation nor apoptosis was observed. Thus,
the fate of erythroid precursors is determined downstream of caspase activation
by the pattern of cleaved targets. Therefore, there are some mechanisms
underlying the selective protection of caspase-3 targets during erythropoiesis.
This model in which caspases activation is required for differentiation may apply
to other haematopoietic or non haematopoietic cellular systems which are
described in this review.

PMID: 16471262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2286-91. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Regulation of allergic airway inflammation through Toll-like receptor 4-mediated 
modification of mast cell function.

Nigo YI(1), Yamashita M, Hirahara K, Shinnakasu R, Inami M, Kimura M, Hasegawa A,
Kohno Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

In a mouse experimental asthma model, the administration of bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), particularly at low doses, enhances the levels of
ovalbumin (OVA)-induced eosinophilic airway inflammation. In an effort to clarify
the cellular and molecular basis for the LPS effect, we demonstrate that the
OVA-induced eosinophilic inflammation in the lung is dramatically increased by
the administration of LPS in wild-type mice, whereas such increase was not
observed in mast-cell-deficient mice or Toll-like receptor (TLR)4-deficient mice.
Adoptive transfer of bone-marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) from wild-type, but
not from TLR4-deficient, mice restored the increased eosinophilic inflammation in
mast-cell-deficient mice. Wild-type BMMCs pretreated with LPS in vitro also
reconstituted the eosinophilic inflammation. Moreover, in vitro analysis revealed
that the treatment of BMMCs with LPS resulted in NF-kappaB activation, sustained 
up-regulation of GATA1 and -2 expression, and increased the capability to produce
IL-5 and -13. Dramatic increases in the expression of IL-5 and -13 and Eotaxin 2 
were detected in LPS-treated BMMCs after costimulation with LPS and IgE/Ag.
Overexpression of GATA1, but not GATA2, in MC9 mast cells resulted in increased
transcriptional activity of IL-4, -5, and -13. Furthermore, the levels of
transcription of Th2 cytokines in BMMCs were decreased by the introduction of
small interfering RNA for GATA1. Thus, mast cells appear to control allergic
airway inflammation after their activation and modulation through TLR4-mediated
induction of GATA1 and subsequent increase in Th2 cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC1413725
PMID: 16461458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Leukemia. 2006 Mar;20(3):417-25.

The GATA site-dependent hemogen promoter is transcriptionally regulated by GATA1 
in hematopoietic and leukemia cells.

Yang LV(1), Wan J, Ge Y, Fu Z, Kim SY, Fujiwara Y, Taub JW, Matherly LH, Eliason 
J, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

Hemgn (a gene symbol for hemogen in mouse, EDAG in human and RP59 in rat) encodes
a nuclear protein that is highly expressed in hematopoietic tissues and acute
leukemia. To characterize its regulatory mechanisms, we examined the activities
of a Hemgn promoter containing 2975 bp of 5' flanking sequence and 196 bp of 5'
untranslated region (5' UTR) sequence both in vitro and in vivo: this promoter is
preferentially activated in a hematopoietic cell line, not in nonhematopoietic
cell lines, and is sufficient to drive the transcription of a lacZ transgene in
hematopoietic tissues in transgenic mice. Mutagenesis analyses showed that the 5'
UTR including two highly conserved GATA boxes is critical for the promoter
activity. GATA1, not GATA2, binds to the GATA binding sites and transactivates
the Hemgn promoter in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, the expression of
human hemogen (EDAG) transcripts were closely correlated with levels of GATA1
transcripts in primary acute myeloid leukemia specimens. This study suggests that
the Hemgn promoter contains critical regulatory elements for its transcription in
hematopoietic tissues and Hemgn is a direct target of GATA1 in leukemia cells.

PMID: 16437149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nat Methods. 2006 Feb;3(2):109-16.

A versatile tool for conditional gene expression and knockdown.

Szulc J(1), Wiznerowicz M, Sauvain MO, Trono D, Aebischer P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Drug-inducible systems allowing the control of gene expression in mammalian cells
are invaluable tools for genetic research, and could also fulfill essential roles
in gene- and cell-based therapy. Currently available systems, however, often have
limited in vivo functionality because of leakiness, insufficient levels of
induction, lack of tissue specificity or prohibitively complicated designs. Here 
we describe a lentiviral vector-based, conditional gene expression system for
drug-controllable expression of polymerase (Pol) II promoter-driven transgenes or
Pol III promoter-controlled sequences encoding small inhibitory hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs). This system has great robustness and versatility, governing tightly
controlled gene expression in cell lines, in embryonic or hematopoietic stem
cells, in human tumors xenotransplanted into nude mice, in the brain of rats
injected intraparenchymally with the vector, and in transgenic mice generated by 
infection of fertilized oocytes. These results open up promising perspectives for
basic or translational research and for the development of gene-based
therapeutics.

PMID: 16432520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;12(2):608-16.

Transcriptional regulation of the human reduced folate carrier in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Liu M(1), Ge Y, Payton SG, Aboukameel A, Buck S, Flatley RM, Haska C, Mohammad R,
Taub JW, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, 110
East Warren Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

PURPOSE: The transcriptional regulation of the human reduced folate carrier
(hRFC), involved in cellular uptake of methotrexate and reduced folates, was
studied in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The hRFC gene is
regulated by six noncoding exons (A1/A2 and A to E) and multiple promoters. In
ALL, hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B are the major transcript forms.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: RNAs from 18 ALL lymphoblast specimens and 10 nonobese
diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient ALL xenografts were assayed by real-time
reverse transcription-PCR for hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B transcripts and for
transcripts encoding USF1, GATA1, Sp1, and Ikaros transcription factors. For the 
xenografts, gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays assessed
transcription factor binding to the hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B promoters. CpG
methylation density within a 334-bp region, including the core hRFC-B promoter,
was established by bisulfite sequencing. hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B promoter
polymorphisms were assayed by DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: For the 28 ALLs, hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B transcripts spanned a 546-fold
range. By chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift assays, binding was
confirmed for USF1 and GATA1 for hRFC-A1/A2, and for Sp1, USF1, and Ikaros for
hRFC-B. hRFC transcript levels correlated with those for GATA1 and USF1 for
hRFC-A1/A2 and with Sp1 and USF1 transcripts for hRFC-B. CpG methylation in ALL
did not correlate with hRFC-B transcripts. In 40 ALL and 17 non-ALL specimens, 2 
cosegregating high-frequency polymorphisms (T-1309/C-1217 and C-1309/T-1217;
allelic frequencies of 36% and 64%, respectively) were detected in the A1/A2
promoter; none were detected in promoter B. The hRFC-A1/A2 polymorphisms only
slightly affected promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show a complex regulation of hRFC in ALL involving the
hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B promoters and noncoding exons. Although Sp1, USF1, and
GATA1 levels are critical determinants of hRFC transcription in ALL, neither DNA 
methylation nor promoter polymorphisms contribute to differences in hRFC
expression.

PMID: 16428507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Oncogene. 2006 May 4;25(19):2758-72.

The carbonic anhydrase I locus contains a c-Myb target promoter and modulates
differentiation of murine erythroleukemia cells.

Chen J(1), Kremer CS, Bender TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, VA 22908-0734, USA.

The Myb proto-oncogene encodes a transcription factor (c-Myb) that is essential
for normal hematopoiesis and is thought to regulate hematopoietic cell
proliferation and differentiation by regulating expression of specific target
genes. We identify the mouse erythroid-specific carbonic anhydrase I promoter
(CAIe) as a target of c-Myb activity and demonstrate that Myb activity is
critical for carbonic anhydrase I (CAI) expression in C19 MEL cells. CAI
expression is downregulated when MEL cells differentiate in response to MEnT or
treatment with N, N-hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA). Coexpression of GATA-1
with c-Myb results in synergistic activation of transcription from the CAIe
promoter and both transcription factors interact with the CAIe promoter in vivo. 
We identify a novel 20 bp sequence in the CAIe promoter that is sufficient to
mediate synergistic activation of the CAIe promoter by c-Myb and GATA-1. c-Myb
and GATA-1 interact with this DNA sequence suggesting that c-Myb and GATA-1 may
be contained in a complex that interacts with this region of the CAIe promoter.
Forced expression of CAI delayed HMBA-induced differentiation of MEL cells and
maintained them in a proliferating state. These data strongly suggest that CAI is
a c-Myb target and is involved in regulating MEL cell proliferation and
differentiation.

PMID: 16407849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Biol Reprod. 2006 May;74(5):798-806. Epub 2006 Jan 11.

Adult sertoli cells are not terminally differentiated in the Djungarian hamster: 
effect of FSH on proliferation and junction protein organization.

Tarulli GA(1), Stanton PG, Lerchl A, Meachem SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton Victoria, 3168,
Australia.

Sertoli cell number is considered to be stable and unmodifiable by hormones after
puberty in mammals, although recent data using the seasonal breeding adult
Djungarian hamster (Phodopus sungorus) model challenged this assertion by
demonstrating a decrease in Sertoli cell number after gonadotropin depletion and 
a return to control levels following 7 days of FSH replacement. The present study
aimed to determine whether adult Sertoli cells are terminally differentiated
using known characteristics of cellular differentiation, including proliferation,
junction protein localization, and expression of particular maturational markers,
in the Djungarian hamster model. Adult long-day (LD) photoperiod (16L:8D)
hamsters were exposed to short-day (SD) photoperiod (8L:16D) for 11 wk to
suppress gonadotropins and then received exogenous FSH for up to 10 days. Sertoli
cell proliferation was assessed by immunofluorescence by the colocalization of
GATA4 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen and quantified by stereology.
Markers of Sertoli cell maturation (immature, cytokeratin 18 [KRT18]; mature,
GATA1) and junction proteins (actin, espin, claudin 11 [CLDN11], and tight
junction protein 1 [TJP1, also known as ZO-1]) also were localized using confocal
immunofluorescence. In response to FSH treatment, proliferation was upregulated
within 2 days compared with SD controls (90% vs. 0.2%, P < 0.001) and declined
gradually thereafter. In LD hamsters, junction proteins colocalized at the basal 
aspect of Sertoli cells, consistent with inter-Sertoli cell junctions, and were
disordered within the Sertoli cell cytoplasm in SD animals. Exogenous FSH
treatment promptly restored localization of these junction markers to the LD
phenotype. Protein markers of maturity remain consistent with those of adult
Sertoli cells. It is concluded that adult Sertoli cells are not terminally
differentiated in the Djungarian hamster and that FSH plays an important role in 
governing the differentiation process. It is proposed that Sertoli cells can
enter a transitional state, exhibiting features common to both undifferentiated
and differentiated Sertoli cells.

PMID: 16407497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Blood. 2006 May 1;107(9):3527-30. Epub 2006 Jan 3.

Phosphorylation of Gata1 at serine residues 72, 142, and 310 is not essential for
hematopoiesis in vivo.

Rooke HM(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Phosphorylation of transcription factors is important in posttranslational
control of protein function. The indispensable zinc-finger transcription factor, 
Gata1, is phosphorylated constitutively at 6 serine residues (26, 49, 72, 142,
178, 187), and at a seventh (310) following induction of erythroid
differentiation. However, the biologic consequences of phosphorylation with
respect to function are unclear. To address this issue, we generated mice with
serine-to-alanine mutations at the inducibly phosphorylated serine 310 alone or
at conserved serine residues 72, 142, and 310 together. The peripheral blood
parameters of the mice were normal, as was their response to acute erythropoietic
stress. Analysis of hematopoietic progenitor populations during ontogeny and into
adulthood showed a moderate decrease in erythroid burst-forming unit (BFU-E) and 
erythroid colony-forming unit (CFU-E) numbers only in the adult bone marrow of
the triple mutant. Yet, later stage erythropoiesis was not perturbed. This
suggests that any molecular consequences associated with loss of phosphorylation 
at residues 72, 142, and 310 can be compensated for in the in vivo environment.

PMCID: PMC1895769
PMID: 16391009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2005;15(3):217-28.

Increased dosage of the RUNX1/AML1 gene: a third mode of RUNX leukemia?

Osato M(1), Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Oncology Research Institute, National
University of Singapore. motomi@imcb.a-star.edu.sg

RUNX1/AML1, located on chromosome 21, is a key factor in the generation and
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells and the gene most frequently implicated
in human leukemias. Chromosome translocations and point mutations are
well-documented genetic alterations in RUNX leukemia (also known as CBF
leukemia). In addition, overdosage or overexpression of RUNX1 is suspected to be 
a third mode of RUNX1 involvement in leukemogenesis. The possibility that this
mode might underlie Down syndrome-related leukemias caused by trisomy of
chromosome 21 is discussed.

PMID: 16390318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2005;15(3):207-16.

AML-1-ETO-Mediated erythroid inhibition: new paradigms for differentiation
blockade by a leukemic fusion protein.

Choi Y(1), Elagib KE, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, 22908, USA.

The chromosomal translocation t(8;21), generating the AML1-ETO fusion protein, is
frequently associated with French-American-British (FAB) type M2 acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). t(8;21) fuses the runt domain from the hematopoietic
transcription factor RUNX1 with almost the entire transcriptional repressor ETO. 
AML1-ETO inhibits normal definitive hematopoiesis and blocks erythroid
differentiation. Several mechanistic models for the role of AML1-ETO in leukemia 
development have emerged over the last decade. Most of these models have
emphasized the capacity of the fusion protein to redirect repressive cofactors,
such as histone deacetylases (HDACs) and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), to RUNX 
target genes, thereby reversing the hematopoietic transcriptional program
activated by wild-type RUNX1a phenomenon referred to collectively in this review 
as the "classical" corepressor model. Because erythropoiesis occurs in a
RUNX-independent manner, this dominant-negative "classical" model cannot explain 
the prominent repression of red-cell development by AML1-ETO. This review will
consider the clinical and mechanistic significance of erythroid inhibition by
AML1-ETO. Additional models to account for this mysterious oncogenic function are
proposed.

PMID: 16390317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1054:433-8.

Genetic analysis of candidate modifier polymorphisms in Hb E-beta 0-thalassemia
patients.

Sripichai O(1), Whitacre J, Munkongdee T, Kumkhaek C, Makarasara W, Winichagoon
P, Abel K, Braun A, Fucharoen S.

Author information: 
(1)Thalassemia Research Center, Institute of Science and Technology for Research 
and Development, Mahidol University, Salaya, Phuttamonthon 4 Rd. Phuttamonthon,
Nakornpathom 73170, Thailand.

Hemoglobin E (Hb E)-beta-thalassemia patients display a range of clinical
severities, from nearly asymptomatic to transfusion-dependent thalassemia major. 
Given this clinical heterogeneity, additional genetic factors modifying disease
severity remain to be discovered. Association studies are being conducted to
elucidate the role of genetic polymorphisms as disease severity modifiers in Hb
E-beta-thalassemia patients. Using strict scoring criteria, 1060 Hb
E-beta-thalassemia patients were categorized into mild, moderate, and severe
groups. Taking a candidate gene approach, we found no statistically significant
differences between the mild and severe patients groups in allelic or genotypic
frequencies for single nucleotide polymorphisms within five genes known to
influence globin gene expression and erythropoiesis.

PMID: 16339693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1054:103-17.

Role of alpha-hemoglobin-stabilizing protein in normal erythropoiesis and
beta-thalassemia.

Weiss MJ(1), Zhou S, Feng L, Gell DA, Mackay JP, Shi Y, Gow AJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. weissmi@email.chop.edu

Hemoglobin (Hb) synthesis is coordinated by homeostatic mechanisms to limit the
accumulation of free alpha or beta subunits, which are cytotoxic. Alpha
hemoglobin-stabilizing protein (AHSP) is an abundant erythroid protein that
specifically binds free alphaHb, stabilizes its structure, and limits its ability
to participate in chemical reactions that generate reactive oxygen species. Gene 
ablation studies in mice demonstrate that AHSP is required for normal
erythropoiesis. AHSP-null erythrocytes are short-lived, contain Hb precipitates, 
and exhibit signs of oxidative damage. Loss of AHSP exacerbates beta-thalassemia 
in mice, indicating that altered AHSP expression or function could modify
thalassemia phenotypes in humans, a topic that is beginning to be explored in
clinical studies. We used biochemical, spectroscopic, and crystallographic
methods to examine how AHSP stabilizes alphaHb. AHSP binds the G and H helices of
alphaHb on a surface that largely overlaps with the alpha1-beta1 interface of
HbA. This result explains previous findings that betaHb can competitively
displace AHSP from alphaHb to form HbA tetramer. Remarkably, binding of AHSP to
oxygenated alphaHb induces dramatic conformational changes and converts the
heme-bound iron to an oxidized hemichrome state in which all six coordinate
positions are occupied. This structure limits the reactivity of heme iron,
providing a mechanism by which AHSP stabilizes alphaHb. These findings suggest a 
biochemical pathway through which AHSP might participate in normal Hb synthesis
and modulate the severity of thalassemias. Moreover, understanding how AHSP
stabilizes alphaHb provides a theoretical basis for new strategies to inhibit the
damaging effects of free alphaHb that accumulates in beta-thalassemia.

PMID: 16339656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1054:55-67.

Isolation and characterization of hematopoietic transcription factor complexes by
in vivo biotinylation tagging and mass spectrometry.

Grosveld F(1), Rodriguez P, Meier N, Krpic S, Pourfarzad F, Papadopoulos P,
Kolodziej K, Patrinos GP, Hostert A, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, 50 Dr.
Molewaterplein, 3015 GE Rotterdam, the Netherlands. f.grosveld@erasmusmc.nl

We have described the application of a simple biotinylation tagging approach for 
the direct purification of tagged transcription factor complexes, based on the
use of artificial short peptide tags that are specifically and efficiently
biotinylated by the bacterial BirA biotin ligase, which is co-expressed in cells 
with the tagged factor. We used this approach to initially characterize complexes
formed by the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 in erythroid cells.
GATA-1 is essential for the erythroid differentiation, its functions encompassing
upregulation of erythroid genes, repression of alternative transcription
programs, and suppression of cell proliferation. However, it was not clear how
all of these GATA-1 functions are mediated. Our work describes, for the first
time, distinct GATA-1 interactions with the essential hematopoietic factor
Gfi-1b, the repressive MeCP1 complex, and the chromatin remodeling ACF/WCRF
complex, in addition to the known GATA-1/FOG-1 and GATA-1/TAL-1 complexes. We
also provide evidence that distinct GATA-1 complexes are associated with specific
GATA-1 functions in erythroid differentiation, for example, GATA-1/Gfi-1b with
the suppression of cell proliferation and GATA-1/FOG-1/MeCP1 with the repression 
of other hematopoietic transcription programs. We next applied the biotinylation 
tag to Ldb-1, a known partner of GATA-1, and characterized a number of novel
interaction partners that are essential in erythroid development, in particular, 
Eto-2, Lmo4, and CdK9. Last, we are in the process of applying the same
technology to characterize the factors that are bound to the suppressed
gamma-globin promoter in vivo.

PMID: 16339652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. PLoS Biol. 2006 Jan;4(1):e10.

Ets1-related protein is a key regulator of vasculogenesis in zebrafish.

Sumanas S(1), Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Jan;4(1):e24.

During embryonic development, multiple signaling pathways control specification, 
migration, and differentiation of the vascular endothelial cell precursors,
angioblasts. No single gene responsible for the commitment of mesenchymal cells
to the angioblast cell fate has been identified as yet. Here we report
characterization and functional studies of Etsrp, a novel zebrafish ETS domain
protein. etsrp embryonic expression is only restricted to vascular endothelial
cells and their earliest precursors. Morpholino knockdown of Etsrp protein
function resulted in the complete absence of circulation in zebrafish embryos.
Angioblasts in etsrp-morpholino-injected embryos (morphants) failed to undergo
migration and differentiation and did not coalesce into functional blood vessels.
Expression of all vascular endothelial molecular markers tested was severely
reduced in etsrp morphants, whereas hematopoietic markers were not affected.
Overexpression of etsrp RNA caused multiple cell types to express vascular
endothelial markers. etsrp RNA restored expression of vascular markers in cloche 
mutants, defective in hematopoietic and endothelial cell formation, arguing that 
etsrp functions downstream of cloche in angioblast formation. etsrp gene function
was also required for endothelial marker induction by the vascular endothelial
growth factor (vegf) and stem cell leukemia (scl/tal1). These results demonstrate
that Etsrp is necessary and sufficient for the initiation of vasculogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1310653
PMID: 16336046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Jul;13(7):1064-74. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Overexpression of Ets-1 in human hematopoietic progenitor cells blocks erythroid 
and promotes megakaryocytic differentiation.

Lulli V(1), Romania P, Morsilli O, Gabbianelli M, Pagliuca A, Mazzeo S, Testa U, 
Peschle C, Marziali G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Ets-1 is a widely expressed transcription factor implicated in development,
tumorigenesis and hematopoiesis. We analyzed Ets-1 gene expression during human
erythroid and megakaryocytic (MK) differentiation in unilineage cultures of CD34+
progenitor cells. During erythroid maturation, Ets-1 is downmodulated and
exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm through an active mechanism mediated
by a leucine-rich nuclear export signal. In contrast, during megakaryocytopoiesis
Ets-1 increases and remains localized in the nucleus up to terminal maturation.
Overexpression of Ets-1 in erythroid cells blocks maturation at the
polychromatophilic stage, increases GATA-2 and decreases both GATA-1 and
erythropoietin receptor expression. Conversely, Ets-1 overexpressing
megakaryocytes are characterized by enhanced differentiation and maturation,
coupled with upmodulation of GATA-2 and megakaryocyte-specific genes. We show
that Ets-1 binds to and activates the GATA-2 promoter, in vitro and in vivo,
indicating that one of the pathways through which Ets-1 blocks erythroid and
promotes MK differentiation is via upmodulation of GATA-2 expression.

PMID: 16294212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 22;102(47):17065-70. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

Chromatin domain activation via GATA-1 utilization of a small subset of dispersed
GATA motifs within a broad chromosomal region.

Im H(1), Grass JA, Johnson KD, Kim SI, Boyer ME, Imbalzano AN, Bieker JJ,
Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison,
WI 53706, USA.

Cis elements that mediate transcription factor binding are abundant within
genomes, but the rules governing occupancy of such motifs in chromatin are not
understood. The transcription factor GATA-1 that regulates red blood cell
development binds with high affinity to GATA motifs, and initial studies suggest 
that these motifs are often unavailable for occupancy in chromatin. Whereas
GATA-2 regulates the differentiation of all blood cell lineages via GATA motif
binding, the specificity of GATA-2 chromatin occupancy has not been studied. We
found that conditionally active GATA-1 (ER-GATA-1) and GATA-2 occupy only a small
subset of the conserved GATA motifs within the murine beta-globin locus. Kinetic 
analyses in GATA-1-null cells indicated that ER-GATA-1 preferentially occupied
GATA motifs at the locus control region (LCR), in which chromatin accessibility
is largely GATA-1-independent. Subsequently, ER-GATA-1 increased promoter
accessibility and occupied the betamajor promoter. ER-GATA-1 increased erythroid 
Krüppel-like factor and SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex occupancy at
restricted LCR sites. These studies revealed three phases of beta-globin locus
activation: GATA-1-independent establishment of specific chromatin structure
features, GATA-1-dependent LCR complex assembly, and GATA-1-dependent promoter
complex assembly. The differential utilization of dispersed GATA motifs therefore
establishes spatial/temporal regulation and underlies the multistep activation
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1287986
PMID: 16286657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cancer Lett. 2006 Aug 28;240(2):203-12. Epub 2005 Nov 7.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibits aclacinomycin A-induced erythroid
differentiation of K562 cells via GATA-1.

Morceau F(1), Schnekenburger M, Blasius R, Buck I, Dicato M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, 9 rue Edward Steichen, L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

Up-regulation of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) is linked to solid tumors
as well as to hematologic disorders including different forms of anemia and
multiple myeloma. This cytokine was shown to contribute to inhibition of
erythroid maturation mechanisms which are characterized by the expression of
specific genes regulated by GATA-1 and NF-E2 transcription factors. Here, we
assessed the inhibiting effect of TNFalpha on erythroid differentiation using
K562 cells which can be chemically induced to differentiate towards the erythroid
pathway by aclacinomycin A, an anthracyclin. Results show that induced
hemoglobinization of K562 cells as well as gamma-globin and erythropoietin
receptor gene expression are decreased by TNFalpha via the inhibition of GATA-1
at its mRNA and protein expression level. Additionally, both constitutive and
induced binding activity of GATA-1 is abolished and induced activation of a
GATA-1 driven luciferase reporter construct is inhibited. Altogether, our results
provide insight into the molecular mechanisms of inflammation-induced inhibition 
of erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 16274927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 15;288(2):559-70. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

The Drosophila LIM-homeo domain protein Islet antagonizes pro-neural cell
specification in the peripheral nervous system.

Biryukova I(1), Heitzler P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology/IGBMC, 1, rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142,
67404 Illkirch CEDEX, France.

The pattern of the external sensory organs (SO) in Drosophila depends on the
activity of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional activators
Achaete/Scute (Ac/Sc) that are expressed in clusters of cells (pro-neural
clusters) and provide the cells with the potential to develop a neural fate. In
the mesothorax, the GATA1 transcription factor Pannier (Pnr), together with its
cofactor Chip, activates ac/sc genes directly through binding to the
dorso-central enhancer (DC) of ac/sc. We identify the LIM-homeo domain (LIM-HD)
transcription factor Islet (Isl) by genetic screening and investigate its role in
the thoracic pre-patterning. We show that isl loss-of-function mutations result
in expanded Ac expression in DC and scutellar (SC) pro-neural clusters and
formation of ectopic sensory organs. Overexpression of Isl decreases pro-neural
expression and suppresses bristle development. Moreover, Isl is coexpressed with 
Pnr in the posterior region of the mesothorax. In the DC pro-neural cluster, Isl 
antagonizes Pnr activity both by dimerization with the DNA-binding domain of Pnr 
and via competitive inhibition of the Chip-bHLH interaction. We propose that
sensory organ pre-patterning relies on the antagonistic activity of individual
Chip-binding factors. The differential affinities of these binding-factors and
their precise stoichiometry are crucial in specifying pre-patterns within the
different pro-neural clusters.

PMID: 16259974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Blood. 2006 Feb 15;107(4):1570-81. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

Differential gene expression, GATA1 target genes, and the chemotherapy
sensitivity of Down syndrome megakaryocytic leukemia.

Ge Y(1), Dombkowski AA, LaFiura KM, Tatman D, Yedidi RS, Stout ML, Buck SA,
Massey G, Becton DL, Weinstein HJ, Ravindranath Y, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute of Environmental Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201,
USA.

Children with Down syndrome (DS) with acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL) have
very high survival rates compared with non-DS AMkL patients. Somatic mutations
identified in the X-linked transcription factor gene, GATA1, in essentially all
DS AMkL cases result in the synthesis of a shorter (40 kDa) protein (GATA1s) with
altered transactivation activity and may lead to altered expression of GATA1
target genes. Using the Affymetrix U133A microarray chip, we identified 551
differentially expressed genes between DS and non-DS AMkL samples. Transcripts
for the bone marrow stromal-cell antigen 2 (BST2) gene, encoding a transmembrane 
glycoprotein potentially involved in interactions between leukemia cells and bone
marrow stromal cells, were 7.3-fold higher (validated by real-time polymerase
chain reaction) in the non-DS compared with the DS group. Additional studies
confirmed GATA1 protein binding and transactivation of the BST2 promoter;
however, stimulation of BST2 promoter activity by GATA1s was substantially
reduced compared with the full-length GATA1. CMK sublines, transfected with the
BST2 cDNA and incubated with HS-5 bone marrow stromal cells, exhibited up to
1.7-fold reduced cytosine arabinoside (ara-C)-induced apoptosis, compared with
mock-transfected cells. Our results demonstrate that genes that account for
differences in survival between DS and non-DS AMkL cases may be identified by
microarray analysis and that differential gene expression may reflect relative
transactivation capacities of the GATA1s and full-length GATA1 proteins.

PMCID: PMC1895418
PMID: 16249385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Leuk Res. 2006 May;30(5):543-6. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

WT1 gene expression in children with Down syndrome and transient
myeloproliferative disorder.

Hasle H(1), Lund B, Nyvold CG, Hokland P, Østergaard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Skejby Hospital, DK-8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) is found in 10% of newborns with Down
syndrome (DS). Myeloid leukemia develops in 25% within the following 3 years.
Little is known about markers predicting leukemia occurrence. We studied
expression levels of the Wilms tumor gene (WT1) by real-time quantitative PCR
(RQ-PCR) in peripheral blood of five infants with TMD. WT1 levels were elevated
similar to findings in AML. Longitudinal studies showed normalization of the WT1 
level in all patients except one who developed GATA1 mutated myeloid leukemia at 
11 months of age. The lack of normalization of WT1 level may be a predictor of
leukemia development and WT1 expression may be an attractive marker for
monitoring of minimal residual disease.

PMID: 16242775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Blood. 2006 Feb 15;107(4):1357-65. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Developmental regulation of yolk sac hematopoiesis by Kruppel-like factor 6.

Matsumoto N(1), Kubo A, Liu H, Akita K, Laub F, Ramirez F, Keller G, Friedman SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, 1425 Madison Ave, Rm 1170F, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Krüppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is a member of a growing family of transcription
factors that share a common 3 C2H2 zinc finger DNA binding domain and have broad 
activity in regulating proliferation and development. We have previously
established that Klf6 is expressed in neuronal tissue, hindgut, heart, lung,
kidney, and limb buds during midgestation. To explore the potential role of Klf6 
in mouse development, we analyzed Klf6-/- mice and found that the homozygous
mutation is embryonic lethal by embryonic day (E) 12.5 and associated with
markedly reduced hematopoiesis and poorly organized yolk sac vascularization.
Additionally, mRNA levels of Scl and Gata1 were reduced by approximately 80% in
Klf6-/- yolk sacs. To further analyze this phenotype, we generated Klf6-/-
embryonic stem (ES) cells by homologous recombination, and compared their
capacity to differentiate into the hematopoietic lineage with that of either
Klf6+/- or Klf6+/+ ES cells. Consistent with the phenotype in the early embryo,
Klf6-/- ES cells displayed significant hematopoietic defects following
differentiation into EBs. Prolongation of epiblast-like cells and delays in
mesoderm induction were also observed in the Klf6-/- EBs, associated with delayed
expression of Brachyury, Klf1, and Gata1. Forced expression of KLF6 using a
tet-inducible system enhanced the hematopoietic potential of wild-type EBs.
Collectively, these findings implicate Klf6 in ES-cell differentiation and
hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC1895396
PMID: 16234353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Nov 10;1731(2):115-24. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Transcriptional regulation of the human reduced folate carrier A1/A2 promoter:
Identification of critical roles for the USF and GATA families of transcription
factors.

Payton SG(1), Liu M, Ge Y, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, and Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) gene has a complex regulation involving 6
alternatively spliced non-coding exons and promoters (A1/A2, A, B, C, D, and E). 
The hRFC-A1/A2 promoter is unique in that it transcribes a novel transcript with 
an in-frame AUG in non-coding exon A1/A2 that encodes a modified hRFC protein
with altered transport function. In this report, we characterize the hRFC-A1/A2
promoter in HepG2 human hepatoma cells. By transfecting HepG2 cells with 5' and
3' deletion constructs, a transcriptionally important 270 bp region was
identified. Gel shift assays identified transcription factor binding to three
E-box elements and one GATA site within this region. These elements were verified
by transfections of mutant constructs into HepG2 cells. Cotransfections in
Drosophila Mel-2 cells confirmed promoter activation by USF1 and GATA1. A
physical association between USF1 and GATA1 was demonstrated by their
co-immunoprecipitation. By real time PCR analysis of transfected HepG2 cells,
USF1 and GATA1 increased endogenous hRFC-A1/A2 transcripts. Altogether, our
results demonstrate a transcriptionally important region in the hRFC-A1/A2
promoter including E-box and GATA elements, and a transactivation by USF1 and
GATA1 proteins. Our results further establish the complexity of hRFC regulation, 
as a means of ensuring adequate folate cofactor transport for cell proliferation.

PMID: 16225938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Biol Reprod. 2006 Feb;74(2):295-306. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Efficient and repetitive production of hematopoietic and endothelial cells from
feeder-free monolayer culture system of primate embryonic stem cells.

Zhang H(1), Saeki K, Kimura A, Saeki K, Nakahara M, Doshi M, Kondo Y, Nakano T,
Yuo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Research Institute, International Medical Center of 
Japan, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.

Retraction in
    Biol Reprod. 2006 Sep;75(3):487.

We have established an innovative culture system for the efficient
differentiation of hematopoietic and endothelial cells from primate embryonic
stem (ES) cells without feeder cells, embryoid bodies, or cell-sorting processes.
After several days' culture in murine stromal OP9-conditioned medium supplemented
with a cytokine cocktail on collagen-coated dishes, ES cells differentiated into 
a very unique population of cells with a finger-like appearance. These
finger-like cells were positive for mesodermal and/or hemangioblastic markers of 
kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) and T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1
(TAL1), and produced large amounts of protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor
type, C-positive hematopoietic cells. These hematopoietic cells showed the
morphology of immature hematopoietic cells, formed blast cell colonies with high 
efficiency, and were positive for CD34 antigen, KDR, TAL1, and GATA binding
protein 1, suggesting that these blast cells are equivalent to the multipotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Moreover, they produced functional macrophages in
murine stromal MS-5-conditioned medium and primitive erythroblasts in the
presence of erythropoietin. The finger-like cells, putative mesodermal
progenitors and/or hemangioblasts, actively proliferated and repetitively
produced hematopoietic cells as long as they were maintained on the original
dish. By contrast, the majority of the finger-like cells differentiated into
endothelial cells with specific markers and specific functions after transfer to 
fresh dishes, indicating that conditions established in the original dish
supported the proliferation and hematopoietic differentiation of the finger-like 
cells. Our method provides a highly controllable culture protocol for repetitive 
production of hematopoietic and endothelial cells from feeder-free monolayer
cultivation of primate ES cells.

PMID: 16221992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Leuk Res. 2006 Apr;30(4):397-406. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Histologic and molecular characterizations of megakaryocytic leukemia in mice.

Hao X(1), Shin MS, Zhou JX, Lee CH, Qi CF, Naghashfar Z, Hartley JW, Fredrickson 
TN, Ward JM, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institute of Health, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
xhao@nniaid.nih.gov

Six cases of megakaryocytic leukemia (MKL) were identified and analyzed for
morphology and molecular features. MKL were composed of megakaryocyte lineage
cells ranging from immature to quite mature cells. VWF, GATA1 and RUNX1 were
strongly expressed in megakaryocytes in both normal spleen and MKL as analyzed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Altered expression of Meis1, Pbx1 and Psen2 and Lef1 
in MKL detected with oligonucleotide microarrays was confirmed by qPCR and IHC.
This is the first report of spontaneous MKL in mice, defining VWF as a biomarker 
for diagnosis and suggesting possible involvement of a series of genes in disease
pathogenesis.

PMID: 16219351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 16;280(50):41636-44. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Distinct roles for SCL in erythroid specification and maturation in zebrafish.

Juarez MA(1), Su F, Chun S, Kiel MJ, Lyons SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology and Cellular 
and Molecular Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA.

The stem cell leukemia (SCL) transcription factor is essential for vertebrate
hematopoiesis. Using the powerful zebrafish model for embryonic analysis, we
compared the effects of either reducing or ablating Scl using morpholino-modified
antisense RNAs. Ablation of Scl resulted in the loss of primitive and definitive 
hematopoiesis, consistent with its essential role in these processes.
Interestingly, in embryos with severely reduced Scl levels, erythroid progenitors
expressing gata1 and embryonic globin developed. Erythroid maturation was
deficient in these Scl hypomorphs, supporting that Scl was required both for the 
erythroid specification and for the maturation steps, with maturation requiring
higher Scl levels than specification. Although all hematopoietic functions were
rescued by wild-type Scl mRNA, an Scl DNA binding mutant rescued primitive and
definitive hematopoiesis but did not rescue primitive erythroid maturation.
Together, we showed that there is a distinct Scl hypomorphic phenotype and
demonstrated that distinct functions are required for the roles of Scl in the
specification and differentiation of primitive and definitive hematopoietic
lineages. Our results revealed that Scl participates in multiple processes
requiring different levels and functions. Further, we identified an Scl
hypomorphic phenotype distinct from the null state.

PMID: 16210319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Blood. 2006 Feb 1;107(3):907-15. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Erythropoietin stimulates phosphorylation and activation of GATA-1 via the
PI3-kinase/AKT signaling pathway.

Zhao W(1), Kitidis C, Fleming MD, Lodish HF, Ghaffari S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

Erythropoietin (Epo) stimulation of its receptor's downstream signaling pathways 
and optimum function of GATA-1 transcription factor are both essential for normal
erythroid cell development. Epo-receptor (EpoR) signaling and GATA-1 regulate
proliferation, survival, differentiation, and maturation of erythroid cells.
Whether any signal that is generated by EpoR targets GATA-1 or affects GATA-1
transcriptional activity is not known. Here, we demonstrate that stimulation of
EpoR results in phosphorylation of GATA-1 at serine 310 (S310) in primary fetal
liver erythroid progenitors and in cultured erythroid cells. We show that
phosphorylation of GATA-1 is important for Epo-induced maturation of fetal liver 
erythroid progenitor cells. The PI3-kinase/AKT signaling pathway is identified as
a mediator of Epo-induced phosphorylation of GATA-1. AKT serine threonine kinase 
phosphorylates GATA-1S310 in vitro and in erythroid cells and enhances GATA-1
transcriptional activity. These data demonstrate that EpoR signaling
phosphorylates GATA-1 and modulates its activity via the PI3-kinase/AKT signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC1895894
PMID: 16204311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Semin Oncol. 2005 Aug;32(4):365-72.

Pathogenesis of myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia: lessons from mouse models 
of the disease.

Vannucchi AM(1), Migliaccio AR, Paoletti F, Chagraoui H, Wendling F.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Unit, University of Florence, AOC, Italy. a.vannucchi@dac.unifi.it

The primary genetic lesion(s), as well as the biological processes responsible
for the typical structural changes of the bone marrow microenvironment in
idiopathic myelofibrosis, are still poorly understood, although a central role in
disease pathogenesis has been attributed to the clonal proliferation and
defective maturation of megakaryocytes. Two animal models of the disease have
been described, that in the last few years significantly contributed to the
elucidation of some of the pathogenetic steps of the human disease; these are
represented by mice genetically modified to overexpress thrombopoietin and by
knock-down mice with defective GATA-1 expression in megakaryocytes (GATA-1(low)
mice). This review will outline these murine models, both characterized by
extensive accumulation of megakaryocytes in hematopoietic tissues, and illustrate
how they provided insights into the identification of some of the molecules and
mechanisms responsible for the development of fibrosis and osteosclerosis that
present major similarities with those observed in patients with idiopathic
myelofibrosis.

PMID: 16202682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Transgenic Res. 2005 Aug;14(4):477-82.

A generic tool for biotinylation of tagged proteins in transgenic mice.

Driegen S(1), Ferreira R, van Zon A, Strouboulis J, Jaegle M, Grosveld F,
Philipsen S, Meijer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

The remarkable high affinity (Kd approximately 10(-15) M) of avidin/streptavidin 
for biotin has been extensively exploited in purification methodologies. Recently
a small peptide sequence (Avi-tag) has been defined that can be specifically and 
efficiently biotinylated by the bacterial BirA biotin ligase. Fusion of this
small peptide sequence to a protein of interest and co-expression with the BirA
gene in mammalian cells allowed purification of the biotinylated protein together
with its associated proteins and other molecules. Ideally, one would like to
apply these technologies to purify tagged proteins directly from mouse tissues.
To make this approach feasible for a large variety of proteins we developed a
mouse strain that expresses the BirA gene ubiquitously by inserting it in the
ROSA26 locus. We demonstrate that the BirA protein is indeed expressed in all
tissues tested. In order to demonstrate functionality we show that it
biotinylates the transgene-encoded Avi-tagged Gata1 and Oct6 transcription
factors in erythroid cells of the foetal liver and Schwann cells of the
peripheral nerve respectively. Therefore, this mouse can be crossed to any
transgenic mouse to obtain efficient biotinylation of an Avi-tagged protein for
the purpose of protein (complex) purification.

PMID: 16201414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2001 Dec 25;81(24):1512-5.

[A novel erythroid differentiation related gene EDRF1 upreguated globin gene
expression in HEL cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang D(1), Shen B, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Academy of Military Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100850, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the differentiation-inducing properties of the novel
erythroid differentiation related gene EDRF1, and demonstrate its functioning
pathway involved in regulation of alpha- and gamma-globin gene expression.
METHODS: EDRF1 sense and antisense constructs were transfected into HEL cells,
then the expression of globin and erythropoietin receptor gene was identified by 
Northern blot analysis. RT-PCR and electrophoresis mobility shift assay (EMSA)
were carried out to monitor the expression and DNA-binding activity of erythroid 
specific transcription factor GATA-1 and NF-E2.
RESULTS: In HEL cells with transfection of sense expression carrier, the
experssion of EDRF1 mRNA was upregulated. In HEL cells with transfection of
antisense expression carrier, the experession of EDRF1 mRNA was downregulated. In
HEL cells with overexpression of EDRF1, production of alpha-globin was increased.
In antisense EDRF1 overexpressed HEL cells, significant loss of alpha- and
gamma-globin mRNA synthesis was observed. The expression of erythropoietin
receptor was unchanged in HEL cells transfected with EDRF1 sense and antisense
expression carriers. No significant change was found in expression of
transcription factors GATA-1 and NF-E2 in HEL cells transfected with empty
carrier, sense expression carrier, and antisense expression carrier. However, the
transcription activity of GATA-1 was severely impaired. Expression of
erythropoietin receptor gene was not influenced by EDRF1 gene overexpression.
CONCLUSION: EDRF1 regulates alpha- and gamma-globin gene synthesis by modulating 
DNA-binding activity of GATA-1 transcription factor. Overexpression and
underexpression of EDRF1 do not significantly regulate the expression of GATA-1
and NF-E2 mRNA. Monitoring the EPOR signal pathway is not the mechanism by which 
EDRF1 influences the differentiation of erythrocyte.

PMID: 16200778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Hematology. 2005;10 Suppl 1:164-6.

Chromosome copy number and leukemia-lessons from Down's syndrome.

Izraeli S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Cancer Research Center, Safra's
Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv 
University, Israel. sizraeli@sheba.health.gov.il

PMID: 16188662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 25;280(47):39016-23. Epub 2005 Sep 25.

GATA-1 and Oct-1 are required for expression of the human
alpha-hemoglobin-stabilizing protein gene.

Gallagher PG(1), Liem RI, Wong E, Weiss MJ, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8021, USA. patrick.gallagher@yale.edu

Alpha-hemoglobin-stabilizing protein (AHSP) is an erythroid protein that binds
and stabilizes alpha-hemoglobin during normal erythropoiesis and in pathological 
states of alpha-hemoglobin excess. AHSP has been proposed as a candidate gene in 
some Heinz body hemolytic anemias and as a modifier gene in the beta-thalassemia 
syndromes. To gain additional insight into the molecular mechanisms controlling
the erythroid-specific expression of the AHSP gene and provide the necessary
tools for further genetic studies of these disorders, we have initiated
identification and characterization of the regulatory elements controlling the
human AHSP gene. We mapped the 5'-end of the AHSP erythroid cDNA and cloned the
5'-flanking genomic DNA containing the putative AHSP gene promoter. In vitro
studies using transfection of promoter/reporter plasmids in human tissue culture 
cell lines, DNase I footprinting analyses and gel mobility shift assays,
identified an AHSP gene erythroid promoter with functionally important binding
sites for GATA-1- and Oct-1-related proteins. In transgenic mice, a reporter gene
directed by a minimal human AHSP promoter was expressed in bone marrow, spleen,
and reticulocytes, but not in nonerythroid tissues. In vivo studies using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated hyperacetylation of the
promoter region and occupancy by GATA-1. The AHSP promoter is an excellent
candidate region for mutations associated with decreased AHSP gene expression.

PMID: 16186125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2005 Nov-Dec;35(3):339-44. Epub 2005 Sep 23.

Functional characterization of the sea urchin sns chromatin insulator in
erythroid cells.

Acuto S(1), Di Marzo R, Calzolari R, Baiamonte E, Maggio A, Spinelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Unità di Ricerca "P. Cutino", Ematologia II, A.O. "V. Cervello", via Trabucco 
n. 180-90146, Palermo, Italy. acutosanti@virgilio.it

Chromatin insulators are regulatory elements that determine domains of genetic
functions. We have previously described the characterization of a 265 bp
insulator element, termed sns, localized at the 3' end of the early histone H2A
gene of the sea urchin Paracentrotus lividus. This sequence contains three
cis-acting elements (Box A, Box B, and Box C + T) all needed for the
enhancer-blocking activity in both sea urchin and human cells. The goal of this
study was to further characterize the sea urchin sns insulator in the erythroid
environment. We employed colony assays in human (K562) and mouse (MEL) erythroid 
cell lines. We tested the capability of sns to interfere with the communication
between the 5'HS2 enhancer of the human beta-globin LCR and the gamma-globin
promoter. We found that the sns sequence displays directional enhancer-blocking
activity. By the use of antibodies against known DNA binding proteins, in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we demonstrated the binding of the
erythroid-specific GATA-1 and the ubiquitous Oct-1 and Sp1 transcription factors.
These factors bind to Box A, Box B, and Box C + T, respectively, in both K562 and
MEL nuclear extracts. These results may have significant implications for the
conservation of insulator function in evolutionary distant organisms and may
prove to be of practical benefit in gene transfer applications for erythroid
disorders such as hemoglobinopathies and thalassemias.

PMID: 16185901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Sep 21;33(16):5331-42. Print 2005.

GATA-1 mediates auto-regulation of Gfi-1B transcription in K562 cells.

Huang DY(1), Kuo YY, Chang ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, No. 1 Jen Ai Road 1st Section, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Gfi-1B (growth factor independence-1B) gene is an erythroid-specific
transcription factor, whose expression plays an essential role in erythropoiesis.
Our laboratory has previously defined the human Gfi-1B promoter region and shown 
that GATA-1 mediates erythroid-specific Gfi-1B transcription. By further
investigating the regulation of the Gfi-1B promoter, here we report that (i)
Gfi-1B transcription is negatively regulated by its own gene product, (ii)
GATA-1, instead of Gfi-1B, binds directly to the Gfi-1-like sites in the Gfi-1B
promoter and (iii) Gfi-1B suppresses GATA-1-mediated stimulation of Gfi-1B
promoter through their protein interaction. These results not only demonstrate
that interaction of GATA-1 and Gfi-1B participates in a feedback regulatory
pathway in controlling the expression of the Gfi-1B gene, but also provide the
first evidence that Gfi-1B can exert its repression function by acting on
GATA-1-mediated transcription without direct binding to the Gfi-1 site of the
target genes. Based on these data, we propose that this negative auto-regulatory 
feedback loop is important in restricting the expression level of Gfi-1B, thus
optimizing its function in erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC1226314
PMID: 16177182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Blood. 2006 Jan 15;107(2):520-7. Epub 2005 Sep 20.

Differential effects of GATA-1 on proliferation and differentiation of erythroid 
lineage cells.

Zheng J(1), Kitajima K, Sakai E, Kimura T, Minegishi N, Yamamoto M, Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School and Graduate School of Frontier
Biosciences, Osaka University, Yamada-oka 2-2, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for both primitive
(embryonic) and definitive (adult) erythropoiesis. To define the roles of GATA-1 
in the production and differentiation of primitive and definitive erythrocytes,
we established GATA-1-null embryonic stem cell lines in which GATA-1 was able to 
be conditionally expressed by using the tetracycline conditional gene expression 
system. The cells were subjected to hematopoietic differentiation by coculturing 
on OP9 stroma cells. We expressed GATA-1 in the course of primitive and
definitive erythropoiesis and analyzed the ability of GATA-1 to rescue the
defective erythropoiesis caused by the GATA-1 null mutation. Our results show
that GATA-1 functions in the proliferation and maturation of erythrocytes in a
distinctive manner. The early-stage expression of GATA-1 during both primitive
and definitive erythropoiesis was sufficient to promote the proliferation of red 
blood cells. In contrast, the late-stage expression of GATA-1 was indispensable
to the terminal differentiation of primitive and definitive erythrocytes. Thus,
GATA-1 affects the proliferation and differentiation of erythrocytes by different
mechanisms.

PMID: 16174764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(19):8592-606.

GATA1-mediated megakaryocyte differentiation and growth control can be uncoupled 
and mapped to different domains in GATA1.

Kuhl C(1), Atzberger A, Iborra F, Nieswandt B, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford and John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom.

The DNA-binding hemopoietic zinc finger transcription factor GATA1 promotes
terminal megakaryocyte differentiation and restrains abnormal immature
megakaryocyte expansion. How GATA1 coordinates these fundamental processes is
unclear. Previous studies of synthetic and naturally occurring mutant GATA1
molecules demonstrate that DNA-binding and interaction with the essential GATA1
cofactor FOG-1 (via the N-terminal finger) are required for gene expression in
terminally differentiating megakaryocytes and for platelet production. Moreover, 
acquired mutations deleting the N-terminal 84 amino acids are specifically
detected in megakaryocytic leukemia in human Down syndrome patients. In this
study, we have systematically dissected GATA1 domains required for platelet
release and control of megakaryocyte growth by ectopically expressing modified
GATA1 molecules in primary GATA1-deficient fetal megakaryocyte progenitors. In
addition to DNA binding, distinct N-terminal regions, including residues in the
first 84 amino acids, promote platelet release and restrict megakaryocyte growth.
In contrast, abrogation of GATA1-FOG-1 interaction leads to loss of
differentiation, but growth of blocked immature megakaryocytes is controlled.
Thus, distinct GATA1 domains regulate terminal megakaryocyte gene expression
leading to platelet release and restrain megakaryocyte growth, and these
processes can be uncoupled.

PMCID: PMC1265752
PMID: 16166640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Int J Hematol. 2005 Jun;81(5):378-84.

GATA transcription factors in hematologic disease.

Cantor AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. alan.cantor@childrens.harvard.edu

GATA family transcription factors play essential roles in broad developmental
settings. GATA-1, one of the hematopoietically expressed members, is required for
normal erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation. Over the past few years,
mutations in the gene encoding GATA-1 have been linked to several human
hematologic disorders, including X-linked dyserythropoietic anemia and
thrombocytopenia, X-linked thrombocytopenia and beta-thalassemia, and Down
syndrome acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. This review summarizes the role of
GATA-1 during normal hematopoiesis and discusses how disease-associated mutations
may affect its function.

PMID: 16158817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Apoptosis. 2005 Oct;10(5):1063-78.

Hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-2 promotes upregulation of alpha globin
and cell death in FL5.12 cells.

Brecht K(1), Simonen M, Kamke M, Heim J.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research Basel, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.
karin.brecht@bluewin.ch

Recently we showed that alpha globin is a novel pro-apoptotic factor in
programmed cell death in the pro-B cell line, FL5.12. Alpha globin was also
upregulated in various other cell lines after different apoptotic stimuli. Under 
withdrawal of IL-3, overexpression of alpha globin accelerated apoptosis in
FL5.12. Here, we have studied how transcription of alpha globin is placed in the 
broader context of apoptosis. We used Affymetrix chip technology and RT QPCR to
compare expression patterns of FL5.12 cells growing with or without IL-3 to
search for transcription factors which were concomitantly upregulated with alpha 
globin. The erythroid-specific transcription factor GATA-2 was the earliest and
most prominently upregulated candidate. GATA-1 was expressed at low levels and
was weakly induced while GATA-3 was completely absent. To evaluate the influence 
of GATA-2 on alpha globin expression and cell viability we overexpressed GATA-2
in FL5.12 cells. Interestingly, high expression of GATA-2 resulted in cell death 
and elevated alpha globin levels in FL5.12 cells. Transduction of antisense
GATA-2 prevented both increase of GATA-2 and alpha globin under apoptotic
conditions and delayed cell death. We suggest a role of GATA-2 in apoptosis
besides its function in maintenance and proliferation of immature hematopoietic
progenitors.

PMID: 16151640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Stem Cells. 2006 Feb;24(2):337-48. Epub 2005 Sep 6.

Differential amplification of murine bipotent megakaryocytic/erythroid progenitor
and precursor cells during recovery from acute and chronic erythroid stress.

Sanchez M(1), Weissman IL, Pallavicini M, Valeri M, Guglielmelli P, Vannucchi AM,
Migliaccio G, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Two murine bipotent erythroid/megakaryocytic cells, the progenitor (MEP) and
precursor (PEM) cells, recently have been identified on the basis of the
phenotypes of linnegc-kitposSca-1neg CD16/CD32lowCD34low and TER119pos4A5pos or
2D5pos, respectively. However, the functional relationship between these two
subpopulations and their placement in the hemopoietic hierarchy is incompletely
understood. We compared the biological properties of these subpopulations in
marrow and spleen of mice with and without acute or chronic erythroid stress. MEP
cells, but not PEM cells, express c-kit, respond to stem cell factor in vitro,
and form spleen colonies in vivo. PEM cells comprise up to 50%-70% of the cells
in BFU-E-derived colonies but are not present among the progeny of purified MEP
cells cultured under erythroid and megakaryocytic permissive conditions. PEM
cells increase 10- to 20-fold under acute and chronic stress, whereas MEP cell
increases (21%-84%) are observed only in acutely stressed animals. These data
suggest that MEP and PEM cells represent distinct cell populations that may exist
in an upstream-downstream differentiation relationship under conditions of
stress. Whereas the dynamics of both populations are altered by stress induction,
the differential response to acute and chronic stress suggests different
regulatory mechanisms. A model describing the relationship between MEP, PEM, and 
common myeloid progenitor cells is presented.

PMID: 16144876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Blood. 2006 Jan 1;107(1):87-97. Epub 2005 Sep 6.

Early block to erythromegakaryocytic development conferred by loss of
transcription factor GATA-1.

Stachura DL(1), Chou ST, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, The University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is essential at multiple stages of hematopoiesis.
Murine gene targeting and analysis of naturally occurring human mutations
demonstrate that GATA-1 drives the maturation of committed erythroid precursors
and megakaryocytes. Prior studies also suggest additional, poorly defined, roles 
for GATA-1 at earlier stages of erythromegakaryocytic differentiation. To
investigate these functions further, we stimulated Gata1- murine embryonic
stem-cell-derived hematopoietic cultures with thrombopoietin, a multistage
cytokine. Initially, the cultures generated a wave of mutant megakaryocytes.
However, these were rapidly overgrown by a unique population of
thrombopoietin-dependent blasts that express immature markers and proliferate
indefinitely. Importantly, on restoration of GATA-1 function, these cells
differentiated into both erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages, suggesting that
they represent bipotential progenitors. Identical cells are also present in vivo,
as indicated by flow cytometry and culture analysis of fetal livers from Gata1-
chimeric mice. Our findings indicate that loss of GATA-1 impairs the maturation
of megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors. This defines a new role for GATA-1 at a
relatively early stage of hematopoiesis and provides potential insight into
recent discoveries that human GATA1 mutations promote acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia, a clonal malignancy with features of both erythroid and megakaryocyte
maturation.

PMCID: PMC1895362
PMID: 16144799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2005 Sep;125(9):685-97.

[Transcription factors responsible for megakaryocyte-specific gene expression].

[Article in Japanese]

Doi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Yamadaoka,
Suita, Japan. doi@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp

Megakaryocytes are the hematopoietic precursors of platelets, which play an
essential role in thrombosis and hemostasis. Platelet factor 4 (PF4) is expressed
exclusively in megakaryocytes and platelets and serves as a lineage-specific
marker of megakaryocytic differentiation. We previously characterized a number of
upstream enhancer and repressor elements and demonstrated that GATA-1 and ETS-1
are important for PF4 gene expression. Recently, we have determined the novel
regulatory element termed "TME" in the PF4 promoter and identified a group of
binding proteins from megakaryocytic HEL cells. Here we review the function of
these proteins in PF4 gene expression and discuss megakaryocyte-specific gene
expression and megakaryocytepoiesis.

PMID: 16141689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7596-602.

The proto-oncogene ERG in megakaryoblastic leukemias.

Rainis L(1), Toki T, Pimanda JE, Rosenthal E, Machol K, Strehl S, Göttgens B, Ito
E, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital and
Hematology Institute, Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

Aneuploidy is one of the hallmarks of cancer. Acquired additions of chromosome 21
are a common finding in leukemias, suggesting a contributory role to
leukemogenesis. About 10% of patients with a germ line trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
are born with transient megakaryoblastic leukemia. We and others have shown
acquired mutations in the X chromosome gene GATA1 in all these cases. The gene or
genes on chromosome 21 whose overexpression promote the megakaryoblastic
phenotype are presently unknown. We propose that ERG, an Ets transcription factor
situated on chromosome 21, is one such candidate. We show that ERG is expressed
in hematopoietic stem cells, megakaryoblastic cell lines, and in primary leukemic
cells from Down syndrome patients. ERG expression is induced upon megakaryocytic 
differentiation of the erythroleukemia cell lines K562 and UT-7, and forced
expression of ERG in K562 cells induces erythroid to megakaryoblastic phenotypic 
switch. We also show that ERG activates the gpIb megakaryocytic promoter and
binds the gpIIb promoter in vivo. Furthermore, both ERG and ETS2 bind in vivo the
hematopoietic enhancer of SCL/TAL1, a key regulator of hematopoietic stem cell
and megakaryocytic development. We propose that trisomy 21 facilitates the
occurrence of megakaryoblastic leukemias through a shift toward the
megakaryoblastic lineage caused by the excess expression of ERG, and possibly by 
other chromosome 21 genes, such as RUNX1 and ETS2, in hematopoietic progenitor
cells, coupled with a differentiation arrest caused by the acquisition of
mutations in GATA1.

PMID: 16140924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Hum Mutat. 2005 Oct;26(4):390-2.

GATA1 mutations in myeloproliferative disorders: nomenclature standardization and
review of the literature.

Splendore A, Magalhães IQ, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

PMID: 16134163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Am J Pathol. 2005 Sep;167(3):849-58.

Abnormalities of GATA-1 in megakaryocytes from patients with idiopathic
myelofibrosis.

Vannucchi AM(1), Pancrazzi A, Guglielmelli P, Di Lollo S, Bogani C, Baroni G,
Bianchi L, Migliaccio AR, Bosi A, Paoletti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
amvannucchi@unifi.it

The abnormal megakaryocytopoiesis associated with idiopathic myelofibrosis (IM)
plays a role in its pathogenesis. Because mice with defective expression of
transcription factor GATA-1 (GATA-1(low) mutants) eventually develop
myelofibrosis, we investigated the occurrence of GATA-1 abnormalities in IM
patients. CD 34(+) cells were purified from 12 IM patients and 8 controls;
erythroblasts and megakaryocytes were then obtained from unilineage cultures of
CD 34(+) cells. Purified CD 61(+), GPA(+), and CD 34(+) cells from IM patients
contained levels of GATA-1, GATA-2, and FOG-1 mRNA, as well as of GATA-2 protein,
that were similar to controls. In contrast, CD 61(+) cells from IM patients
contained significantly reduced GATA-1 protein. Furthermore, 45% of
megakaryocytes in biopsies from IM patients did not stain with anti-GATA-1
antibody, as compared to controls (2%), essential thrombocythemia (4%), or
polycythemia vera (11%) patients. Abnormalities in immunoreactivity for FOG-1
were not found, and no mutations in GATA-1 coding sequences were found. The
presence of GATA-1(neg) megakaryocytes in bone marrow biopsies was independent of
the Val 617 Phe JAK 2 mutation, making it unlikely that a downstream functional
relationship exists. We conclude that megakaryocytes from IM patients have
reduced GATA-1 content, possibly contributing to disease pathogenesis as in the
GATA-1(low) mice and also representing a novel IM-associated marker.

PMCID: PMC1698737
PMID: 16127162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 6;102(36):12897-902. Epub 2005 Aug 25.

The erythrocyte viral trap: transgenic expression of viral receptor on
erythrocytes attenuates coxsackievirus B infection.

Asher DR(1), Cerny AM, Finberg RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 227 Lazare
Research Building, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Viruses rely on attachment to specific cell surface receptors to infect host
cells. Selective expression of viral receptors has the potential to attenuate
infection of susceptible tissues by redirecting virus to cells that cannot
support viral replication. We propose that erythrocytes are an ideal instrument
for this strategy, because they are present in vast numbers, permeate every
organ, and cannot serve as hosts for viral propagation. To test this hypothesis, 
we generated a transgenic mouse, termed globin transcription factor 1
(GATA1)-coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR), that expressed the CAR on
erythrocytes. Coxsackievirus group B (CVB) adhered to the surface of
CAR-expressing erythrocytes and was rendered noninfectious. Upon infection with
CVB, GATA1-CAR mice had diminished viremia and reduced viral replication in
heart, brain, and liver. Furthermore, when faced with a CVB challenge that was
lethal to WT littermates, the survival of GATA1-CAR mice was prolonged, and their
ultimate mortality was reduced. The GATA1-CAR mouse model presented here
demonstrates that erythrocyte expression of CAR limits CVB pathogenesis.
Erythrocytes also may be coated with a variety of receptors by nontransgenic
methods, making this a very flexible model for the treatment of infectious
diseases in humans.

PMCID: PMC1200307
PMID: 16123123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Blood. 2005 Sep 1;106(5):1887-8.

Independent clones at separable stages of differentiation, bearing different
GATA1 mutations, in the same TMD patient with Down syndrome.

Groet J, Mulligan C, Spinelli M, Serra A, McElwaine S, Cotter FE,
Dagna-Bricarelli F, Saglio G, Basso G, Nizetic D.

PMID: 16113234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Blood. 2005 Dec 15;106(13):4102-13. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Variegation of the phenotype induced by the Gata1low mutation in mice of
different genetic backgrounds.

Martelli F(1), Ghinassi B, Panetta B, Alfani E, Gatta V, Pancrazzi A, Bogani C,
Vannucchi AM, Paoletti F, Migliaccio G, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.

All mice harboring the X-linked Gata1low mutation in a predominantly CD1
background are born anemic and thrombocytopenic. They recover from anemia at 1
month of age but remain thrombocytopenic all their life and develop
myelofibrosis, a syndrome similar to human idiopathic myelofibrosis, at 12
months. The effects of the genetic background on the myelofibrosis developed by
Gata1low mice was assessed by introducing the mutation, by standard genetic
approaches, in the C57BL/6 and DBA/2 backgrounds and by analyzing the phenotype
of the different mutants at 12 to 13 (by histology) and 16 to 20 (by
cytofluorimetry) months of age. Although all the Gata1low mice developed fibrosis
at 12 to 13 months, variegations were observed in the severity of the phenotype
expressed by mutants of different backgrounds. In C57BL/6 mice, the mutation was 
no longer inherited in a Mendelian fashion, and fibrosis was associated with
massive osteosclerosis. Instead, DBA/2 mutants, although severely anemic,
expressed limited fibrosis and osteosclerosis and did not present tear-drop
poikilocytes in blood or extramedullary hemopoiesis in liver up to 20 months of
age. We propose that the variegation in myelofibrosis expressed by Gata1low
mutants of different strains might represent a model to study the variability of 
the clinical picture of the human disease.

PMID: 16109774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(17):7412-22.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt induced by erythropoietin renders the erythroid
differentiation factor GATA-1 competent for TIMP-1 gene transactivation.

Kadri Z(1), Maouche-Chretien L, Rooke HM, Orkin SH, Romeo PH, Mayeux P, Leboulch 
P, Chretien S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of d'Hématologie, Institute Cochin, INSERM U56, CNRS UMR 8104,
Université René Descartes Hospital Cochin, Paris, France.

The contribution of erythropoietin to the differentiation of the red blood cell
lineage remains elusive, and the demonstration of a molecular link between
erythropoietin and the transcription of genes associated with erythroid
differentiation is lacking. In erythroid cells, expression of the tissue
inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase (TIMP-1) is strictly dependent on
erythropoietin. We report here that erythropoietin regulates the transcription of
the TIMP-1 gene upon binding to its receptor in erythroid cells by triggering the
activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt. We found that Akt
directly phosphorylates the transcription factor GATA-1 at serine 310 and that
this site-specific phosphorylation is required for the transcriptional activation
of the TIMP-1 promoter. This chain of events can be recapitulated in nonerythroid
cells by transfection of the implicated molecular partners, resulting in the
expression of the normally silent endogenous TIMP-1 gene. Conversely, TIMP-1
secretion is profoundly decreased in erythroid cells from fetal livers of
transgenic knock-in mice homozygous for a GATA(S310A) gene, which encodes a
GATA-1 mutant that cannot be phosphorylated at Ser(310). Furthermore,
retrovirus-mediated expression of GATA(S310A) into GATA-1(null)-derived embryonic
stem cells decreases the rate of hemoglobinization by more than 50% compared to
expressed wild-type GATA-1. These findings provide the first example of a chain
of coupling mechanisms between the binding of erythropoietin to its receptor and 
GATA-1-dependent gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1190299
PMID: 16107690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35184-94. Epub 2005 Aug 16.

The long terminal repeat (LTR) of ERV-9 human endogenous retrovirus binds to NF-Y
in the assembly of an active LTR enhancer complex NF-Y/MZF1/GATA-2.

Yu X(1), Zhu X, Pi W, Ling J, Ko L, Takeda Y, Tuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Institute of Molecular
Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The solitary ERV-9 long terminal repeat (LTR) located upstream of the HS5 site in
the human beta-globin locus control region exhibits prominent enhancer activity
in embryonic and erythroid cells. The LTR enhancer contains 14 tandemly repeated 
subunits with recurrent CCAAT, GTGGGGA, and GATA motifs. Here we showed that in
erythroid K562 cells these DNA motifs bound the following three transcription
factors: ubiquitous NF-Y and hematopoietic MZF1 and GATA-2. These factors and
their target DNA motifs exhibited a hierarchy of DNA/protein and protein/protein 
binding affinities: NF-Y/CCAAT > NF-Y/GATA-2 > NF-Y/MZF1 > MZF1/GTGGGGA;
GATA-2/GATA. Through protein/protein interactions, NF-Y bound at the CCAAT motif 
recruited MZF1 and GATA-2, but not Sp1 and GATA-1, and stabilized their binding
to the neighboring GTGGGGA and GATA sites to assemble a novel LTR enhancer
complex, NF-Y/MZF1/GATA-2. In the LTR-HS5-epsilonp-GFP plasmid integrated into
K562 cells, mutation of the CCAAT motif in the LTR enhancer to abolish NF-Y
binding inactivated the enhancer, closed down the chromatin structure of the
epsilon-globin promoter, and silenced transcription of the green fluorescent
protein gene. The results indicated that NF-Y bound at the CCAAT motifs assembled
a robust LTR enhancer complex, which could act over the intervening DNA to
remodel the chromatin structure and to stimulate the transcription of the
downstream gene locus.

PMID: 16105833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Acta Haematol. 2005;114(2):113-6.

Dyserythropoietic anemia and thrombocytopenia due to a novel mutation in GATA-1.

Del Vecchio GC(1), Giordani L, De Santis A, De Mattia D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine of Evolutive Age, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Hematopoiesis is a complex process regulated by nuclear proteins that coordinate 
lineage-specific patterns of gene expression. Targeted mutagenesis has revealed
critical roles for the X-linked transcription factor GATA-1 in erythrocyte and
megakaryocyte differentiation. GATA-1 has two zinc fingers essential for normal
function. The C-terminal finger is necessary for DNA binding. The N-terminal
finger mediates interaction with FOG-1, a cofactor for GATA-1. Mutations in the
N-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 result in abnormal hematopoiesis. Here we report
a family with a novel single base mutation that results in an amino acid
substitution (Gly208Arg) within the highly conserved portion of the GATA-1
N-terminal finger domain, leading to dyserythropoietic anemia and
macrothrombocytopenia. Another mutation described at the same codon (208) has
been found to be associated with thrombocytopenia only. Our data support and
extend the effect of the amino acid substitution at codon 208 on GATA-1 function 
not only regarding megakaryocyte but also regarding erythroid development.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16103636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Sep 23;335(2):477-84.

Impaired repressor activity and biological functions of PU.1 in MEL cells induced
by mutations in the acetylation motifs within the ETS domain.

Kihara-Negishi F(1), Suzuki M, Yamada T, Sakurai T, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, 2-2 Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

PU.1, a hematopoietic Ets transcription factor, is required for development of
the lymphoid and myeloid lineages. We have previously shown that PU.1 functions
as both a transcriptional activator and repressor through complex formation with 
CBP/p300 and HDAC1/mSin3A/MeCP2, respectively. To determine whether modification 
of PU.1 is responsible for switching its association between co-activators and
co-repressors, we examined whether acetylation regulates the physical and
functional activities of PU.1. PU.1 was acetylated in vivo and its repressor
activity was reduced when the putative acetylation motifs in the Ets domain were 
mutated. The mutant cooperated with CBP similar to wild type PU.1, but
insufficiently with GATA-1 and mSin3A. Whereas overexpression of wild type PU.1
induced differentiation block, growth inhibition, and apoptotic cell death in MEL
erythroleukemia cells as we reported previously, overexpression of the
mutant-acetylation motif PU.1 did not. Taken together, our data suggest that
acetylation might regulate the biological functions of PU.1 in erythroid cells.

PMID: 16098914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;38(1):6-11. Epub 2005 Jul 25.

GATA-1: one protein, many partners.

Lowry JA(1), Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
NSW 2006, Australia. j.lowry@mmb.usyd.edu.au

GATA-1, the founding member of the GATA transcription factor family, is essential
for cell maturation and differentiation within the erythroid and megakaryocytic
lineages. GATA-1 regulates the expression of many genes within these lineages and
its functionality depends upon its ability to bind both DNA and protein partners.
Disruption of either of these functions causes severe hematopoietic dysfunction
and results in blood disorders, such as thrombocytopenia and anemia. Within this 
review, we will focus on the structural aspects of GATA-1 with regard to
interactions with its many partners and the identification of several mutations
that disrupt these interactions.

PMID: 16095949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Blood. 2005 Nov 15;106(10):3440-8. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Transcription factor GATA-1 potently represses the expression of the HIV-1
coreceptor CCR5 in human T cells and dendritic cells.

Sundrud MS(1), Vancompernolle SE, Eger KA, Bruno TC, Subramaniam A, Mummidi S,
Ahuja SK, Unutmaz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical
School, Nashville, TN, USA.

CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) is the major HIV-1 coreceptor and its expression
levels are a critical determinant of HIV-1 infection. However, the molecular
mechanisms of CCR5 regulation in primary targets of HIV-1 remain unknown. Despite
binding to conserved DNA elements, we show that the transcription factors GATA
binding protein 1 (GATA-1) and GATA-3 differentially suppress the expression of
CCR5 in stem-cell-derived dendritic cells and primary human T-cell subsets. In
addition, GATA-1 expression was also more potent than GATA-3 in suppressing T
helper 1 (Th1)-associated genes, interferon-gamma (IFNgamma), and CXC chemokine
receptor-3 (CXCR3). GATA-1, but not GATA-3, potently suppressed CCR5
transcription, thereby rendering human T cells resistant to CCR5-tropic HIV-1
infection. However, GATA-1 could also serve as a surrogate for GATA-3 in its
canonic role of programming Th2 gene expression. These findings provide insight
into GATA-3-mediated gene regulation during T-cell differentiation. Importantly, 
decoding the mechanisms of GATA-1-mediated repression of CCR5 may offer an
opportunity to develop novel approaches to inhibit CCR5 expression in T cells.

PMCID: PMC1895046
PMID: 16091457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2005 Sep-Oct;35(2):241-52.

Isolation of TPO-dependent subclones from the multipotent 32D cell line.

Amabile G(1), Di Noia A, Alfani E, Vannucchi AM, Sanchez M, Bosco D, Migliaccio
AR, Migliaccio G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore Sanità, Rome.

Using thrombopoietin (TPO), as selective pressure, several TPO-dependent clones
were isolated from the murine multipotential IL-3-dependent cell line 32D. Four
of them were fully characterized. They depended on TPO for survival and
proliferation and, although retaining the capacity to grow in IL-3, did not
respond to either EPO, G-CSF or GM-CSF. 32D TPO cells were heterogeneous in
morphology and ranged from small cells, with a DNA content nearly tetraploid and 
a modal chromosome no. 66, to cells 50-75 microm in diameter containing multiple 
(up to 5-6) interconnected nuclei with a clear megakaryocyte (Mk) morphology by
electron microscopy. Cell sorter isolation and single cell cloning experiments
indicated that the small cells were those capable to proliferate in TPO and to
generate the larger ones over time. 32D TPO cells expressed Mk-specific markers
by FACS (CD41, CD61 and 2D5) and RT-PCR (acetyl cholinesterase E and platelet
factor 4) and their unique profile, by gene array analysis, included expression
of urokinase plasminogen activator surface receptor (CD87 or uPAR), plasminogen
activator inhibitor and coagulation factor II (thrombin) receptor (Cf2r). In
addition, by quantitative RT-PCR, 32D TPO clones expressed levels of Gata1
similar to those expressed by freshly isolated Mks (DeltaCt approximately 4.7 in 
both cases). In conclusion, the 32D TPO subclones described here are among the
few pure Mk cell lines isolated so far and, for their unique properties, may
prove themselves as a useful model to study Mk differentiation.

PMID: 16055357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Histochem Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;124(2):105-11. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) as a proliferative marker during
embryonic and adult zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Leung AY(1), Leung JC, Chan LY, Ma ES, Kwan TT, Lai KN, Meng A, Liang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu
Lam Road, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. ayhleung@hku.hk

We investigated the expression of proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in
zebrafish to delineate the proliferative hematopoietic component during adult and
embryonic hematopoiesis. Immunostaining for PCNA and enhanced green fluorescence 
protein (eGFP) was performed in wild-type and fli1-eGFP (endothelial marker) and 
gata1-eGFP (erythroid cell marker) transgenic fish. Expression of PCNA mRNA was
examined in wild-type and chordin morphant embryos. In adult zebrafish kidney,
the renal tubules are surrounded by endothelial cells and it is separated into
hematopoietic and excretory compartments. PCNA was expressed in hematopoietic
progenitor cells but not in mature neutrophils, eosinophils or erythroid cells.
Some PCNA+ cells are scattered in the hematopoietic compartment of the kidney
while others are closely associated with renal tubular cells. PCNA was also
expressed in spermatogonial stem cells and intestine crypts, consistent with its 
role in cell proliferation and DNA synthesis. In embryos, PCNA is expressed in
the brain, spinal cord and intermediate cell mass (ICM) at 24 h-post
fertilization. In chordin morphants, PCNA is significantly upregulated in the
expanded ICM. Therefore, PCNA can be used to mark cell proliferation in zebrafish
hematopoietic tissues and to identify a population of progenitor cells whose
significance would have to be further investigated.

PMID: 16028068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(15):6747-59.

Repression of c-kit and its downstream substrates by GATA-1 inhibits cell
proliferation during erythroid maturation.

Munugalavadla V(1), Dore LC, Tan BL, Hong L, Vishnu M, Weiss MJ, Kapur R.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Cancer Research Institute, 1044 W. Walnut Street, Room 425,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. vmunugal@iupui.edu

Stem cell factor (SCF), erythropoietin (Epo), and GATA-1 play an essential
role(s) in erythroid development. We examined how these proteins interact
functionally in G1E cells, a GATA-1(-) erythroblast line that proliferates in an 
SCF-dependent fashion and, upon restoration of GATA-1 function, undergoes GATA-1 
proliferation arrest and Epo-dependent terminal maturation. We show that
SCF-induced cell cycle progression is mediated via activation of the Src
kinase/c-Myc pathway. Restoration of GATA-1 activity induced G1 cell cycle arrest
coincident with repression of c-Kit and its downstream effectors Vav1, Rac1, and 
Akt. Sustained expression of each of these individual signaling components
inhibited GATA-1-induced cell cycle arrest to various degrees but had no effects 
on the expression of GATA-1-regulated erythroid maturation markers. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that GATA-1 occupies a defined Kit gene
regulatory element in vivo, suggesting a direct mechanism for gene repression.
Hence, in addition to its well-established function as an activator of erythroid 
genes, GATA-1 also participates in a distinct genetic program that inhibits cell 
proliferation by repressing the expression of multiple components of the c-Kit
signaling axis. Our findings reveal a novel aspect of molecular cross talk
between essential transcriptional and cytokine signaling components of
hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC1190349
PMID: 16024808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2005 Jul;27(7):408-9.

GATA1 mutation analysis demonstrates two distinct primary leukemias in a child
with down syndrome; implications for leukemogenesis.

Hellebostad M, Carpenter E, Hasle H, Mitchell C, Vyas P.

PMID: 16012335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005 Aug 15;70(4):606-17.

Cloning and functional characterization of the rat alpha2B-adrenergic receptor
gene promoter region: Evidence for binding sites for erythropoiesis-related
transcription factors GATA1 and NF-E2.

Schaak S(1), Cussac D, Labialle S, Mignotte V, Paris H.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 388, Institut Louis Bugnard, CHU Rangueil, Bâtiment L3, BP 84225, 
31432 Toulouse Cedex 4, France.

In the rat, the alpha2B-adrenergic receptor (alpha2B-AR) is encoded by the rat
non-glycosylated (RNG) gene and is primarily expressed in the kidney, brain and
liver of adult animals. High levels of alpha2B-AR are also found during fetal
life in the placenta, liver and blood, where it is borne by cells of the
erythropoietic lineage. As a first step to define the mechanisms responsible for 
the spatio-temporal pattern of alpha2B-AR expression, a genomic fragment
containing 2.8 kb of the 5'-flanking region, the ORF and approximately 20 kb of
the 3'-flanking region of the RNG gene was isolated. RNase protection assays
performed on RNA from placenta or kidney using a series of riboprobes permitted
to locate the transcription start site 372 bases upstream from the start codon.
Transient transfection of various cells, including rat proximal tubule in primary
culture, with constructs containing luciferase as a reporter gene demonstrated
that: (i) the 5'-flanking region exhibited a strong and sense-dependent
transcriptional activity and (ii) the 332 bp fragment (-732/-401 relative to the 
start codon), which lacks a TATA box but contains Sp1 sites, is sufficient to
drive expression. Analysis of chromatin susceptibility to DNaseI digestion
identified two hypersensitive sites (HS1 and HS2) located 1.7 and 1.0 kb,
respectively, upstream from ATG and containing recognition sequences for
erythroid transcription factors. EMSA showed specific binding of GATA1 and NF-E2 
to these elements. Taken together, the results suggest that the chromatin
environment in the vicinity of these boxes plays a critical role for alpha2B-AR
expression during fetal life.

PMID: 15993847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Planta Med. 2005 Jun;71(6):489-94.

The benzophenanthridine alkaloid fagaronine induces erythroleukemic cell
differentiation by gene activation.

Dupont C(1), Couillerot E, Gillet R, Caron C, Zeches-Hanrot M, Riou JF,
Trentesaux C.

Author information: 
(1)JE 2428 Onco-Pharmacologie, UFR Pharmacie, IFR 53 Biomolécules, Université de 
Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, France.

Fagaronine, a benzophenanthridine alkaloid from Fagara zanthoxyloides Lam.
(Rutaceae), has been tested on the erythroleukemic cell line K562 in order to
explain some previous results on cell differentiation. In this study we showed
that fagaronine induces a significant hemoglobinization of the human
erythroleukemic cell line K562. This hemoglobin synthesis was accompanied by a
strong increase of erythroid mRNA expression such as gamma- and alpha-globin, and
PBGD, an enzyme of heme synthesis. In addition, the Epo-R transcripts were also
stimulated indicating that cells are engaged in a maturation process. Both
transcription factors GATA-1 and NF-E2, which play an important role in the
regulation of genes involved in the erythroid differentiation, were also
transcriptionally up-regulated. To elucidate the possible role of GATA-1 in the
FAG-induced differentiation of K562 cells, we transfected reporter constructs
containing regulatory regions of erythroid genes encompassing GATA-1 binding
sites. After 48 hours of treatment, FAG stimulated the EPO-R and gamma-globin
promoters by 2- to 3-fold and the promoter/enhancer region of GATA-1 gene by
3.2-fold. A mutation within the GATA-1 binding sites strongly decreased the
promoter activation induced by FAG. Taken together, our results represent a
demonstration that FAG exerts its differentiating activity by a specific
activation of the regulating GATA-1 regions of genes involved in the erythroid
phenotype expression.

PMID: 15971117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29533-42. Epub 2005 Jun 20.

MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of GATA-1 promotes Bcl-XL expression and cell
survival.

Yu YL(1), Chiang YJ, Chen YC, Papetti M, Juo CG, Skoultchi AI, Yen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

In the interleukin 3-dependent hematopoietic cell line Ba/F3, inhibition of
mitogen-activated protein kinase, a member of the MAPK/c-Jun N-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase kinase family that plays an important role
in cell growth and death control, rapidly leads to severe apoptosis. However,
most of the antiapoptotic substrates of MAPK remain to be identified. Here we
report that, upon interleukin-3 stimulation of Ba/F3 cells, the transcription
factor GATA-1 is strongly phosphorylated at residue serine 26 by a MAPK-dependent
pathway. Phosphorylation of GATA-1 increases GATA-1-mediated transcription of the
E4bp4 survival gene without significantly changing the DNA-binding affinity of
GATA-1. Further characterization of GATA-1 phosphorylation site mutants revealed 
that the antiapoptotic function of GATA-1 is strongly dependent upon its
phosphorylation at the Ser-26 position and is probably mediated through its
up-regulation of Bcl-X(L) expression. Taken together, our data demonstrate that
MAPK-dependent GATA-1 phosphorylation is important for its transactivation of the
E4bp4 gene, Bcl-X(L) expression and cell survival. Therefore, GATA-1 may
represent a novel MAPK substrate that plays an essential role in a
cytokine-mediated antiapoptotic response.

PMCID: PMC3193074
PMID: 15967790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Jun;1044:142-58.

Role of GATA-1 in normal and neoplastic hemopoiesis.

Migliaccio AR(1), Rana RA, Vannucchi AM, Manzoli FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy. migliar@iss.it

GATA-1 exerts a concentration-dependent control on the differentiation of
erythroid, megakaryocytic, mast, and eosinophilic cells. The concentration of
GATA-1 is, in turn, regulated by specific sequences within the GATA-1 locus. On
the basis of its levels of expression, the GATA-1 protein becomes associated with
suitable partners forming transcription complexes that, by binding to
lineage-specific enhancers, activate the expression of the corresponding target
genes. Instrumental to our understanding of the role of GATA-1 in hemopoietic
differentiation has been the generation of genetically engineered mutant mice and
the discovery of naturally occurring mutations associated with either inherited
or acquired human pathologies. We review our current understanding of the role of
GATA-1 in normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis as emerging from these genetic
approaches.

PMID: 15958708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Exp Med. 2005 Jun 20;201(12):1891-7. Epub 2005 Jun 13.

Identification of eosinophil lineage-committed progenitors in the murine bone
marrow.

Iwasaki H(1), Mizuno S, Mayfield R, Shigematsu H, Arinobu Y, Seed B, Gurish MF,
Takatsu K, Akashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Eosinophil lineage-committed progenitors (EoPs) are phenotypically isolatable in 
the steady-state murine bone marrow. Purified granulocyte/monocyte progenitors
(GMPs) gave rise to eosinophils as well as neutrophils and monocytes at the
single cell level. Within the short-term culture of GMPs, the eosinophil
potential was found exclusively in cells activating the transgenic reporter for
GATA-1, a transcription factor capable of instructing eosinophil lineage
commitment. These GATA-1-activating cells possessed an
IL-5Ralpha(+)CD34(+)c-Kit(lo) phenotype. Normal bone marrow cells also contained 
IL-5Ralpha(+)CD34(+)c-Kit(lo) EoPs that gave rise exclusively to eosinophils.
EoPs significantly increased in number in response to helminth infection,
suggesting that the EoP stage is physiologically involved in eosinophil
production in vivo. EoPs expressed eosinophil-related genes, such as the
eosinophil peroxidase and the major basic protein, but did not express
basophil/mast cell-related mast cell proteases. The enforced retroviral
expression of IL-5Ralpha in GMPs did not enhance the frequency of eosinophil
lineage read-outs, whereas IL-5Ralpha(+) GMPs displayed normal
neutrophil/monocyte differentiation in the presence of IL-5 alone. Thus,
IL-5Ralpha might be expressed specifically at the EoP stage as a result of
commitment into the eosinophil lineage. The newly identified EoPs could be the
cellular target in the treatment of a variety of disorders mediated by
eosinophils.

PMCID: PMC2212039
PMID: 15955840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Exp Parasitol. 2005 Jul;110(3):238-43. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Entamoeba histolytica: functional characterization of the -234 to -196 bp
promoter region of the multidrug resistance EhPgp1 gene.

Ramirez ME(1), Perez DG, Nader E, Gomez C.

Author information: 
(1)Programa Institucional de Biomedicina Molecular, ENMyH-IPN, Guillermo Massieu 
Helguera, No. 239. Fracc. La Escalera, Ticomán, CP 07320 Mexico, D.F., Mexico.

The multidrug resistance EhPgp1 gene is constitutively expressed in drug
resistant trophozoites from Entamoeba histolytica. It has been demonstrated that 
two CCAAT/enhancer binding sites located in the EhPgp1 gene promoter control its 
transcriptional activation. However, functional assays of the 5' end of its
promoter showed that region from -234 to -196 bp (38 bp) is also important for
the EhPgp1 gene transcription. Here, we demonstrated that in the 38 bp region
putative cis-activator sequences are located. In silico analysis showed the
presence of GATA1, Gal4, Nit-2, and C/EBP consensus sequences. Additionally, we
identified three specific DNA-protein complexes, which were competed by a C/EBP, 
GATA1, and HOX oligonucleotides. Finally, we partially purified three proteins of
64.4, 56.7, and 27.4 kDa. Further investigations are currently in progress to
determine the identity of these nuclear factors and how they are interacting with
the EhPgp1 gene promoter.

PMID: 15955318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Oncol Rep. 2005 Jul;14(1):9-15.

Effects of vanadium complexes on cell growth of human leukemia cells and
protein-DNA interactions.

Lampronti I(1), Bianchi N, Borgatti M, Fabbri E, Vizziello L, Khan MT, Ather A,
Brezena D, Tahir MM, Gambari R.

Author information: 
(1)ER-GenTech, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Section of
Molecular Biology, Ferrara University, Ferrara, Italy.

Vanadium complexes are known to possess potent insulin-mimetic effects, high
affinity for several enzymes and anticancer activity, which deserve increasing
attention for application to biomedical sciences. Different vanadium complexes
have been found to be more effective than the simple vanadium-(IV) and -(V) salts
in experiments performed both in vitro and in vivo. Application of
polyoxometalates as potential drugs against Herpes Simplex Virus and AIDS have
also increased the interest to study the association between vanadium containing 
species and proteins. The aim of our research was to investigate the in vitro
antiproliferative activity of a variety of vanadium-containing compounds, and
study their ability to interfere with the molecular interactions between GATA-1
and NF-kappaB transcription factors and target DNA elements, employing
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. All of the used vanadium compounds were
found to exhibit antiproliferative activity, despite with differences in
efficacy. Inhibition of K562 cell growth was not associated with differentiation,
but with activation of apoptosis. Vanadium complexes with a +5 oxidation state
and their discrete anionic units appear essential for the respective effects on
K562 cells; a +4 oxidation state appears to be important in inhibiting
transcription factors/DNA interactions.

PMID: 15944761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Proteomics. 2005 Jul;5(11):2819-38.

Proteomics profiling of nuclear proteins for kidney fibroblasts suggests hypoxia,
meiosis, and cancer may meet in the nucleus.

Shakib K(1), Norman JT, Fine LG, Brown LR, Godovac-Zimmermann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rayne Institute, University College London, London,
UK.

Proteomics methods were used to characterize proteins that change their form or
abundance in the nucleus of NRK49F rat kidney fibroblasts during prolonged
hypoxia (1% O(2), 12 h). Of the 791 proteins that were monitored, about 20%
showed detectable changes. The 51 most abundant proteins were identified by mass 
spectrometry. Changes in nuclear receptor transcription factors (THRalpha1,
RORalpha4, HNF4alpha, NUR77), other transcription factors (GATA1, AP-2alpha,
OCT1, ATF6alpha, ZFP161, ZNF354A, PDCD2), and transcription cofactors (PC4, PCAF,
MTA1, TCEA1, JMY) are indicative of major, co-ordinated changes in transcription.
Proteins involved in DNA repair/recombination, ribosomal RNA synthesis, RNA
processing, nuclear transport, nuclear organization, protein translation,
glycolysis, lipid metabolism, several protein kinases (PKCdelta, MAP3K4, GRK3),
as well as proteins with no established functional role were also observed. The
observed proteins suggest nuclear regulatory roles for proteins involved in
cytosolic processes such as glycolysis and fatty acid metabolism, and roles in
overall nuclear structure/organization for proteins previously associated with
meiosis and/or spermatogenesis (synaptonemal complex proteins 1 and 2 (SYCP1,
SYCP2), meiosis-specific nuclear structural protein 1 (MNS1), LMNC2, zinc finger 
protein 99 (ZFP99)). Proteins associated with cytoplasmic membrane functions
(ACTN4, hyaluronan mediated motility receptor (RHAMM), VLDLR, GRK3) and/or
endocytosis (DNM2) were also seen. For 30% of the identified proteins, new
isoforms indicative of alternative transcription were detected (e.g., GATA1,
ATF6alpha, MTA1, MLH1, MYO1C, UBF, SYCP2, EIF3S10, MAP3K4, ZFP99). Comparison
with proteins involved in cell death, cancer, and testis/meiosis/spermatogenesis 
suggests commonalities, which may reflect fundamental mechanisms for
down-regulation of cellular function.

PMID: 15942958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Chem Biol Interact. 2005 May 30;153-154:187-95. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Therapy-related myeloid leukaemia: a model for leukemogenesis in humans.

Larson RA(1), Le Beau MM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine and Cancer Research
Center, University of Chicago, MC-2115, 5341 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. rlarson@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Therapy-related myeloid leukemia (t-AML) is a distinctive clinical syndrome
occurring after exposure to chemotherapy (CT) or radiotherapy (RT). We studied
306 consecutive patients referred to the University of Chicago with cytogenetic
analyses. Since 1972, 141 males and 165 females with a median age of 51 years
(range: 3-83 years) at primary diagnosis and 58 years (range: 6-86 years) at
secondary diagnosis were analyzed. Patients had received various cytotoxic agents
including alkylating agents (240 patients, 78%) and topoisomerase II inhibitors
(115 patients, 39%). One hundred and twenty-one (40%) had received CT alone, 43
(14%) had received RT alone, and 139 (45%) had received both modalities. At
diagnosis of t-AML, 282 (92%) had clonal abnormalities involving chromosome 5
(n=63), chromosome 7 (n=85), both chromosomes 5 and 7 (n=66), recurring balanced 
rearrangements (n=31), or other clonal abnormalities (n=39); 24 had a normal
karyotype. Abnormalities of chromosomes 5 and/or 7 accounted for 76% of all cases
with an abnormal karyotype. Seventeen patients had developed t-AML after
autologous stem cell transplantation, but no unique pattern of cytogenetic
abnormalities was observed. Patients presenting with acute leukemia were more
likely to have a balanced rearrangement than those presenting with myelodysplasia
(28% versus 4%, p<0.0001). Shorter latency was observed for patients with
balanced rearrangements (median: 28 months versus 67 months; p<0.0001). Median
survival after diagnosis of t-AML was 8 months; survival at 5 years was less than
10%. To gain insights into the molecular basis of this disease, we performed gene
expression profiling of CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells from t-AML patients.
We found distinct subtypes of t-AML that have characteristic gene expression
patterns. Common to each of the subgroups are gene expression patterns typical of
arrested differentiation in early progenitor cells. Leukemias with a -5/del(5q)
have a higher expression of genes involved in cell cycle control (CCNA2, CCNE2,
CDC2), checkpoints (BUB1), or growth (MYC), and loss of expression of the gene
encoding interferon consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP). A second subgroup
of t-AML is characterized by down-regulation of transcription factors involved in
early hematopoiesis (TAL1, GATA1, and EKLF) and overexpression of proteins
involved in signaling pathways in myeloid cells (FLT3) and cell survival (BCL2). 
Establishing the molecular pathways involved in t-AML may facilitate the
identification of selectively expressed genes that can be exploited for the
development of targeted therapies.

PMID: 15935816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Leuk Res. 2005 Nov;29(11):1239-40.

GATA 1 mutations as clonal markers of minimal residual disease in acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome--a new tool with significant potential
applications.

Hitzler J, Zipursky A.

Comment on
    Leuk Res. 2005 Nov;29(11):1353-6.

PMID: 15925405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. EMBO J. 2005 Jul 6;24(13):2354-66. Epub 2005 May 26.

GATA-1 forms distinct activating and repressive complexes in erythroid cells.

Rodriguez P(1), Bonte E, Krijgsveld J, Kolodziej KE, Guyot B, Heck AJ, Vyas P, de
Boer E, Grosveld F, Strouboulis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

GATA-1 is essential for the generation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic,
eosinophilic and mast cell lineages. It acts as an activator and repressor of
different target genes, for example, in erythroid cells it represses cell
proliferation and early hematopoietic genes while activating erythroid genes, yet
it is not clear how both of these functions are mediated. Using a biotinylation
tagging/proteomics approach in erythroid cells, we describe distinct GATA-1
interactions with the essential hematopoietic factor Gfi-1b, the repressive MeCP1
complex and the chromatin remodeling ACF/WCRF complex, in addition to the known
GATA-1/FOG-1 and GATA-1/TAL-1 complexes. Importantly, we show that FOG-1 mediates
GATA-1 interactions with the MeCP1 complex, thus providing an explanation for the
overlapping functions of these two factors in erythropoiesis. We also show that
subsets of GATA-1 gene targets are bound in vivo by distinct complexes, thus
linking specific GATA-1 partners to distinct aspects of its functions. Based on
these findings, we suggest a model for the different roles of GATA-1 in erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1173143
PMID: 15920471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. EMBO J. 2005 Jul 6;24(13):2367-78. Epub 2005 May 26.

FOG-1 recruits the NuRD repressor complex to mediate transcriptional repression
by GATA-1.

Hong W(1), Nakazawa M, Chen YY, Kori R, Vakoc CR, Rakowski C, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-1 and its cofactor FOG-1 coordinate erythroid cell
maturation by activating erythroid-specific genes and repressing genes associated
with the undifferentiated state. Here we show that FOG-1 binds to the NuRD
corepressor complex in vitro and in vivo. The interaction is mediated by a small 
conserved domain at the extreme N-terminus of FOG-1 that is necessary and
sufficient for NuRD binding. This domain defines a novel repression module found 
in diverse transcriptional repressors. NuRD is present at GATA-1/FOG-1-repressed 
genes in erythroid cells in vivo. Point mutations near the N-terminus of FOG-1
that abrogate NuRD binding block gene repression by FOG-1. Finally, the ability
of GATA-1 to repress transcription was impaired in erythroid cells expressing
mutant forms of FOG-1 that are defective for NuRD binding. Together, these
studies show that FOG-1 and likely other FOG-like proteins are corepressors that 
link GATA factors to histone deacetylation and nucleosome remodeling.

PMCID: PMC1173144
PMID: 15920470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Leuk Res. 2005 Nov;29(11):1353-6.

GATA1 as a new target to detect minimal residual disease in both transient
leukemia and megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.

Pine SR(1), Guo Q, Yin C, Jayabose S, Levendoglu-Tugal O, Ozkaynak MF, Sandoval
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.
sharon.pine@nymc.edu

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2005 Nov;29(11):1239-40.

Acquired mutations in exon 2 of the GATA1 gene are detected in most Down syndrome
(DS) patients with transient leukemia (TL) and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
(AMKL). We sought to determine if GATA1 mutations can be utilized as markers for 
minimal residual disease (MRD). GATA1 mutations were screened by SSCP analysis
and sequenced. Using GATA1 mutation-specific primers, follow-up bone marrow
samples from four patients were assayed by quantitative PCR. We show that
molecular monitoring of GATA1 mutations is possible in Down syndrome patients
with TL and AMKL, and GATA1 could be a stable marker for MRD monitoring.

PMID: 15916804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Exp Hematol. 2005 Jun;33(6):641-51.

Transcriptional control of fetal liver hematopoiesis: dominant negative effect of
the overexpression of the LIM domain mutants of LMO2.

Terano T(1), Zhong Y, Toyokuni S, Hiai H, Yamada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biology of Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Yoshida Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The LIM-finger protein LMO2 forms a transcription factor complex with 
other hematopoietic regulator proteins, such as TAL1 (SCL), LDB1, GATA1, 2, and
3, in the promoters of several erythroid genes. To elucidate the functional role 
of two LIM domains in LMO2, we introduced deletion or mutation in each of the LIM
domains and analyzed their phenotypic effects on the hematopoietic system when
overexpressed in vivo or in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Protein interactions of LIM-modified LMO2 constructs with 
TAL1, LDB1, and GATAs were examined in an immunoprecipitation assay. In vivo
hematopoiesis in transgenic mice with wild-type and LIM-modified Lmo2 was studied
morphologically and by measuring the progenitor cells in fetal liver. Their
effects on the erythroid differentiation of the dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)-induced 
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells were evaluated.
RESULTS: Deletion of the LIM2 domain, but not of the LIM1 domain, abolished its
binding of GATA proteins. Overexpression of wild-type LMO2 is known to have
dominant negative inhibitory effects on erythropoietic development. Enforced
expression of LMO2 constructs with mutant or absent LIM2 but with an intact LIM1 
domain resulted in fetal death, small livers and hearts, and decreased
hematopoiesis, as well as a hypoplastic thymus. DMSO-induced erythroid
differentiation of the MEL cells was inhibited by the overexpressed LMO2 with
mutant LIM2 but not by the LMO2 with modified LIM1.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of the LMO2 with modified LIM2 inhibited hematopoiesis
probably by interfering with the formation of the physiological complex or by
replacing the functional LMO2 with mutants with reduced affinity to GATA
proteins. In this experiment, no evident effect of the LMO2 with modified LIM1
could be observed.

PMID: 15911088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nat Genet. 2005 Jun;37(6):613-9. Epub 2005 May 15.

Developmental stage-selective effect of somatically mutated leukemogenic
transcription factor GATA1.

Li Z(1), Godinho FJ, Klusmann JH, Garriga-Canut M, Yu C, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Childrens Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Acquired mutations in the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA binding
protein-1 (GATA1) are found in megakaryoblasts from nearly all individuals with
Down syndrome with transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD, also called
transient leukemia) and the related acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL,
also called DS-AML M7). These mutations lead to production of a variant GATA1
protein (GATA1s) that is truncated at its N terminus. To understand the
biological properties of GATA1s and its relation to DS-AMKL and TMD, we used gene
targeting to generate Gata1 alleles that express GATA1s in mice. We show that the
dominant action of GATA1s leads to hyperproliferation of a unique, previously
unrecognized yolk sac and fetal liver progenitor, which we propose accounts for
the transient nature of TMD and the restriction of DS-AMKL to infants. Our
observations raise the possibility that the target cells in other leukemias of
infancy and early childhood are distinct from those in adult leukemias and
underscore the interplay between specific oncoproteins and potential target
cells.

PMID: 15895080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 1;283(1):85-96.

15-zinc finger protein Bloody Fingers is required for zebrafish morphogenetic
movements during neurulation.

Sumanas S(1), Zhang B, Dai R, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, Department of Molecular, Cell and
Developmental Biology, CA 90095, USA.

A novel zebrafish gene bloody fingers (blf) encoding a 478 amino acid protein
containing fifteen C(2)H(2) type zinc fingers was identified by expression
screening. As determined by in situ hybridization, blf RNA displays strong
ubiquitous early zygotic expression, while during late gastrulation and early
somitogenesis, blf expression becomes transiently restricted to the posterior
dorsal and lateral mesoderm. During later somitogenesis, blf expression appears
only in hematopoietic cells. It is completely eliminated in cloche, moonshine but
not in vlad tepes (gata1) mutant embryos. Morpholino (MO) knockdown of the Blf
protein results in the defects of morphogenetic movements. Blf-MO-injected
embryos (morphants) display shortened and widened axial tissues due to defective 
convergent extension. Unlike other convergent extension mutants, blf morphants
display a split neural tube, resulting in a phenotype similar to the human open
neural tube defect spina bifida. In addition, dorsal ectodermal cells delaminate 
in blf morphants during late somitogenesis. We propose a model explaining the
role of blf in convergent extension and neurulation. We conclude that blf plays
an important role in regulating morphogenetic movements during gastrulation and
neurulation while its role in hematopoiesis may be redundant.

PMID: 15890328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Blood. 2005 Aug 15;106(4):1223-31. Epub 2005 Apr 28.

Differential requirements for the activation domain and FOG-interaction surface
of GATA-1 in megakaryocyte gene expression and development.

Muntean AG(1), Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, Univeristy of Chicago, IL, USA.

GATA1 is mutated in patients with 2 different disorders. First, individuals with 
a GATA1 mutation that blocks the interaction between GATA-1 and its cofactor
Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) suffer from dyserythropoietic anemia and
thrombocytopenia. Second, children with Down syndrome who develop acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia harbor mutations in GATA1 that lead to the exclusive
expression of a shorter isoform named GATA-1s. To determine the effect of these
patient-specific mutations on GATA-1 function, we first compared the gene
expression profile between wild-type and GATA-1-deficient megakaryocytes. Next,
we introduced either GATA-1s or a FOG-binding mutant (V205G) into
GATA-1-deficient megakaryocytes and assessed the effect on differentiation and
gene expression. Whereas GATA-1-deficient megakaryocytes failed to undergo
terminal differentiation and proliferated excessively in vitro,
GATA-1s-expressing cells displayed proplatelet formation and other features of
terminal maturation, but continued to proliferate aberrantly. In contrast,
megakaryocytes that expressed V205G GATA-1 exhibited reduced proliferation, but
failed to undergo maturation. Examination of the expression of
megakaryocyte-specific genes in the various rescued cells correlated with the
observed phenotypic differences. These studies show that GATA-1 is required for
both normal regulation of proliferation and terminal maturation of
megakaryocytes, and further, that these functions can be uncoupled by mutations
in GATA1.

PMCID: PMC1895209
PMID: 15860665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Klin Padiatr. 2005 May-Jun;217(3):126-34.

Immunophenotype of Down syndrome acute myeloid leukemia and transient
myeloproliferative disease differs significantly from other diseases with
morphologically identical or similar blasts.

Langebrake C(1), Creutzig U, Reinhardt D.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital Muenster, Department of Pediatric Hematology
and Oncology, 48129 Muenster. langebra@uni-muenster.de

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Children with Down Syndrome (DS) have a 20-40 fold
increased risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia (AML), mainly of the
megakaryoblastic subtype (AMKL). Approximately 10 % of newborns with DS show
transient myeloproliferative disease (TMD) which normally resolves spontaneously.
The blast cells of both entities show megakaryoblastic/erythroblastic features
(M7/M6) and cannot be distinguished by morphological characteristics.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Blast cells of 62 children were analyzed by four-color flow
cytometry and dual color fluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: The immunophenotype of blast cells from children with TMD and DS-AMKL is
characterized by the expression of CD33 (+)/CD13 (+/-)/CD38 (+)/CD117 (+)/CD34
(+/-)/CD7 (+)/CD56 (+/-)/CD36 (+)/CD71 (+)/CD42b (+)/CD4dim (+)/TPO-R (+)/EPO-R
(-)/IL-3-Ralpha (+)/IL-6-Ralpha (-). Non-DS children with morphologically related
diseases, i. e. myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia 
(JMML), or AML-M6 and AML-M7, did not show this expression profile. CD34
expression was observed in 93 % of TMD, but only 50 % of DS-AMKL patients. The
blast cells of all TMD and DS-AMKL cases were positive for TPO-R and IL-3R,
whereas EPO-R and IL-6R were absent.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunophenotyping by the use of surface antigens and growth factor
receptors is a useful tool to discriminate TMD and DS-AMKL from diseases with
morphologically similar or identical blasts. The absence of EPO-R on the blast
cells might be a sign of the high expression of the mutated -- and less active --
GATA1 in DS. The higher amount of CD34 co-expression in TMD may be interpreted to
indicate that TMD is a slightly more immature disease than DS-AMKL.

PMID: 15858703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 30;24(28):4477-85.

Increased dosage of Runx1/AML1 acts as a positive modulator of myeloid
leukemogenesis in BXH2 mice.

Yanagida M(1), Osato M, Yamashita N, Liqun H, Jacob B, Wu F, Cao X, Nakamura T,
Yokomizo T, Takahashi S, Yamamoto M, Shigesada K, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore.

The RUNX1/AML1 gene on chromosome 21 is most frequently inactivated in human
leukemias. In addition, an increased dose of RUNX1 is suggested as a basis for
several kinds of leukemias. Amplifications of chromosome 21 or the RUNX1 gene are
shown to be associated with leukemias with lymphoid lineage, whereas its
involvement in myeloid lineage remains unclear. In this study, we generated
GATA-1 promoter-driven Runx1 transgenic (Tg) mice, which showed a transient mild 
increase of megakaryocyte marker-positive myeloid cells but no spontaneous
leukemia. These mice were then crossed with BXH2 mice, which have a
replication-competent retrovirus in the mouse and develop myeloid leukemia due to
insertional mutagenesis by random integration of the virus. Overexpressed Runx1
transgene in BXH2 mice resulted in shortening of the latency of leukemia with
increased frequency of megakaryoblastic leukemia, suggesting that increased Runx1
dosage is leukemogenic in myeloid lineage. Identifications of retroviral
integration sites revealed the genetic alterations that may cooperate with Runx1 
overdose in myeloid leukemogenesis. This mouse model may be useful for analysing 
the pathogenesis of myeloid leukemias with RUNX1 overdose, especially to examine 
whether an extra-copy of RUNX1 by trisomy 21 is causally related to Down's
syndrome-related acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL).

PMID: 15856017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Blood. 2005 Aug 1;106(3):860-70. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Hematopoietic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells progresses through
sequential hematoendothelial, primitive, and definitive stages resembling human
yolk sac development.

Zambidis ET(1), Peault B, Park TS, Bunz F, Civin CI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Hematopoiesis, Sidney Kimmel comprehensive Cancer
Center at John Hokins, The John Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
ezambid1@jhmi.edu

We elucidate the cellular and molecular kinetics of the stepwise differentiation 
of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to primitive and definitive
erythromyelopoiesis from human embryoid bodies (hEBs) in serum-free clonogenic
assays. Hematopoiesis initiates from CD45 hEB cells with emergence of
semiadherent mesodermal-hematoendothelial (MHE) colonies that can generate
endothelium and form organized, yolk sac-like structures that secondarily
generate multipotent primitive hematopoietic stem progenitor cells (HSPCs),
erythroblasts, and CD13+CD45+ macrophages. A first wave of hematopoiesis follows 
MHE colony emergence and is predominated by primitive erythropoiesis
characterized by a brilliant red hemoglobinization, CD71/CD325a (glycophorin A)
expression, and exclusively embryonic/fetal hemoglobin expression. A second wave 
of definitive-type erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-e's), erythroid
colony-forming units (CFU-e's), granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming cells
(GM-CFCs), and multilineage CFCs follows next from hEB progenitors. These stages 
of hematopoiesis proceed spontaneously from hEB-derived cells without requirement
for supplemental growth factors during hEB differentiation. Gene expression
analysis of differentiating hEBs revealed that initiation of hematopoiesis
correlated with increased levels of SCL/TAL1, GATA1, GATA2, CD34, CD31, and the
homeobox gene-regulating factor CDX4 These data indicate that hematopoietic
differentiation of hESCs models the earliest events of embryonic and definitive
hematopoiesis in a manner resembling human yolk sac development, thus providing a
valuable tool for dissecting the earliest events in human HSPC genesis.

PMCID: PMC1895146
PMID: 15831705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Blood. 2005 Jul 15;106(2):521-30. Epub 2005 Apr 12.

Mutant-specific gene programs in the zebrafish.

Weber GJ(1), Choe SE, Dooley KA, Paffett-Lugassy NN, Zhou Y, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Stem Cell Program, Department of Hematology/Oncology,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Karp 7, 1 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Hematopoiesis involves the production of stem cells, followed by the orchestrated
differentiation of the blood lineages. Genetic screens in zebrafish have
identified mutants with defects that disrupt specific stages of hematopoiesis and
vasculogenesis, including the cloche, spadetail (tbx16), moonshine (tif1g),
bloodless, and vlad tepes (gata1) mutants. To better characterize the blood
program, gene expression profiling was carried out in these mutants and in
scl-morphants (scl(mo)). Distinct gene clusters were demarcated by stage-specific
and mutant-specific gene regulation. These were found to correlate with the
transcriptional program of hematopoietic progenitor cells, as well as of the
erythroid, myeloid, and vascular lineages. Among these, several novel
hematopoietic and vascular genes were detected, for instance, the erythroid
transcription factors znfl2 and ncoa4. A specific regulation was found for
myeloid genes, as they were more strongly expressed in vlt mutants compared with 
other erythroid mutants. A unique gene expression pattern of up-regulated
isoprenoid synthesis genes was found in cloche and scl(mo), possibly in migrating
cells. In conjunction with the high conservation of vertebrate hematopoiesis, the
comparison of transcriptional profiles in zebrafish blood mutants represents a
versatile and powerful tool to elucidate the genetic regulation of blood and
blood vessel development.

PMCID: PMC1895186
PMID: 15827125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):22385-94. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

Graded levels of GATA-1 expression modulate survival, proliferation, and
differentiation of erythroid progenitors.

Pan X(1), Ohneda O, Ohneda K, Lindeboom F, Iwata F, Shimizu R, Nagano M, Suwabe
N, Philipsen S, Lim KC, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Center for TARA, ERATO
Environmental Response Project, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba
305-8577, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-1 plays an important role in gene regulation during the
development of erythroid cells. Several reports suggest that GATA-1 plays
multiple roles in survival, proliferation, and differentiation of erythroid
cells. However, little is known about the relationship between the level of
GATA-1 expression and its nature of multifunction to affect erythroid cell fate. 
To address this issue, we developed in vitro embryonic stem (ES) culture system
by using OP9 stromal cells (OP9/ES cell co-culture system), and cultured the
mutant (GATA-1.05 and GATA-1-null) and wild type (WT)ES cells, respectively. By
using this OP9/ES cell co-culture system, primitive and definitive erythroid
cells were developed individually, and we examined how expression level of GATA-1
affects the development of erythroid cells. GATA-1.05 ES-derived definitive
erythroid cells were immature with the appearance of proerythroblasts, and highly
proliferated, compared with WT and GATA-1-null ES-derived erythroid cells.
Extensive studies of cell cycle kinetics revealed that the GATA-1.05
proerythroblasts accumulated in S phase and expressed lower levels of p16(INK4A) 
than WT ES cell-derived proerythroblasts. We concluded that GATA-1 must achieve a
critical threshold activity to achieve selective activation of specific target
genes, thereby influencing the developmental decision of an erythroid progenitor 
cell to undergo apoptosis, proliferation, or terminal differentiation.

PMID: 15817467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Blood. 2005 Jul 15;106(2):477-84. Epub 2005 Apr 5.

Haploinsufficiency of GATA-2 perturbs adult hematopoietic stem-cell homeostasis.

Rodrigues NP(1), Janzen V, Forkert R, Dombkowski DM, Boyd AS, Orkin SH, Enver T, 
Vyas P, Scadden DT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Technology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02129, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 plays a fundamental role in
generating hematopoietic stem-cells in mammalian development. Less well defined
is whether GATA-2 participates in adult stem-cell regulation, an issue we
addressed using GATA-2 heterozygote mice that express reduced levels of GATA-2 in
hematopoietic cells. While GATA-2+/- mice demonstrated decreases in some
colony-forming progenitors, the most prominent changes were observed within the
stem-cell compartment. Heterozygote bone marrow had a lower abundance of
Lin(-)c-kit(+)Sca-1(+)CD34- cells and performed poorly in competitive
transplantation and quantitative week-5 cobblestone area-forming cell (CAFC)
assays. Furthermore, a stem-cell-enriched population from GATA1+/- marrow was
more quiescent and exhibited a greater frequency of apoptotic cells associated
with decreased expression of the anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-xL. Yet the self-renewal
potential of the +/- stem-cell compartment, as judged by serial transplantations,
was unchanged. These data indicate compromised primitive cell proliferation and
survival in the setting of a lower GATA-2 gene dose without a change in the
differentiation or self-renewal capacity of the stem-cells that remain. Thus,
GATA-2 dose regulates adult stem-cell homeostasis by affecting select aspects of 
stem cell function.

PMID: 15811962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. BMC Immunol. 2005 Apr 4;6:7.

Analysis of the CCR3 promoter reveals a regulatory region in exon 1 that binds
GATA-1.

Zimmermann N(1), Colyer JL, Koch LE, Rothenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. Nives.Zimmermann@cchmc.org

BACKGROUND: CC Chemokine Receptor 3 (CCR3), the major chemokine receptor
expressed on eosinophils, binds promiscuously to several ligands including
eotaxins 1, 2, and 3. Even though the only cells that consistently accumulate
following eotaxin administration in vivo are myeloid cells (primarily
eosinophils), other cell types have recently been shown to express CCR3. It is
therefore important to elucidate the molecular mechanisms regulating receptor
expression.
RESULTS: In order to define regions responsible for CCR3 transcription, a DNAse
hypersensitive site was identified in the vicinity of exon 1. Coupled with our
previous data implicating exon 1 in CCR3 transcription, we hypothesized that
transcription factors bind to exon-1. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis
revealed that nuclear proteins in eosinophilic cells bound to exon 1.
Furthermore, antibody interference and mutation studies demonstrated GATA-1
binding to exon 1. In order to test the 1.6-kb CCR3 promoter element (that
includes exon 1) for in vivo function, this region was used to generate
transgenic mice that expressed a reporter protein. Strong transgene expression
was achieved, with the pattern of expression suggesting a broad acting promoter.
CONCLUSION: The transcription factor GATA-1 binds to CCR3 exon 1. The 1.6-kb CCR3
promoter element, that includes exon 1, is a strong promoter in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1080127
PMID: 15807893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Blood. 2005 Jul 15;106(2):534-41. Epub 2005 Mar 31.

Identification of novel vascular endothelial-specific genes by the microarray
analysis of the zebrafish cloche mutants.

Sumanas S(1), Jorniak T, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, 621 C. Young Dr South, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The zebrafish cloche (clo) mutation affects the earliest known step in
differentiation of blood and endothelial cells in vertebrates. We established
clo/gata1-GFP transgenic line with erythroid-specific green fluorescent protein
(GFP) expression, which allowed differentiation of clo and wild-type siblings at 
the midsomitogenesis stages before morphologically visible phenotypes appeared.
To discover novel genes potentially involved in hematopoietic and vascular
development, we performed microarray analysis of more than 15,000 zebrafish genes
or expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in clo mutant embryos. We isolated the
full-length sequences and determined the expression patterns for 8 novel cDNAs
that were significantly down-regulated in clo-/- embryos. Dual specificity
phosphatase 5 (dusp5), cadherin 5 (cdh5; VE-cadherin), aquaporin 8 (aqp8),
adrenomedullin receptor (admr), complement receptor C1qR-like (crl), scavenger
receptor class F, member 1 (scarf1), and ETS1-like protein (etsrp) were
specifically expressed in the vascular endothelial cells, while retinol binding
protein 4 (rbp4) was expressed in the yolk syncytial layer and the hypochord.
Further functional studies of these novel genes should help to elucidate critical
early steps leading to the formation of vertebrate blood vessels.

PMCID: PMC1895181
PMID: 15802528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Mar 23;127(11):3751-9.

Spectroscopic and functional determination of the interaction of Pb2+ with GATA
proteins.

Ghering AB(1), Jenkins LM, Schenck BL, Deo S, Mayer RA, Pikaart MJ, Omichinski
JG, Godwin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road,
Evanston, Illinois 60208-3113, USA.

GATA proteins are transcription factors that bind GATA DNA elements through Cys4 
structural zinc-binding domains and play critical regulatory roles in
neurological and urogenital development and the development of cardiac disease.
To evaluate GATA proteins as potential targets for lead, spectroscopically
monitored metal-binding titrations were used to measure the affinity of Pb2+ for 
the C-terminal zinc-binding domain from chicken GATA-1 (CF) and the double-finger
domain from human GATA-1 (DF). Using this method, Pb2+ coordinating to CF and DF 
was directly observed through the appearance of intense bands in the
near-ultraviolet region of the spectrum (250-380 nm). Absorption data collected
from these experiments were best fit to a 1:1 Pb2+ -CF model and a 2:1 Pb2+ -DF
model. Competition experiments using Zn2+ were used to determine the absolute
affinities of Pb2+ for these proteins. These studies reveal that Pb2+ forms tight
complexes with cysteine residues in the zinc-binding sites in GATA proteins,
beta1Pb = 6.4 (+/- 2.0) x 10(9) M(-1) for CF and beta2 = 6.3 (+/- 6.3) x 10(19)
M(-2) for Pb(2+)2-DF, and within an order of magnitude of the affinity of Zn2+
for these proteins. Furthermore, Pb2+ was able to displace bound Zn2+ from CF and
DF. Upon addition of Pb2+, GATA shows a decreased ability to bind to DNA and
subsequently activate transcription. Therefore, the DNA binding and
transcriptional activity of GATA proteins are most likely to be targeted by Pb2+ 
in cells and tissues that sequester Pb2+ in vivo, which include the brain and the
heart.

PMID: 15771509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Blood. 2005 Jul 1;106(1):247-53. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Aberrant mitochondrial iron distribution and maturation arrest characterize early
erythroid precursors in low-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.

Tehranchi R(1), Invernizzi R, Grandien A, Zhivotovsky B, Fadeel B, Forsblom AM,
Travaglino E, Samuelsson J, Hast R, Nilsson L, Cazzola M, Wibom R,
Hellström-Lindberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.
ramin.tehranchi@medhs.ki.se

Early erythroblasts from patients with refractory anemia (RA) and RA with ringed 
sideroblasts (RARS) show constitutive mitochondrial release of cytochrome c.
Moreover, mature erythroblasts in RARS, but not in RA, display aberrant
accumulation of mitochondrial ferritin (MtF). We analyzed cytochrome c release,
MtF expression, and gene expression during erythroid differentiation in bone
marrow cells from myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients and healthy controls.
Whereas none or few cultured erythroid cells from healthy individuals and RA
patients expressed MtF, those from RARS patients showed MtF expression at an
early stage, when cells were CD34+ and without morphologic signs of erythroid
differentiation. The proportion of RARS erythroblasts that were MtF+ increased
further upon in vitro maturation. Moreover, a significant overexpression of mRNA 
encoding cytochrome c, and proapoptotic Bid and Bax, was seen in freshly isolated
cells from MDS patients. Genes involved in erythroid differentiation were also
dysregulated in MDS cells. Importantly, GATA-1 expression increased during normal
erythroid maturation, but remained low in MDS cultures, indicating a block of
erythroid maturation at the transcriptional level. In conclusion, aberrant MtF
expression in RARS erythroblasts occurs at a very early stage of erythroid
differentiation and is paralleled by an up-regulation of genes involved in this
process.

PMID: 15755901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Feb;13(1):70-5.

[Expressions of transcription factor GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes in bone marrow
stromal cells from patients with leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu XL(1), Li YQ, Wang Z, Yang LJ, Chen SH, Zhang H, Zhu KE, Han ZC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Medical College, Jinan University, Guangzhou
510632,China.

In order to investigate expressions of transcription factor GATA-1 and GATA-2
genes in the bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) from patients with leukemia or
normal controls, bone marrow stromal cells from 34 normal cases and 42 cases with
leukemia were cultured long-term in vitro. Nonadherent cells (bone marrow
hematopoietic cells) and amplified adherent cells (BMSC) were collected
separately. Expressions of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes were analyzed by using
RT-PCR-ELISA; the semi-quantitative expression levels of GATA genes in the BMSCs 
from patients with leukemia were compared with normal controls. The results
showed that expressions of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes could be detected in the BMSCs
and the bone marrow hematopoietic cells from both normal controls and the cases
of leukemia. The expression ratio of GATA-1 in the BMSCs from acute lymphocytic
leukemia (ALL) (85.7%) was similar to the normal controls (88.2%), whereas the
expression ratios in BMSCs from acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) (55.6%) and
chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML) (41.2%) were significant lower than the normal 
controls (P < 0.05). The rank of expression level of GATA-1 gene in the BMSCs was
"ALL>AML>normal>CML". There was no difference in the expression level of GATA-2
gene within the BMSCs from normal controls and patients with leukemia. The ranks 
of expression levels of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes in bone marrow hematopoietic
cells were "AML>normal>ALL>CML" and "AML>CML>ALL>normal". The dominant expression
of GATA-2 gene was found in the BMSCs from AML, CML or normal controls. It is
inferred that the expressions of GATA-1 and GATA-2 genes in the BMSCs of normal
controls and patients with leukemia may influence the regulation of hematopoiesis
in the bone marrow stroma and it is worthy of further study to explore their
roles in pathogenesis and development of leukemia.

PMID: 15748439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Blood. 2005 Mar 15;105(6):2614-6.

Down syndrome in Down House: trisomy 21, GATA1 mutations, and Charles Darwin.

Steensma DP.

PMID: 15746086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Blood. 2005 Jun 1;105(11):4523-6. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

AML1-FOG2 fusion protein in myelodysplasia.

Chan EM(1), Comer EM, Brown FC, Richkind KE, Holmes ML, Chong BH, Shiffman R,
Zhang DE, Slovak ML, Willman CL, Noguchi CT, Li Y, Heiber DJ, Kwan L, Chan RJ,
Vance GH, Ramsey HC, Hromas RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, 1044 W Walnut St, R4-202, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5254, USA.
echan@iupui.edu

Core binding factor (CBF) participates in specification of the hematopoietic stem
cell and functions as a critical regulator of hematopoiesis. Translocation or
point mutation of acute myeloid leukemia 1 (AML1)/RUNX1, which encodes the
DNA-binding subunit of CBF, plays a central role in the pathogenesis of acute
myeloid leukemia and myelodysplasia. We characterized the t(X;21)(p22.3;q22.1) in
a patient with myelodysplasia that fuses AML1 in-frame to the novel partner gene 
FOG2/ZFPM2. The reciprocal gene fusions AML1-FOG2 and FOG2-AML1 are both
expressed. AML1-FOG2, which fuses the DNA-binding domain of AML1 to most of FOG2,
represses the transcriptional activity of both CBF and GATA1. AML1-FOG2 retains a
motif that recruits the corepressor C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) and these
proteins associate in a protein complex. These results suggest a central role for
CtBP in AML1-FOG2 transcriptional repression and implicate coordinated disruption
of the AML1 and GATAdevelopmental programs in the pathogenesis of myelodysplasia.

PMID: 15705784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Blood. 2005 Jun 1;105(11):4369-76. Epub 2005 Feb 8.

Selective impairment of platelet activation to collagen in the absence of GATA1.

Hughan SC(1), Senis Y, Best D, Thomas A, Frampton J, Vyas P, Watson SP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
s.hughan@bham.ac.uk

Defects in the X-linked DNA-binding megakaryocyte transcription factor GATA1
cause thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function. However, detailed studies 
of GATA1 function in platelet activation are lacking. Here, we studied platelets 
from GATA1-deficient mice and from a male patient (S14) with a bleeding diathesis
attributed to a single amino acid substitution (R216Q) in the N-terminal GATA1
zinc finger that alters binding to DNA. In both cases there was inhibition of
aggregation to collagen and decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of glycoprotein VI
(GPVI)-signaling proteins. This effect was more marked in GATA1-deficient murine 
platelets, where it was associated with a significant reduction in surface GPVI
expression. Moreover, both human and murine GATA1-mutant platelets showed reduced
adhesion and aggregate formation on a collagen matrix at an intermediate rate of 
shear, although this could not be accounted solely by the thrombocytopenia and
altered GPVI expression, indicating that GATA1 regulates additional factors
important for platelet activation under shear. In contrast, there was no
inhibition of responses to G protein-coupled receptor agonists in GATA1-perturbed
platelets. Our results are consistent with GATA1 regulating some but not all
pathways of platelet activation, leading to an impairment of aggregate formation 
under flow, which cannot be attributed solely to the thrombocytopenia.

PMID: 15701726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell. 2005 Feb 4;17(3):453-62.

Proximity among distant regulatory elements at the beta-globin locus requires
GATA-1 and FOG-1.

Vakoc CR(1), Letting DL, Gheldof N, Sawado T, Bender MA, Groudine M, Weiss MJ,
Dekker J, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

Recent evidence suggests that long-range enhancers and gene promoters are in
close proximity, which might reflect the formation of chromatin loops. Here, we
examined the mechanism for DNA looping at the beta-globin locus. By using
chromosome conformation capture (3C), we show that the hematopoietic
transcription factor GATA-1 and its cofactor FOG-1 are required for the physical 
interaction between the beta-globin locus control region (LCR) and the beta-major
globin promoter. Kinetic studies reveal that GATA-1-induced loop formation
correlates with the onset of beta-globin transcription and occurs independently
of new protein synthesis. GATA-1 occupies the beta-major globin promoter normally
in fetal liver erythroblasts from mice lacking the LCR, suggesting that GATA-1
binding to the promoter and LCR are independent events that occur prior to loop
formation. Together, these data demonstrate that GATA-1 and FOG-1 are essential
anchors for a tissue-specific chromatin loop, providing general insights into
long-range enhancer function.

PMID: 15694345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Feb 2;97(3):226-31.

GATA1, cytidine deaminase, and the high cure rate of Down syndrome children with 
acute megakaryocytic leukemia.

Ge Y(1), Stout ML, Tatman DA, Jensen TL, Buck S, Thomas RL, Ravindranath Y,
Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, MI, USA.

Down syndrome children with acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL) have higher cure
rates than non-Down syndrome acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients treated with
cytosine arabinoside (ara-C). Megakaryoblasts from Down syndrome AML patients are
more sensitive in vitro to ara-C than cells from non-Down syndrome AML patients. 
Somatic mutations in the GATA1 transcription factor have been detected
exclusively and almost uniformly in Down syndrome AMkL patients, suggesting a
potential linkage to the chemotherapy sensitivity of Down syndrome
megakaryoblasts. Stable transfection of wild-type GATA1 cDNA into the Down
syndrome AMkL cell line CMK resulted in decreased (8- to 17-fold) ara-C
sensitivity and a threefold-lower generation of the active ara-C metabolite
ara-CTP compared with that for mock-transfected CMK cells. High intracellular
levels of uridine arabinoside (ara-U) (an inactive ara-C catabolite generated by 
cytidine deaminase) and cytidine deaminase transcripts were detected in
GATA1-transfected CMK sublines, whereas no ara-U was detected in mock-transfected
cells. Cytidine deaminase transcripts were a median 5.1-fold (P = .002) lower in 
Down syndrome megakaryoblasts (n = 16) than in blast cells from non-Down syndrome
patients (n = 56). These results suggest that GATA1 transcriptionally upregulates
cytidine deaminase and that the presence or absence of GATA1 mutations in AML
blasts likely confers differences in ara-C sensitivities due to effects on
cytidine deaminase gene expression, which, in turn, contributes to the high cure 
rate of Down syndrome AMkL patients.

PMID: 15687366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Br J Haematol. 2005 Feb;128(4):548-51.

GATA1 mutation and trisomy 21 are required only in haematopoietic cells for
development of transient myeloproliferative disorder.

Carpenter E(1), Valverde-Garduno V, Sternberg A, Mitchell C, Roberts I, Vyas P,
Vora A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

Trisomy 21 [Down's syndrome (DS)] and mutations in transcription factor GATA1
predispose neonates to a transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) and/or acute
megakaryocytic leukaemia (AMKL). The role of trisomy 21 in their pathogenesis is 
unclear. We previously reported two rare neonates without DS who had TMD, one of 
whom progressed to AMKL. Trisomy 21 was detected only in blood cells at
presentation with TMD/AMKL and disappeared with disease resolution. We now show
that the blood cells at presentation of TMD harboured GATA1 genomic DNA
mutations, suggesting a requirement for trisomy 21 in haematopoietic cells,
rather than other cell types, for development of TMD/AMKL.

PMID: 15686466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1215-27.

GATA1 function, a paradigm for transcription factors in hematopoiesis.

Ferreira R(1), Ohneda K, Yamamoto M, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

PMCID: PMC548021
PMID: 15684376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):13163-70. Epub 2005 Jan 25.

GATA transcription factors inhibit cytokine-dependent growth and survival of a
hematopoietic cell line through the inhibition of STAT3 activity.

Ezoe S(1), Matsumura I, Gale K, Satoh Y, Ishikawa J, Mizuki M, Takahashi S,
Minegishi N, Nakajima K, Yamamoto M, Enver T, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Although GATA-1 and GATA-2 were shown to be essential for the development of
hematopoietic cells by gene targeting experiments, they were also reported to
inhibit the growth of hematopoietic cells. Therefore, in this study, we examined 
the effects of GATA-1 and GATA-2 on cytokine signals. A tamoxifen-inducible form 
of GATA-1 (GATA-1/ERT) showed a minor inhibitory effect on interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent growth of an IL-3-dependent cell line Ba/F3. On the other hand, 
it drastically inhibited TPO-dependent growth and gp130-mediated growth/survival 
of Ba/F3. Similarly, an estradiol-inducible form of GATA-2 (GATA-2/ER) disrupted 
thrombopoietin (TPO)-dependent growth and gp130-mediated growth/survival of
Ba/F3. As for this mechanism, we found that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 directly bound
to STAT3 both in vitro and in vivo and inhibited its DNA-binding activity in gel 
shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, whereas they hardly
affected STAT5 activity. In addition, endogenous GATA-1 was found to interact
with STAT3 in normal megakaryocytes, suggesting that GATA-1 may inhibit STAT3
activity in normal hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, we found that GATA-1
suppressed STAT3 activity through its N-zinc finger domain. Together, these
results suggest that, besides the roles as transcription factors, GATA family
proteins modulate cytokine signals through protein-protein interactions, thereby 
regulating the growth and survival of hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 15673499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genes Cells. 2005 Jan;10(1):47-62.

Transgenic over-expression of GATA-1 mutant lacking N-finger domain causes
hemolytic syndrome in mouse erythroid cells.

Nakano M(1), Ohneda K, Yamamoto-Mukai H, Shimizu R, Ohneda O, Ohmura S, Suzuki M,
Tsukamoto S, Yanagawa T, Yoshida H, Takakuwa Y, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for erythroid cell differentiation.
GATA-binding motifs have been found in the regulatory regions of various
erythroid-specific genes, suggesting that GATA-1 contributes to gene regulation
during the entire process of erythropoiesis. A GATA-1 germ-line mutation results 
in embryonic lethality due to defective primitive erythropoiesis and GATA-1-null 
embryonic stem cells fails to differentiate beyond the proerythroblast stage.
Therefore, the precise roles of GATA-1 in the later stages of erythropoiesis
could not be clarified. Under the control of a GATA-1 gene hematopoietic
regulatory domain, a GATA-1 mutant lacking the N-finger domain (DeltaNF mutant)
was over-expressed in mice. These mice exhibited abnormal morphology in
peripheral red blood cells (RBCs), reticulocytosis, splenomegaly, and erythroid
hyperplasia, indicating compensated hemolysis. These mice were extremely
sensitive to phenylhydrazine (PHZ), an agent that induces hemolysis, and their
RBCs were osmotically fragile. Importantly, the hemolytic response to PHZ was
partially restored by the simultaneous expression of wild-type GATA-1 with the
DeltaNF mutant, supporting our contention that DeltaNF protein competitively
inhibits the function of endogenous GATA-1. These data provide the first in vivo 
evidence that the NF domain contributes to the gene regulation that is critical
for differentiation and survival of mature RBCs in postnatal erythropoiesis.

PMID: 15670213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Blood. 2005 May 1;105(9):3493-501. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

A pathobiologic pathway linking thrombopoietin, GATA-1, and TGF-beta1 in the
development of myelofibrosis.

Vannucchi AM(1), Bianchi L, Paoletti F, Pancrazzi A, Torre E, Nishikawa M,
Zingariello M, Di Baldassarre A, Rana RA, Lorenzini R, Alfani E, Migliaccio G,
Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Biochemistry, Istituto Superiore Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299,
00161 Rome, Italy. migliar@iss.it

Idiopathic myelofibrosis (IM) is a disease characterized by marrow fibrosis,
abnormal stem/progenitor cell trafficking, and extramedullary hematopoiesis
frequently associated with alterations in megakaryocytes (Mks). Mice harboring
genetic alterations in either the extrinsic (ectopic thrombopoietin expression,
TPO(high) mice) or intrinsic (hypomorphic GATA-1 mutation, GATA-1(low) mice)
control of Mk differentiation develop myelofibrosis, a syndrome similar to IM.
The relationship, if any, between the pathobiologic mechanism leading to the
development of myelofibrosis in the 2 animal models is not understood. Here we
show that plasma from GATA-1(low) mice contained normal levels of TPO. On the
other hand, Mks from TPO-treated wild-type animals (TPO(high) mice), as those
from GATA-1(low) animals, had similar morphologic abnormalities and contained low
GATA-1. In both animal models, development of myelofibrosis was associated with
high transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) content in extracellular fluids
of marrow and spleen. Surprisingly, TPO treatment of GATA-1(low) mice restored
the GATA-1 content in Mks and halted both defective thrombocytopoiesis and
fibrosis. These data indicate that the TPO(high) and GATA-1(low) alterations are 
linked in an upstream-downstream relationship along a pathobiologic pathway
leading to development of myelofibrosis in mice and, possibly, of IM in humans.

PMID: 15665119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Dec;1030:537-54.

GATA-1: friends, brothers, and coworkers.

Morceau F(1), Schnekenburger M, Dicato M, Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

GATA-1 is the founding member of the GATA family of transcription factors. GATA-1
and GATA family member GATA-2 are expressed in erythroid and megakaryocytic
lineages, in which they play a crucial role in cell maturation and
differentiation. GATA-1 regulates the transcription of many specific and
nonspecific erythroid genes by binding to DNA at the consensus sequence WGATAR,
which is recognized by all of the GATA family of transcription factors. However, 
it was identified in eosinophilic cells and also in Sertoli cells in testis. Its 
activity depends on close cooperation with a functional network of cofactors,
among them Friend of GATA, PU.1, and CBP/p300. The GATA-1 protein structure has
been well described and includes two zinc fingers that are directly involved in
the interaction with DNA and other proteins in vivo. GATA-1 mutations in the zinc
fingers can cause deregulation of required interactions and lead to severe
dysfunction in the hematopoietic system.

PMID: 15659837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):137-47. Epub 2004 Dec 13.

GATA1 in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

Crispino JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, 924 E. 57th
Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. crispino@huggins.bsd.uchicago.edu

In the late 1980s, several research groups independently discovered the founding 
member of the GATA family of transcription factors, GATA-1. Each group had
evidence that GATA-1 played an important role in erythroid gene expression, but
little did they know that it would turn out to be a key regulator of development 
of not only red blood cells, but of several other hematopoietic cell types as
well. Furthermore, few would have guessed that missense mutations in GATA1 would 
cause inherited blood disorders, while acquired mutations would be found
associated with essentially all cases of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL)
in children with Down syndrome (DS). With respect to the latter disorder, the
presence of a GATA1 mutation is now arguably the defining feature of this
leukemia. In this review, I will summarize our current knowledge of the role of
GATA-1 in normal development, and discuss how mutations in GATA1 lead to abnormal
and malignant hematopoiesis.

PMID: 15659348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):129-36. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Gene expression regulation and domain function of hematopoietic GATA factors.

Shimizu R(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, Center for Tsukuba Advanced
Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

The hierarchical gene regulatory network in hematopoiesis is highly complex,
making elucidation of the processes of specification and differentiation of
hematopoietic cells a challenging task. Recent discoveries have divulged the GATA
factors as central to the genetic control of hematopoiesis. In particular,
hematopoietic development is subject to extensive and precise regulation of
GATA-1 and GATA-2 at the molecular level. We wish to emphasize the regulatory
relationships between GATA-1 and GATA-2 implicated in cell development. An
advanced experimental genetic approach has provided evidence that abnormalities
in this network may result in a variety of blood disorders. The most striking new
finding is the novel pathogenesis arising from GATA-1 dysfunction that leads to
leukemia.

PMID: 15659347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2005 Jan;27(1):50-2.

Transient neonatal myeloproliferative disorder without Down syndrome and
detection of GATA1 mutation.

Magalhães IQ(1), Splendore A, Emerenciano M, Córdoba MS, Córdoba JC, Allemand PA,
Ferrari I, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Hematologia/Oncologia Pediátrica SES-DF, Brasília, Brazil.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder is a form of self-limited leukemia that
occurs almost exclusively in neonates with Down syndrome. The authors report an
unusual case of a newborn without constitutional trisomy 21 who developed
undifferentiated leukemia and subsequently achieved clinical and molecular
remission without chemotherapy. Cytogenetics and molecular analysis have shown
trisomy 21 and GATA1 mutation restricted to leukemic cells. G-to-T transversion
was detected, which is predicted to result in a premature stop codon (c.119G>T;
pGlu67X) in diagnosis samples. These findings emphasize that there must be a
powerful interaction between GATA1 and trisomy 21 in leukemogenesis process.

PMID: 15654280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jan 18;102(3):583-8. Epub 2005 Jan 11.

Zinc fingers as protein recognition motifs: structural basis for the
GATA-1/friend of GATA interaction.

Liew CK(1), Simpson RJ, Kwan AH, Crofts LA, Loughlin FE, Matthews JM, Crossley M,
Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales 2006, Australia.

GATA-1 and friend of GATA (FOG) are zinc-finger transcription factors that
physically interact to play essential roles in erythroid and megakaryocytic
development. Several naturally occurring mutations in the GATA-1 gene that alter 
the FOG-binding domain have been reported. The mutations are associated with
familial anemias and thrombocytopenias of differing severity. To elucidate the
molecular basis for the GATA-1/FOG interaction, we have determined the
three-dimensional structure of a complex comprising the interaction domains of
these proteins. The structure reveals how zinc fingers can act as protein
recognition motifs. Details of the architecture of the contact domains and their 
physical properties provide a molecular explanation for how the GATA-1 mutations 
contribute to distinct but related genetic diseases.

PMCID: PMC545545
PMID: 15644435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005 Jan;5(1):11-20.

Origins of leukaemia in children with Down syndrome.

Hitzler JK(1), Zipursky A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology/Oncology, The Hospital for
Sick Children, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. johann.hitzler@sickkids.ca

Transient megakaryoblastic leukaemia is found in 10% of newborns with Down
syndrome, characterized by constitutional trisomy 21. Although in most cases the 
leukaemic cells disappear spontaneously after the first months of life,
irreversible acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia develops in 20% of these
individuals within 4 years. The leukaemic cells typically harbour somatic
mutations of the gene encoding GATA1, an essential transcriptional regulator of
normal megakaryocytic differentiation. Leukaemia that specifically arises in the 
context of constitutional trisomy 21 and somatic GATA1 mutations is a unique
biological model of the incremental process of leukaemic transformation.

PMID: 15630411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Cell. 2005 Jan;8(1):109-16.

Loss of gata1 but not gata2 converts erythropoiesis to myelopoiesis in zebrafish 
embryos.

Galloway JL(1), Wingert RA, Thisse C, Thisse B, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors into erythroid or myeloid cell
lineages is thought to depend upon relative levels of the transcription factors
gata1 and pu.1. While loss-of-function analysis shows that gata1 is necessary for
terminal erythroid differentiation, no study has demonstrated that loss of gata1 
alters myeloid differentiation during ontogeny. Here we provide in vivo evidence 
that loss of Gata1, but not Gata2, transforms primitive blood precursors into
myeloid cells, resulting in a massive expansion of granulocytic neutrophils and
macrophages at the expense of red blood cells. In addition to this fate change,
expression of many erythroid genes was found to be differentially dependent on
Gata1 alone, on both Gata1 and Gata2, or independent of both Gata factors,
suggesting that multiple pathways regulate erythroid gene expression. Our studies
establish a transcriptional hierarchy of Gata factor dependence during
hematopoiesis and demonstrate that gata1 plays an integral role in directing
myelo-erythroid lineage fate decisions during embryogenesis.

PMID: 15621534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Cell. 2005 Jan;8(1):97-108.

Interplay of pu.1 and gata1 determines myelo-erythroid progenitor cell fate in
zebrafish.

Rhodes J(1), Hagen A, Hsu K, Deng M, Liu TX, Look AT, Kanki JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The zebrafish is a powerful model system for investigating embryonic vertebrate
hematopoiesis, allowing for the critical in vivo analysis of cell lineage
determination. In this study, we identify zebrafish myeloerythroid progenitor
cells (MPCs) that are likely to represent the functional equivalent of mammalian 
common myeloid progenitors. Utilizing transgenic pu.1-GFP fish, real-time MPC
differentiation was correlated with dynamic changes in cell motility, morphology,
and gene expression. Unlike mammalian hematopoiesis, embryonic zebrafish
myelopoiesis and erythropoiesis occur in anatomically separate locations. Gene
knockdown experiments and transplantation assays demonstrated the reciprocal
negative regulation of pu.1 and gata1 and their non-cell-autonomous regulation
that determines myeloid versus erythroid MPC fate in the distinct blood-forming
regions. Furthermore, forced expression of pu.1 in the bloodless mutant cloche
resulted in myelopoietic rescue, providing intriguing evidence that this gene can
function in the absence of some stem cell genes, such as scl, in governing
myelopoiesis.

PMID: 15621533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Blood. 2005 Apr 15;105(8):3100-8. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Transgenic expression of BACH1 transcription factor results in megakaryocytic
impairment.

Toki T(1), Katsuoka F, Kanezaki R, Xu G, Kurotaki H, Sun J, Kamio T, Watanabe S, 
Tandai S, Terui K, Yagihashi S, Komatsu N, Igarashi K, Yamamoto M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
Aomori, 036-8563 Japan.

Both nuclear factor erythroid 2 45 kDa subunit (p45) and BTB and CNC homolog 1
(Bach) transcription factors can form dimers with one of the small Maf proteins, 
and these heterodimers bind to the musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene (Maf)
recognition element (MARE). MARE is known to act as a critical cis-regulatory
element of erythroid and megakaryocytic genes. Although detailed analyses of
p45-null mutant mice and small maf compound mutant mice revealed that these
factors are both critical for platelet production, the functional contributions
of Bach1 and the relationship or redundancy between Bach1 and p45 in
megakaryocytes remain to be clarified. To address these issues, we generated
transgenic lines of mice bearing human BACH1 cDNA under the control of the GATA-1
locus hematopoietic regulatory domain. The transgenic mouse lines showed
significant thrombocytopenia associated with impaired maturation of the
megakaryocytes, and they developed myelofibrosis. The megakaryocytes in the
transgenic mice exhibited reduced proplatelet formation, and the modal ploidy
class of megakaryocytes was 2N, indicating the impairment of endomitosis.
Transcription of the p45 target genes was down-regulated and we indeed found that
BACH1 binds to the thromboxane synthase gene, one of the target genes for p45 in 
megakaryocytes. These findings thus provide evidence that BACH1 acts as a
transcriptional repressor in the regulation of MARE-dependent genes in
megakaryocytes.

PMID: 15613547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):7452-9. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

T to C substitution at -175 or -173 of the gamma-globin promoter affects GATA-1
and Oct-1 binding in vitro differently but can independently reproduce the
hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin phenotype in transgenic mice.

Liu LR(1), Du ZW, Zhao HL, Liu XL, Huang XD, Shen J, Ju LM, Fang FD, Zhang JW.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100005, China.

The T to C substitution at position -175 of the gamma-globin gene has been
identified in some individuals with non-deletion hereditary persistence of fetal 
hemoglobin (HPFH). In this study, the HPFH phenotype was reestablished in
transgenic mice carrying the mu'LCRAgamma(-175)psibetadeltabeta construct, which 
contained a 3.1-kb mu'LCR cassette linked to a 29-kb fragment from the Agamma-to 
beta-globin gene with the natural chromosome arrangement but with the -175
mutation, which provided evidence for this single mutation as the cause of this
form of HPFH. The HPFH phenotype was also reproduced in transgenic mice carrying 
the mu'LCRAgamma(-173)psibetadeltabeta construct, in which the -175 T to C Agamma
gene was substituted with the -173 T to C Agamma gene. In vitro experiments
proved that the -175 mutation significantly reduced binding of Oct-1 but not
GATA-1, whereas the -173 mutation dramatically decreased binding of GATA-1 but
not Oct-1. These results suggest that abrogation of either GATA-1 or Oct-1
binding to this promoter region may result in the HPFH phenotype. An in vivo
footprinting assay revealed that either the -175 mutation or the -173 mutation
significantly decreased overall protein binding to this promoter region in adult 
erythrocytes of transgenic mice. We hypothesize that a multiprotein complex
containing GATA-1, Oct-1, and other protein factors may contribute to the
formation of a repressive chromatin structure that silences gamma-globin gene
expression in normal adult erythrocytes. Both the -173 and -175 T to C
substitutions may disrupt the complex assembly and result in the reactivation of 
the gamma-globin gene in adult erythrocytes.

PMID: 15613485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genomics. 2005 Jan;85(1):117-30.

DYRK gene structure and erythroid-restricted features of DYRK3 gene expression.

Zhang D(1), Li K, Erickson-Miller CL, Weiss M, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
16802, USA.

DYRKs are an emerging family of dual-specificity kinases that play key roles in
cell proliferation, survival, and development. Up to seven mammalian DYRK
isoforms have been reported, but only the DYRK1A gene (and its products) has been
well characterized. Defined here are the genomic structures (and phylogenetics)
of DYRK3, four additional murine and/or human DYRKs, and two related HIPK genes. 
For murine DYRK3, direct BAC sequences are provided, a basis for differential
processing of murine versus human transcripts is defined, and tissue expression
profiles plus a functional DYRK3 promoter are characterized. Unlike complex DYRKs
1A, 1B, and 4A, DYRK3 and DYRK2 possess simple 4-exon structures. For DYRK3,
expression is strong in erythroid cells and testis, but is also detected in adult
kidney and liver in situ. In addition, a 1930-bp DYRK3 promoter drives erythroid 
expression and transcript expression is inhibited sharply on GATA1-induced G1E
cell differentiation.

PMID: 15607427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Dec 8;32(21):6454-67. Print 2004.

A novel E2 box-GATA element modulates Cdc6 transcription during human cells
polyploidization.

Vilaboa N(1), Bermejo R, Martinez P, Bornstein R, Calés C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas A. Sols,
Universidad Autónoma-CSIC, Arturo Duperier, 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Cdc6 is a key regulator of the strict alternation of S and M phases during the
mitotic cell cycle. In mammalian and plant cells that physiologically become
polyploid, cdc6 is transcriptionally and post-translationally regulated. We have 
recently reported that Cdc6 levels are maintained in megakaryoblastic HEL cells, 
but severely downregulated by ectopic expression of transcriptional repressor
Drosophila melanogaster escargot. Here, we show that cdc6 promoter activity is
upregulated during megakaryocytic differentiation of HEL endoreplicating cells,
and that Escargot interferes with such activation. Transactivation experiments
showed that a 1.7 kb region located at 2800 upstream cdc6 transcription
initiation site behaved as a potent enhancer in endoreplicating cells only. This 
activity was mainly dependent on a novel cis-regulatory element composed by an E2
box overlapping a GATA motif. Ectopic Escargot could bind this regulatory element
in vitro and endogenous GATA-1 and E2A formed specific complexes in
megakaryoblastic cells as well as in primary megakaryocytes. Chromatin
Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that both transcription factors were
occupying the E2 box/GATA site in vivo. Altogether, these data suggest that cdc6 
expression could be actively maintained during megakaryocytic differentiation
through transcriptional mechanisms involving specific cis- and trans-regulatory
elements.

PMCID: PMC535689
PMID: 15590906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(24):10814-25.

Leukemogenesis caused by incapacitated GATA-1 function.

Shimizu R(1), Kuroha T, Ohneda O, Pan X, Ohneda K, Takahashi S, Philipsen S,
Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for TARA, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577,
Japan.

GATA-1 is essential for the development of erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages.
We found that GATA-1 gene knockdown female (GATA-1.05/X) mice frequently develop 
a hematopoietic disorder resembling myelodysplastic syndrome that is
characterized by the accumulation of progenitors expressing low levels of GATA-1.
In this study, we demonstrate that GATA-1.05/X mice suffer from two distinct
types of acute leukemia, an early-onset c-Kit-positive nonlymphoid leukemia and a
late-onset B-lymphocytic leukemia. Since GATA-1 is an X chromosome gene, two
types of hematopoietic cells reside within heterozygous GATA-1 knockdown mice,
bearing either an active wild-type GATA-1 allele or an active mutant GATA-1.05
allele. In the hematopoietic progenitors with the latter allele, low-level GATA-1
expression is sufficient to support survival and proliferation but not
differentiation, leading to the accumulation of progenitors that are easily
targeted by oncogenic stimuli. Since such leukemia has not been observed in
GATA-1-null/X mutant mice, we conclude that the residual GATA-1 activity in the
knockdown mice contributes to the development of the malignancy. This de novo
model recapitulates the acute crisis found in preleukemic conditions in humans.

PMCID: PMC533998
PMID: 15572684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4929-39. Epub 2004 Nov 24.

Notch signals inhibit the development of erythroid/megakaryocytic cells by
suppressing GATA-1 activity through the induction of HES1.

Ishiko E(1), Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Gale K, Ishiko J, Satoh Y, Tanaka H, Shibayama 
H, Mizuki M, Era T, Enver T, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The effects of Notch signals on the erythroid/megakaryocytic differentiation of
hematopoietic cells were examined. Activation of Notch signals by the
intracellular Notch1 or an estradiol-inducible form of Notch1/ER suppressed the
expression of the erythroid marker glycophorin A in an erythroid/megakaryocytic
cell line K562. Although Mock-transfected K562 cells underwent megakaryocytic
differentiation in response to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA),
estradiol-activated Notch1/ER induced apoptosis during TPA treatment in the
transfectant, which was accompanied by the reduced expression of an antiapoptotic
molecule Bcl-XL. Even when apoptosis was prevented by the overexpression of
Bcl-XL, activated Notch signals still inhibited TPA-induced megakaryocytic
differentiation. As for this mechanism, Notch1/recombination signal binding
protein J-kappa-induced HES1 but not HES5 was found to inhibit the function of an
erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage-specific transcription factor GATA-1. Although
HES1 did not affect the DNA binding activity of GATA-1 in gel shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, it directly bound to GATA-1 and dissociated a
critical transcriptional cofactor, p300, from GATA-1. Furthermore, overexpressed 
HES1 inhibited the development of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells in colony
assays. Also, the Notch ligand Jagged1 expressed on NIH3T3 cells suppressed the
development of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells from cocultured Lin-Sca-1+
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. These results suggest that Notch1 inhibits
the development of erythroid/megakaryocytic cells by suppressing GATA-1 activity 
through HES1.

PMID: 15563463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10118-25.

Ski negatively regulates erythroid differentiation through its interaction with
GATA1.

Ueki N(1), Zhang L, Hayman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222, USA.

The Ski oncoprotein dramatically affects cell growth, differentiation, and/or
survival. Recently, Ski was shown to act in distinct signaling pathways including
those involving nuclear receptors, transforming growth factor beta, and tumor
suppressors. These divergent roles of Ski are probably dependent on Ski's
capacity to bind multiple partners with disparate functions. In particular, Ski
alters the growth and differentiation program of erythroid progenitor cells,
leading to malignant leukemia. However, the mechanism underlying this important
effect has remained elusive. Here we show that Ski interacts with GATA1, a
transcription factor essential in erythropoiesis. Using a Ski mutant deficient in
GATA1 binding, we show that this Ski-GATA1 interaction is critical for Ski's
ability to repress GATA1-mediated transcription and block erythroid
differentiation. Furthermore, the repression of GATA1-mediated transcription
involves Ski's ability to block DNA binding of GATA1. This finding is in marked
contrast to those in previous reports on the mechanism of repression by Ski,
which have described a model involving the recruitment of corepressors into
DNA-bound transcription complexes. We propose that Ski cooperates in the process 
of transformation in erythroid cells by interfering with GATA1 function, thereby 
contributing to erythroleukemia.

PMCID: PMC529047
PMID: 15542823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Hum Reprod. 2005 Jan;20(1):108-16. Epub 2004 Nov 11.

Molecular markers for the assessment of postnatal male germ cell development in
the mouse.

Jarvis S(1), Elliott DJ, Morgan D, Winston R, Readhead C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College Faculty 
of Medicine, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN, UK.

BACKGROUND: A proliferation marker, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), a 
Sertoli cell specific transcription factor, GATA-1 and the male germ cell
specific, RNA binding motif (RBM), were used to identify different cellular
populations during postnatal development of the mouse testis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR and real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR)
were used.
RESULTS: PCNA was expressed in pre-Sertoli and germ cells on the day of birth.
Both pre-meiotic germ cells and spermatocytes expressed RBM throughout postnatal 
development. RBM-positive cell counts and QRT-PCR of RBM showed that average
level of RBM per cell is highest in juvenile males between 14 and 21 days. From
42 days onward, there was a dramatic decrease in RBM expression in individual
pre-meiotic and meiotic germ cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These markers were used to correlate cell proliferative capability, 
gene expression profile and anatomic location within the developing mouse testis.
The majority of germ cells start active proliferation once they have migrated to 
the basement membrane or immediately before. RBM is more highly expressed during 
the first wave of spermatogenesis versus subsequent waves, suggesting that there 
may be a change in the activity of RBM.

PMID: 15539445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 13;24(3):336-43.

Lyn deficiency reduces GATA-1, EKLF and STAT5, and induces extramedullary stress 
erythropoiesis.

Ingley E(1), McCarthy DJ, Pore JR, Sarna MK, Adenan AS, Wright MJ, Erber W,
Tilbrook PA, Klinken SP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine, Western Australian Institute for Medical
Research and Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia,
WA, Australia.

In vitro studies have implicated the Lyn tyrosine kinase in erythropoietin
signaling. In this study, we show that J2E erythroid cells lacking Lyn have
impaired signaling and reduced levels of transcription factors STAT5a, EKLF and
GATA-1. Since mice lacking STAT5, EKLF or GATA-1 have red cell abnormalities,
this study also examined the erythroid compartment of Lyn(-/-) mice.
Significantly, STAT5, EKLF and GATA-1 levels were appreciably lower in Lyn(-/-)
erythroblasts, and the phenotype of Lyn(-/-) animals was remarkably similar to
GATA-1(low) animals. Although young adult Lyn-deficient mice had normal
hematocrits, older mice developed anemia. Grossly enlarged erythroblasts and
florid erythrophagocytosis were detected in the bone marrow of mice lacking Lyn. 
Markedly elevated erythroid progenitors and precursor levels were observed in the
spleens, but not bone marrow, of Lyn(-/-) animals indicating that extramedullary 
erythropoiesis was occurring. These data indicate that Lyn(-/-) mice display
extramedullary stress erythropoiesis to compensate for intrinsic and extrinsic
erythroid defects.

PMID: 15516974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Blood. 2004 Nov 1;104(9):2988; author reply 2988-9.

Do beta-globin, GATA-1,or EpoR regulatory domains specifically mark erythroid
progenitors in transgenic reporter mice?

Suzuki N, Imagawa S, Noguchi CT, Yamamoto M.

Comment on
    Blood. 2004 Aug 1;104(3):659-66.

PMID: 15498861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 1;173(9):5564-73.

The interaction between GATA proteins and activator protein-1 promotes the
transcription of IL-13 in mast cells.

Masuda A(1), Yoshikai Y, Kume H, Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Host Defense, Center for Neural Disease and Cancer, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. amasuda@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

IL-13 is considered to be a key modulator in the pathogenesis of Th2-induced
allergic inflammation, although little is known about the regulation of IL-13
transcription in mast cells. In T cells, involvement of GATA-3 in cell
type-specific expression of the IL-13 gene has been reported. However, the
mechanisms that induce rapid transactivation of the IL-13 gene in response to
various types of stimulation have hitherto remained unknown. In this report, we
describe our investigation of the promoter region necessary for IL-13
transcription; we have found that both AP-1 and GATA proteins are indispensable
for IL-13 transcription in mouse mast cells. In our investigation, we focused on 
the functional interaction between GATA and AP-1 in the IL-13 promoter context.
Transfection experiments have revealed that GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins are able
to associate with AP-1 proteins. We have also shown that overexpression of GATA-1
induced excess AP-1 binding to the IL-13 promoter as well as a significant
increase in IL-13 production in mast cells. The results of the present study have
shown that direct interaction between AP-1 and GATA proteins plays an important
role in IL-13 transcription in mast cells.

PMID: 15494506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):1724-32. Epub 2004 Oct 19.

Dynamic GATA factor interplay at a multicomponent regulatory region of the GATA-2
locus.

Martowicz ML(1), Grass JA, Boyer ME, Guend H, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology
Program, Department of Pharmacology, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Given the simplicity of the DNA sequence that mediates binding of GATA
transcription factors, GATA motifs reside throughout chromosomal DNA. However,
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis has revealed that GATA-1 discriminates
exquisitely among these sites. GATA-2 selectively occupies the -2.8-kilobase (kb)
region of the GATA-2 locus in the active state despite there being numerous GATA 
motifs throughout the locus. The GATA-1-mediated displacement of GATA-2 is
tightly coupled to repression of GATA-2 transcription. We have used high
resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation to show that GATA-1 and GATA-2 occupy
two additional regions, -3.9 and -1.8 kb of the GATA-2 locus. GATA-1 and GATA-2
had distinct preferences for occupancy at these regions, with GATA-1 and GATA-2
occupancy highest at the -3.9- and -1.8-kb regions, respectively. Activation of
an estrogen receptor fusion to GATA-1 (ER-GATA-1) induced similar kinetics of
ER-GATA-1 occupancy and GATA-2 displacement at the sites. In the
transcriptionally active state, DNase I hypersensitive sites (HSs) were detected 
at the -3.9- and -1.8-kb regions, with a weak HS at the -2.8-kb region. Whereas
ER-GATA-1-instigated repression abolished the -1.8-kb HS, the -3.9-kb HS
persisted in the repressed state. Transient transfection analysis provided
evidence that the -3.9-kb region functions distinctly from the -2.8- and -1.8-kb 
regions. We propose that GATA-2 transcription is regulated via the collective
actions of complexes assembled at the -2.8- and -1.8-kb regions, which share
similar properties, and through a qualitatively distinct activity of the -3.9-kb 
complex.

PMID: 15494394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Br J Haematol. 2004 Nov;127(3):356-9.

Development of Duffy transgenic mouse: in vivo expression of human Duffy gene
with -33T-->C promoter mutation in non-erythroid tissues.

Chaudhuri A(1), Yuen G, Fang F, Storry J.

Author information: 
(1)Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute of the New York Blood Center, New York,
NY 10021, USA. achaudhuri@nybloodcenter.org

Blood group Duffy gene (FY) promoter in Duffy-negative individuals contains a
point mutation in the GATA1 protein-binding motif, which was suggested to be
responsible for erythroid suppression of FY. We developed two transgenic mouse
lines with FY from both Duffy phenotypes. Transgenic mice with FY from
Duffy-positive phenotype expressed Duffy protein both in red blood cells (RBCs)
and non-erythroid tissues. Transgenic mice with FY from Duffy-negative phenotype 
did not express Duffy protein in RBCs, but it was expressed in non-erythroid
tissues. This is the first in vivo experimental evidence showing the effect of
-33T-->C promoter mutation on FY expression.

PMID: 15491299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52183-90. Epub 2004 Oct 5.

Ets-dependent regulation of target gene expression during megakaryopoiesis.

Jackers P(1), Szalai G, Moussa O, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29403, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):25304.

Megakaryopoiesis is the process by which hematopoietic stem cells in the bone
marrow differentiate into mature megakaryocytes. The expression of megakaryocytic
genes during megakaryopoiesis is controlled by specific transcription factors.
Fli-1 and GATA-1 transcription factors are required for development of
megakaryocytes and promoter analysis has defined in vitro functional binding
sites for these factors in several megakaryocytic genes, including GPIIb, GPIX,
and C-MPL. Herein, we utilize chromatin immunoprecipitation to examine the
presence of Ets-1, Fli-1, and GATA-1 on these promoters in vivo. Fli-1 and Ets-1 
occupy the promoters of GPIIb, GPIX, and C-MPL genes in both Meg-01 and CMK11-5
cells. Whereas GPIIb is expressed in both Meg-01 and CMK11-5 cells, GPIX and
C-MPL are only expressed in the more differentiated CMK11-5 cells. Thus, in vivo 
occupancy by an Ets factor is not sufficient to promote transcription of some
megakaryocytic genes. GATA-1 and Fli-1 are both expressed in CMK11-5 cells and
co-occupy the GPIX and C-MPL promoters. Transcription of all three megakaryocytic
genes is correlated with the presence of acetylated histone H3 and phosphorylated
RNA polymerase II on their promoters. We also show that exogenous expression of
GATA-1 in Meg-01 cells leads to the expression of endogenous c-mpl and gpIX mRNA.
Whereas GPIIb, GPIX, and C-MPL are direct target genes for Fli-1, both Fli-1 and 
GATA-1 are required for formation of an active transcriptional complex on the
C-MPL and GPIX promoters in vivo. In contrast, GPIIb expression appears to be
independent of GATA-1 in Meg-01 cells.

PMID: 15466856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 31;279(53):55024-33. Epub 2004 Sep 27.

Sequences downstream of the erythroid promoter are required for high level
expression of the human alpha-spectrin gene.

Wong EY(1), Lin J, Forget BG, Bodine DM, Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8021, USA.

Alpha-spectrin is a membrane protein critical for the flexibility and stability
of the erythrocyte. We are attempting to identify and characterize the molecular 
mechanisms controlling the erythroid-specific expression of the alpha-spectrin
gene. Previously, we demonstrated that the core promoter of the human
alpha-spectrin gene directed low levels of erythroid-specific expression only in 
the early stages of erythroid differentiation. We have now identified a region 3'
of the core promoter that contains a DNase I hypersensitive site and directs high
level, erythroid-specific expression in reporter gene/transfection assays. In
vitro DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified
two functional GATA-1 sites in this region. Both GATA-1 sites were required for
full activity, suggesting that elements binding to each site interact in a
combinatorial manner. This region did not demonstrate enhancer activity in any
orientation or position relative to either the alpha-spectrin core promoter or
the thymidine kinase promoter in reporter gene assays. In vivo studies using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated hyperacetylation of this region
and occupancy by GATA-1 and CBP (cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB)-binding protein). These results demonstrate that a region 3' of the
alpha-spectrin core promoter contains a GATA-1-dependent positive regulatory
element that is required in its proper genomic orientation. This is an excellent 
candidate region for mutations associated with decreased alpha-spectrin gene
expression in patients with hereditary spherocytosis and hereditary
pyropoikilocytosis.

PMID: 15456760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Jan;44(1):40-4.

GATA1 mutations in Down syndrome: implications for biology and diagnosis of
children with transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia.

Crispino JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA. crispino@huggins.bsd.uchicago.edu

Although physicians have known for many decades that children with Down syndrome 
are predisposed to developing transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) and
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), many questions regarding these disorders 
remain unresolved. First, what is the relationship between TMD and AMKL? Second, 
what specific genetic alterations contribute to the leukemic process? Finally,
what factors lead to the increased predisposition to these myeloid disorders? In 
this review I will summarize important new insights into the biology of TMD and
AMKL gained from the recent discovery that GATA1, a gene that encodes an
essential hematopoietic transcription factor, is mutated in the leukemic blasts
from nearly all patients with these malignancies. In addition, I will discuss
whether assaying for the presence of a GATA1 mutation can aid in the diagnosis of
these and related megakaryoblastic leukemias. Future research aimed at defining
the activity of mutant GATA-1 protein and identifying interacting factors encoded
by chromosome 21 will likely lead to an even greater understanding of this
intriguing leukemia.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15390312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Jan;44(1):33-9.

Down syndrome, drug metabolism and chromosome 21.

Taub JW(1), Ge Y.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, Michigan, USA. jtaub@med.wayne.edu

It has been recognized that chromosomal abnormalities in childhood leukemia, are 
linked to both leukemogenesis and segregate patients into prognostic treatment
groups. This is best exemplified in cases of children with Down syndrome (DS),
who have significantly higher risks of developing leukemia compared to non-DS
children and distinctive treatment outcomes, particularly in cases of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). The high event-free survival (EFS) rates of DS AML
patients and in particular, patients with megakaryocytic leukemia (AMkL), at
least in part reflects an increased sensitivity to cytosine arabinoside (ara-C)
secondary to increased expression of the chromosome 21-localized gene,
cystathionine-beta-synthase, and potentially global mechanisms which increase the
susceptibility of cells to undergo apoptosis. Somatic mutations of the X-linked
transcription factor gene, GATA1, have been detected uniformly and exclusively in
DS AMkL cases, which may lead to altered expression of GATA1 target genes and
alter the metabolism of drugs including ara-C. Hyperdiploid acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) cells with extra copies of chromosome 21, generate higher levels
of the active methotrexate (MTX) metabolite, MTX polyglutamates. This is on
account of increased intracellular transport of MTX via the reduced folate
carrier (RFC) whose gene is localized to chromosome 21 and may also account for
the increased MTX-associated toxicity of DS ALL patients. Microarray technology
should lead to the identification of additional gene targets linked to the
treatment response of specific cytogenetic leukemia subgroups.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15390307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Jan;44(1):85-91.

Tetrasomy 21 transient leukemia with a GATA1 mutation in a phenotypically normal 
trisomy 21 mosaic infant: case report and review of the literature.

Sandoval C(1), Pine SR, Guo Q, Sastry S, Stewart J, Kronn D, Jayabose S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York 10595, 
USA. claudio_sandoval@nymc.edu

Infants with constitutional trisomy 21 are at increased risk of developing
transient and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). Mutations in GATA1 have
been identified in trisomy 21 patients with AMKL, and this lesion is thought to
be an initial event by virtue of its presence during transient leukemia.
Transient leukemia is also observed in phenotypically normal infants albeit much 
less commonly so. Almost all these infants are mosaic for trisomy 21, and the
clinical course of transient leukemia recapitulates that observed in
constitutional trisomy 21. We report a phenotypically normal infant with
tetrasomy 21 transient leukemia, GATA1 mutation within exon 2, and trisomy 21
mosaicism restricted to the hematopoietic tissue. Two years after diagnosis, low 
levels of trisomy 21 persisted in the peripheral blood, which resolved 2.5 years 
after diagnosis. The GATA1 mutation was not detected at last follow-up. The
literature review identified 32 phenotypically normal infants with transient
leukemia. Ninety-one percent (29 of 32) were observed and three received
chemotherapy at diagnosis of transient leukemia. Nineteen percent (6 of 32)
developed acute leukemia, and four continued in remission (two died). Transient
leukemia in trisomy 21 mosaicism recapitulates the condition observed in
constitutional trisomy 21 at the biological and clinical levels. Infants should
be followed for the development of acute leukemia.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15390279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Leuk Res. 2004 Nov;28(11):1227-37.

Analysis of the relationship between Scl transcription factor complex protein
expression patterns and the effects of LiCl on ATRA-induced differentiation in
blast cells from patients with acute myeloid leukemia.

Rice AM(1), Holtz KM, Karp J, Rollins S, Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cancer Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Exogenous expression of the transcription factor Scl (Tal1) in WEHI-3B D+
myelomonocytic leukemia cells interferes with their capacity to respond to
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induced differentiation; combination of ATRA with 
LiCl, however, circumvents the inhibition of differentiation produced by Scl. To 
gain information on the possible involvement of this transcription factor in the 
non-responsiveness of acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) patients to ATRA, we
compared the endogenous expression levels of Scl and its transcription complex
partners [i.e., Rbtn1 (LMO1), Rbtn2 (LMO2), Ldb1, and GATA family proteins] in
leukemic blast cells from patients with AML and acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), and determined the effects of lithium chloride alone or in combination
with ATRA on the capacity of blast cells to differentiate during short-term ex
vivo culture. Levels of Scl, Rbtn2, GATA1, and Ldb1 expression were comparable in
AML and APL blasts, while the levels of expression of Rbtn1, GATA2, and GATA3
were absent or markedly lower in APL cells. Differentiation markers (cell surface
myeloid antigens CD11b, CD15, CD14, and CD33) were also analyzed in blast cells. 
ATRA produced changes in at least one surface antigen differentiation marker in
89% of patient blasts, while LiCl caused such changes in 72% of the leukemic
cells of patients. The combination of LiCl and ATRA induced the differentiation
of leukemic blasts from 94% of patients. Although the expression of the
transcription factors did not act as individual predictors of responsiveness or
non-responsiveness to the inducers of differentiation, ATRA or ATRA plus LiCl,
the addition of LiCl to ATRA increased the differentiation response over that of 
ATRA alone in a number of leukemic samples. These findings suggest that the
combination of LiCl and ATRA may produce some clinical benefit in the treatment
of the myeloid leukemias.

PMID: 15380350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Blood. 2005 Jan 15;105(2):617-26. Epub 2004 Sep 16.

Human embryonic stem cell-derived CD34+ cells: efficient production in the
coculture with OP9 stromal cells and analysis of lymphohematopoietic potential.

Vodyanik MA(1), Bork JA, Thomson JA, Slukvin II.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Wisconsin National Primate
Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792-8550, USA.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have the potential to serve as an alternative source of
hematopoietic precursors for transplantation and for the study of hematopoietic
cell development. Using coculture of human ES (hES) cells with OP9 bone marrow
stromal cells, we were able to obtain up to 20% of CD34+ cells and isolate up to 
10(7) CD34+ cells with more than 95% purity from a similar number of initially
plated hES cells after 8 to 9 days of culture. The hES cell-derived CD34+ cells
were highly enriched in colony-forming cells, cells expressing
hematopoiesis-associated genes GATA-1, GATA-2, SCL/TAL1, and Flk-1, and retained 
clonogenic potential after in vitro expansion. CD34+ cells displayed the
phenotype of primitive hematopoietic progenitors as defined by co-expression of
CD90, CD117, and CD164, along with a lack of CD38 expression and contained
aldehyde dehydrogenase-positive cells as well as cells with verapamil-sensitive
ability to efflux rhodamine 123. When cultured on MS-5 stromal cells in the
presence of stem cell factor, Flt3-L, interleukin 7 (IL-7), and IL-3, isolated
CD34+ cells differentiated into lymphoid (B and natural killer cells) as well as 
myeloid (macrophages and granulocytes) lineages. These data indicate that CD34+
cells generated through hES/OP9 coculture display several features of definitive 
hematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 15374881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hum Cell. 2004 Jun;17(2):85-92.

Transcription factor expression in cell lines derived from natural killer-cell
and natural killer-like T-cell leukemia-lymphoma.

Matsuo Y(1), Drexler HG, Harashima A, Okochi A, Shimizu N, Orita K.

Author information: 
(1)Fujisaki Cell Center, Hayashibara Biochemical Labs, Okayama 702-8006, Japan.
yomatsuo@hayashibara.co.jp

Although a number of transcription factors (TFs) have been identified that play a
pivotal role in the development of hematopoietic lineages, only little is known
about factors that may influence development and lineage commitment of natural
killer (NK) or NK-like T (NKT)-cells. Obviously to fully appreciate the NK- and
NKT-cell differentiation process, it is important to identify and characterize
the TFs effecting the NK- and NKT-cell lineage. Furthermore, these TFs may play a
role in NK- or NKT-cell leukemias, in which the normal differentiation program is
presumably disturbed. The present study analyzed the expression of the following 
13 TFs: AML1, CEBPA, E2A, ETS1, GATA1, GATA2, GATA3, IKAROS, IRF1, PAX5, PU1,
TBET and TCF1 in 7 malignant NK-cell lines together with 5 malignant NKT-cell
lines, 5 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell lines including 3
gamma/delta T-cell receptor (TCR) type and 2 alpha/beta TCR type, and 3 B-cell
precursor (BCP) leukemia cell lines. AML1, E2A, ETS1, IKAROS and IRF1 were found 
to be positive for all cell lines tested whereas GATA1 turned out to be
universally negative. CEBPA, PAX5 and PU1 were negative for all cell lines tested
except in the three positive BCP-cell lines. GATA2 was positive for 3/5 T-cell
lines but negative for the other cell lines. GATA3 was positive for 7/7 NK-, 4/5 
NKT-, 5/5 T- and 2/3 BCP-cell lines. TBET was positive for all NK- and NKT-cell
lines and negative for all T- and BCP-cell lines except one BCP-cell line. In
contrast to the expression of TBET, TCF1 was negative for all NK- and NKT-cell
lines, being positive for 4/5 T- and 1/3 BCP-cell lines. Expression analysis of
TFs revealed that NK- and NKT-cell lines showed identical profiles, clearly
distinct from those of the other T-ALL or BCP-ALL leukemia-derived cell lines..

PMID: 15369140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Sep 17;1679(3):201-13.

Chromatin structure at the flanking regions of the human beta-globin locus
control region DNase I hypersensitive site-2: proposed nucleosome positioning by 
DNA-binding proteins including GATA-1.

Davies N(1), Freebody J, Murray V.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South
Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, Australia.

The human beta-globin locus control region DNase I hypersensitive site-2 (LCR
HS-2) is erythroid-specific and is located 10.9 kb upstream of the epsilon-globin
gene. Most studies have only examined the core region of HS-2. However, previous 
studies in this laboratory indicate that positioned nucleosomes are present at
the 5'- and 3'-flanking regions of HS-2. In addition, footprints were observed
that indicated the involvement of DNA-binding proteins in positioning the
nucleosome cores. A consensus GATA-1 site exists in the region of the
3'-footprint. In this study, using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
and DNase I footprinting, we confirmed that GATA-1 binds in vitro at the 3'-end
of HS-2. An additional GATA-1 site was found to bind GATA-1 in vitro at a site
positioned 40 bp upstream. At the 5'-end of HS-2, DNase I footprinting revealed a
series of footprints showing a marked correlation with the in vivo footprints.
EMSA indicated the presence of several erythroid-specific complexes in this
region including GATA-1 binding. Sequence alignment for 12 mammalian species in
HS-2 confirmed that the highest conservation to be in the HS-2 core. However, a
second level of conservation extends from the core to the sites of the proposed
positioning proteins at the HS-2 flanking regions, before declining rapidly. This
indicates the importance of the HS-2 flanking regions and supports the proposal
of nucleosome positioning proteins in these regions.

PMID: 15358512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Neurochem. 2004 Sep;90(6):1432-44.

Mechanism of promoter activity of the beta-amyloid precursor protein gene in
different cell lines: identification of a specific 30 bp fragment in the proximal
promoter region.

Ge YW(1), Ghosh C, Song W, Maloney B, Lahiri DK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurogenetics, Institute of Psychiatric Research,
Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana 46202-4887, USA.

The amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) deposited in brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
patients is proteolytically derived from a large Abeta precursor protein (APP).
APP gene expression patterns in the AD brain region indicate that abnormalities
of gene regulation may be important in AD pathology. To understand the
contribution of different cell types to APP gene expression, we studied it at
four levels: promoter activity (by reporter gene assay of transfected cells),
DNA-nuclear protein interaction (by electrophoretic mobility shift assay), RNA
message and protein (by northern and western blotting, respectively). APP mRNA
and protein expression levels were greater in neuroblastoma and PC12 cells than
in glial or cervix epithelial cells. Relative activity among 12 different
promoter regions and within single regions varied according to cell type/cell
line. An upstream regulatory region containing a GATA-1 site is necessary for
activity in PC12 and glial cells but not in neuroblastoma cells. DNA-protein
interactions were examined in three distal and one proximal promoter elements in 
nuclear extracts belonging to neuronal and non-neuronal cells. The proximal
promoter region is important for cell line-specific APP gene expression.
Characterization of the APP regulatory region's interaction with cell
type-specific nuclear factor(s) is important to understand tissue-specific
expression of APP seen in AD subjects.

PMID: 15341527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Blood. 2004 Sep 1;104(5):1588-9.

Prenatal origin of GATA1 mutations may be an initiating step in the development
of megakaryocytic leukemia in Down syndrome.

Taub JW, Mundschau G, Ge Y, Poulik JM, Qureshi F, Jensen T, James SJ, Matherly
LH, Wechsler J, Crispino JD.

PMID: 15317736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS Biol. 2004 Aug;2(8):E237. Epub 2004 Aug 17.

The zebrafish moonshine gene encodes transcriptional intermediary factor 1gamma, 
an essential regulator of hematopoiesis.

Ransom DG(1), Bahary N, Niss K, Traver D, Burns C, Trede NS, Paffett-Lugassy N,
Saganic WJ, Lim CA, Hersey C, Zhou Y, Barut BA, Lin S, Kingsley PD, Palis J,
Orkin SH, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. zon@enders.tch.harvard.edu

Hematopoiesis is precisely orchestrated by lineage-specific DNA-binding proteins 
that regulate transcription in concert with coactivators and corepressors.
Mutations in the zebrafish moonshine (mon) gene specifically disrupt both
embryonic and adult hematopoiesis, resulting in severe red blood cell aplasia. We
report that mon encodes the zebrafish ortholog of mammalian transcriptional
intermediary factor 1gamma (TIF1gamma) (or TRIM33), a member of the TIF1 family
of coactivators and corepressors. During development, hematopoietic progenitor
cells in mon mutants fail to express normal levels of hematopoietic transcription
factors, including gata1, and undergo apoptosis. Three different mon mutant
alleles each encode premature stop codons, and enforced expression of wild-type
tif1gamma mRNA rescues embryonic hematopoiesis in homozygous mon mutants.
Surprisingly, a high level of zygotic tif1gamma mRNA expression delineates
ventral mesoderm during hematopoietic stem cell and progenitor formation prior to
gata1 expression. Transplantation studies reveal that tif1gamma functions in a
cell-autonomous manner during the differentiation of erythroid precursors.
Studies in murine erythroid cell lines demonstrate that Tif1gamma protein is
localized within novel nuclear foci, and expression decreases during erythroid
cell maturation. Our results establish a major role for this transcriptional
intermediary factor in the differentiation of hematopoietic cells in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC509301
PMID: 15314655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7779-94.

Jun blockade of erythropoiesis: role for repression of GATA-1 by HERP2.

Elagib KE(1), Xiao M, Hussaini IM, Delehanty LL, Palmer LA, Racke FK, Birrer MJ, 
Ganapathy-Kanniappan S, McDevitt MA, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia School of Medicine, P.O. Box 800904, Charlottesville,
VA 22908, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2215. Shanmugasundaram, Ganapathy [Corrected to
Ganapathy-Kanniappan, Shanmugasundaram].

Although Jun upregulation and activation have been established as critical to
oncogenesis, the relevant downstream pathways remain incompletely characterized. 
In this study, we found that c-Jun blocks erythroid differentiation in primary
human hematopoietic progenitors and, correspondingly, that Jun factors block
transcriptional activation by GATA-1, the central regulator of erythroid
differentiation. Mutagenesis of c-Jun suggested that its repression of GATA-1
occurs through a transcriptional mechanism involving activation of downstream
genes. We identified the hairy-enhancer-of-split-related factor HERP2 as a novel 
gene upregulated by c-Jun. HERP2 showed physical interaction with GATA-1 and
repressed GATA-1 transcriptional activation. Furthermore, transduction of HERP2
into primary human hematopoietic progenitors inhibited erythroid differentiation.
These results thus define a novel regulatory pathway linking the transcription
factors c-Jun, HERP2, and GATA-1. Furthermore, these results establish a
connection between the Notch signaling pathway, of which the HERP factors are a
critical component, and the GATA family, which participates in programming of
cellular differentiation.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

PMCID: PMC506977
PMID: 15314183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004 Sep 15;68(6):1269-77.

Increased glutathione S-transferase P1-1 expression by mRNA stabilization in
hemin-induced differentiation of K562 cells.

Schnekenburger M(1), Morceau F, Duvoix A, Delhalle S, Trentesaux C, Dicato M,
Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital
Kirchberg, 9, rue Edward Steichen, L-2540 Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

GSTP1-1 gene expression mechanisms were investigated in hemin-induced erythroid
differentiation of K562 cells. Hemoglobin production during differentiation was
followed by a significant increase in GSTP1-1 mRNA (1.7-fold, P < 0.01) and
protein (1.2-fold, P < 0.01) after 4 days of induction. This increase in mRNA
production was not due to transcriptional up-regulation by GATA-1 previously
shown to regulate GSTP1-1 during erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation.
Moreover, a drastic decrease in differentiation-specific GATA-1 mRNA expression
was correlated to a reduction in GATA-1 promoter binding activity. Neither AP-1
nor NF-kappaB transcription factor binding activities could provide an
explanation to the GSTP1-1 mRNA overexpression in hemin-treated cells. GSTP1-1
mRNA stability analysis using actinomycin D as an inhibitor of mRNA neosynthesis 
showed that mRNA half-life was doubled in hemin-induced erythroid differentiation
of K562 cells. These results allow us to add stabilization of GSTP1-1 mRNA as a
novel regulatory mechanism during hemin-mediated differentiation of K562 cells.

PMID: 15313425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Exp Hematol. 2004 Aug;32(8):700-8.

Inhibition of beta protein 1 expression enhances beta-globin promoter activity
and beta-globin mRNA levels in the human erythroleukemia (K562) cell line.

Zoueva OP(1), Rodgers GP.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes &
Digestive & Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: In this paper, we report new observations related to the mechanism of 
the negative regulation of the important adult beta-globin gene in the erythroid 
cells at the embryonic-fetal stage of their development. We focused on the role
of the silencer II region located upstream of the beta-globin gene, which along
with its cognate binding protein BP1, negatively regulates beta-globin
transcription.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We prepared plasmid constructs containing the wild-type
silencer II sequence, a mutated silencer II sequence, or a mutated control
sequence in the beta-globin promoter 690-bp insert, which in turn was linked to
an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) reporter gene. A human
erythroleukemia cell line (K562) with embryonic-fetal phenotype was transfected
with these EGFP constructs.
RESULTS: Flow cytometry and fluorescence digital imaging showed about threefold
increase in the beta-globin promoter activity of the mutated silencer II
construct. Introduction of a small interfering RNA (siRNA) complementary to BP1
into the cells caused a 75% decrease in BP1 expression and a simultaneous
approximately 40% elevation of beta-globin promoter activity as well as an
increase in beta-globin mRNA levels, as compared with controls. We detected no
changes in the mRNA levels of positive regulators of hemoglobin transcription
such as EKLF and GATA-1.
CONCLUSION: Our results support the involvement of BP1 in the mechanism of the
negative regulation of beta-globin transcription. A better understanding of this 
mechanism may lay the groundwork for novel gene therapy approaches to inhibit the
expression of abnormal structural variants of adult beta globin, such as sickle
hemoglobin.

PMID: 15308321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Blood. 2004 Nov 15;104(10):3136-47. Epub 2004 Aug 5.

Global regulation of erythroid gene expression by transcription factor GATA-1.

Welch JJ(1), Watts JA, Vakoc CR, Yao Y, Wang H, Hardison RC, Blobel GA, Chodosh
LA, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Hematology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is required for erythropoiesis, yet its full actions 
are unknown. We performed transcriptome analysis of G1E-ER4 cells, a GATA-1-null 
erythroblast line that undergoes synchronous erythroid maturation when GATA-1
activity is restored. We interrogated more than 9000 transcripts at 6 time points
representing the transition from late burst forming unit-erythroid (BFU-E) to
basophilic erythroblast stages. Our findings illuminate several new aspects of
GATA-1 function. First, the large number of genes responding quickly to
restoration of GATA-1 extends the repertoire of its potential targets. Second,
many transcripts were rapidly down-regulated, highlighting the importance of
GATA-1 in gene repression. Third, up-regulation of some known GATA-1 targets was 
delayed, suggesting that auxiliary factors are required. For example, induction
of the direct GATA-1 target gene beta major globin was late and, surprisingly,
required new protein synthesis. In contrast, the gene encoding Fog1, which
cooperates with GATA-1 in beta globin transcription, was rapidly induced
independently of protein synthesis. Guided by bioinformatic analysis, we
demonstrated that selected regions of the Fog1 gene exhibit enhancer activity and
in vivo occupancy by GATA-1. These findings define a regulatory loop for beta
globin expression and, more generally, demonstrate how transcriptome analysis can
be used to generate testable hypotheses regarding transcriptional networks.

PMID: 15297311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Blood. 2004 Dec 1;104(12):3573-80. Epub 2004 Aug 3.

Increased and pathologic emperipolesis of neutrophils within megakaryocytes
associated with marrow fibrosis in GATA-1(low) mice.

Centurione L(1), Di Baldassarre A, Zingariello M, Bosco D, Gatta V, Rana RA,
Langella V, Di Virgilio A, Vannucchi AM, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomorphology, University G. D'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.

Deletion of megakaryocytic-specific regulatory sequences of GATA-1 (Gata1(tm2Sho)
or GATA-1(low) mutation) results in severe thrombocytopenia, because of defective
thrombocytopoiesis, and myelofibrosis. As documented here, the GATA-1(low)
mutation blocks megakaryocytic maturation between stage I and II, resulting in
accumulation of defective megakaryocytes (MKs) in the tissues of GATA-1(low)
mice. The block in maturation includes failure to properly organize alpha
granules because von Willebrand factor is barely detectable in mutant MKs, and
P-selectin, although normally expressed, is found frequently associated with the 
demarcation membrane system (DMS) instead of within granules. Conversely, both
von Willebrand factor and P-selectin are barely detectable in GATA-1(low)
platelets. Mutant MKs are surrounded by numerous myeloperoxidase-positive
neutrophils, some of which appear in the process to establish contact with MKs by
fusing their membrane with those of the DMS. As a result, 16% (in spleen) to 34% 
(in marrow) of GATA-1(low) MKs contain 1 to 3 neutrophils embedded in a
vacuolated cytoplasm. The neutrophil-embedded GATA-1(low) MKs have morphologic
features (high electron density and negativity to TUNEL staining) compatible with
those of cells dying from para-apoptosis. We suggest that such an increased and
pathologic neutrophil emperipolesis may represent one of the mechanisms leading
to myelofibrosis by releasing fibrogenic MK cytokines and neutrophil proteases in
the microenvironment.

PMID: 15292068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jul 27;32(13):3935-46. Print 2004.

GATA-1 and NF-Y cooperate to mediate erythroid-specific transcription of Gfi-1B
gene.

Huang DY(1), Kuo YY, Lai JS, Suzuki Y, Sugano S, Chang ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, No. 1 Jen Ai Road 1st Section, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

Expression of Gfi (growth factor-independence)-1B, a Gfi-1-related
transcriptional repressor, is restricted to erythroid lineage cells and is
essential for erythropoiesis. We have determined the transcription start site of 
the human Gfi-1B gene and located its first non-coding exon approximately 7.82 kb
upstream of the first coding exon. The genomic sequence preceding this first
non-coding exon has been identified to be its erythroid-specific promoter region 
in K562 cells. Using gel-shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays,
we have demonstrated that NF-Y and GATA-1 directly participate in transcriptional
activation of the Gfi-1B gene in K562 cells. Ectopic expression of GATA-1
markedly stimulates the activity of the Gfi-1B promoter in a non-erythroid cell
line U937. Interestingly, our results have indicated that this GATA-1-mediated
trans-activation is dependent on NF-Y binding to the CCAAT site. Here we conclude
that functional cooperation between GATA-1 and NF-Y contributes to
erythroid-specific transcriptional activation of Gfi-1B promoter.

PMCID: PMC506805
PMID: 15280509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Blood. 2004 Nov 15;104(10):3106-16. Epub 2004 Jul 20.

Differences in the chromatin structure and cis-element organization of the human 
and mouse GATA1 loci: implications for cis-element identification.

Valverde-Garduno V(1), Guyot B, Anguita E, Hamlett I, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Medical Research Council Molecular Unit, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, United
Kingdom.

Cis-element identification is a prerequisite to understand transcriptional
regulation of gene loci. From analysis of a limited number of conserved gene
loci, sequence comparison has proved a robust and efficient way to locate
cis-elements. Human and mouse GATA1 genes encode a critical hematopoietic
transcription factor conserved in expression and function. Proper control of
GATA1 transcription is critical in regulating myeloid lineage specification and
maturation. Here, we compared sequence and systematically mapped position of
DNase I hypersensitive sites, acetylation status of histone H3/H4, and in vivo
binding of transcription factors over approximately 120 kilobases flanking the
human GATA1 gene and the corresponding region in mice. Despite lying in
approximately 10 megabase (Mb) conserved syntenic segment, the chromatin
structures of the 2 homologous loci are strikingly different. The 2 previously
unidentified hematopoietic cis-elements, one in each species, are not conserved
in position and sequence and have enhancer activity in erythroid cells. In vivo, 
they both bind the transcription factors GATA1, SCL, LMO2, and Ldb1. More
broadly, there are both species- and regulatory element-specific patterns of
transcription factor binding. These findings suggest that some cis-elements
regulating human and mouse GATA1 genes differ. More generally, mouse human
sequence comparison may fail to identify all cis-elements.

PMID: 15265794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(14):6194-204.

A GATA factor mediates cell type-restricted induction of HLA-E gene transcription
by gamma interferon.

Barrett DM(1), Gustafson KS, Wang J, Wang SZ, Ginder GD.

Author information: 
(1)Massey Cancer Center, Department of Human Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA 23298-0037, USA.

The human major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class Ib gene, HLA-E, codes for 
the major ligand of the inhibitory receptor NK-G-2A, which is present on most
natural killer (NK) cells and some CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes. We have
previously shown that gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) induction of HLA-E gene
transcription is mediated through a distinct IFN-gamma-responsive element, the
IFN response region (IRR), in all cell types studied. We have now identified and 
characterized a cell type-restricted enhancer of IFN-gamma-mediated induction of 
HLA-E gene transcription, designated the upstream interferon response region
(UIRR), which is located immediately upstream of the IRR. The UIRR mediates a
three- to eightfold enhancement of IFN-gamma induction of HLA-E transcription in 
some cell lines but not in others, and it functions only in the presence of an
adjacent IRR. The UIRR contains a variant GATA binding site (AGATAC) that is
critical to both IFN-gamma responsiveness and to the formation of a specific
binding complex containing GATA-1 in K562 cell nuclear extracts. The binding of
GATA-1 to this site in response to IFN-gamma was confirmed in vivo in a chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Forced expression of GATA-1 in nonexpressing U937
cells resulted in a four- to fivefold enhancement of the IFN-gamma response from 
HLA-E promoter constructs containing a wild-type but not a GATA-1 mutant UIRR
sequence and increased the IFN-gamma response of the endogenous HLA-E gene.
Knockdown of GATA-1 expression in K562 cells resulted in a approximately 4-fold
decrease in the IFN-gamma response of the endogenous HLA-E gene, consistent with 
loss of the increase in IFN-gamma response of HLA-E promoter-driven constructs
containing the UIRR in wild-type K562 cells. Coexpression of wild-type and mutant
adenovirus E1a proteins that sequester p300/CBP eliminated IFN-gamma-mediated
enhancement through the UIRR, but only partially reduced induction through the
IRR, implicating p300/CBP binding to Stat-1alpha at the IRR in the recruitment of
GATA-1 to mediate the cooperation between the UIRR and IRR. We propose that the
GATA-1 transcription factor represents a cell type-restricted mediator of
IFN-gamma induction of the HLA-E gene.

PMCID: PMC434230
PMID: 15226423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biochemistry. 2004 Jul 6;43(26):8346-55.

Spectroscopic determination of the thermodynamics of cobalt and zinc binding to
GATA proteins.

Ghering AB(1), Shokes JE, Scott RA, Omichinski JG, Godwin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road,
Evanston, Illinois 60208-3113, USA.

Vertebrate GATA proteins regulate processes that are vital to development, and
each possesses two tandem GATA finger domains: an N-terminal GATA finger and a
C-terminal GATA finger. These GATA fingers require Zn(2+) to fold, to bind DNA
recognition elements, and to regulate transcription. While the GATA-1 C-terminal 
finger is necessary and sufficient to bind to single GATA DNA sites, the
N-terminal finger interacts with DNA such that the double finger unit (DF domain)
has a binding and transactivation profile that is tuned by the DNA-binding site. 
Co(2+) was used as a spectroscopic probe in a series of competition titrations to
determine the affinity of Co(2+) and Zn(2+) for the C-terminal finger from
chicken GATA-1 and the double finger from human GATA-1 (referred to in this
report as CF and DF). For CF, these experiments yielded K(b)(Co) = 1.0 (+/-1.3) x
10(7) M(-1) and K(b)(Zn) = 2.0 (+/-1.3) x 10(10) M(-1). For DF, these experiments
yielded equilibrium constants for the process of two M(2+) binding to form
M(2+)(2)-DF of beta(2)(Co) = 2.5 (+/-1.6) x 10(14) M(-2) and beta(2)(Zn) = 6.3
(+/-2.5) x 10(20) M(-2). The ZnS(4) coordination environment of Zn(2+)-bound CF
was confirmed with X-ray absorption spectroscopy. A detailed analysis of these
data suggests that the N-terminal and C-terminal fingers of DF act as independent
and identical Zn(2+)-binding sites and each finger binds Zn(2+) with an affinity 
equivalent to that of CF.

PMID: 15222747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2004 Jun;52(5):275-9.

Impaired GATA-1 expression and myelofibrosis in an animal model.

Vannucchi AM(1), Bianchi L, Paoletti F, Di Giacomo V, Migliaccio G, Migliaccio
AR.

Author information: 
(1)UF di Ematologia, Az. Osp. Careggi, University of Florence, 50134 Florence,
Italy. a.vannucchi@dac.unifi.it

The genetic lesion(s) underlying chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis, as well as the
mechanisms leading to the typical fibro-osteosclerotic changes of the bone marrow
microenvironment, are still undefined. Recently, animal models of the disease
have been described. We will briefly review the characteristics of these models, 
the thrombopoietin-overexpressing mice and the GATA-1(low) mice (mice deficient
for GATA-1 expression in megakaryocytes), and illustrate how they provided
insights into pathogenetic mechanisms of myelofibrosis, with special regard to
the role of abnormal megakaryocyte proliferation and maturation.

PMID: 15217713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. EMBO J. 2004 Jul 21;23(14):2841-52. Epub 2004 Jun 24.

Globin gene activation during haemopoiesis is driven by protein complexes
nucleated by GATA-1 and GATA-2.

Anguita E(1), Hughes J, Heyworth C, Blobel GA, Wood WG, Higgs DR.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

How does an emerging transcriptional programme regulate individual genes as stem 
cells undergo lineage commitment, differentiation and maturation? To answer this,
we have analysed the dynamic protein/DNA interactions across 130 kb of chromatin 
containing the mouse alpha-globin cluster in cells representing all stages of
differentiation from stem cells to mature erythroblasts. The alpha-gene cluster
appears to be inert in pluripotent cells, but priming of expression begins in
multipotent haemopoietic progenitors via GATA-2. In committed erythroid
progenitors, GATA-2 is replaced by GATA-1 and binding is extended to additional
sites including the alpha-globin promoters. Both GATA-1 and GATA-2 nucleate the
binding of various protein complexes including SCL/LMO2/E2A/Ldb-1 and NF-E2.
Changes in protein/DNA binding are accompanied by sequential alterations in
long-range histone acetylation and methylation. The recruitment of polymerase II,
which ultimately leads to a rapid increase in alpha-globin transcription, occurs 
late in maturation. These studies provide detailed evidence for the more general 
hypothesis that commitment and differentiation are primarily driven by the
sequential appearance of key transcriptional factors, which bind chromatin at
specific, high-affinity sites.

PMCID: PMC514941
PMID: 15215894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jul 16;320(1):108-15.

Induction of CRMP-2 by GDNF and analysis of the CRMP-2 promoter region.

Kodama Y(1), Murakumo Y, Ichihara M, Kawai K, Shimono Y, Takahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan.

Collapsin response mediator protein-2 (CRMP-2) is a mammalian homologue of UNC-33
of Caenorhabditis elegans. Mutations of CRMP-2 result in abnormal axon
termination. Recently, it was demonstrated that CRMP-2 binds to tubulin
heterodimers to promote microtubule assembly that is critical for axonal
differentiation and growth during development. Here we show that glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) enhances CRMP-2 expression in TGW human
neuroblastoma cells via activation of RET receptor tyrosine kinase. GDNF-mediated
CRMP-2 expression was regulated mainly by the extracellular regulated kinase
(ERK) pathway, but was independent of activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
and Src family kinases. Analysis of the promoter region of the CRMP-2 gene
revealed that the region 214-48 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site is 
important for CRMP-2 expression. The SP1, E2F, and GATA1/2 binding sites appeared
to play some roles in regulation of CRMP-2 expression. As expected, the CRMP-2
protein accumulated in extended neurites of TGW cells treated with GDNF. However,
neuritogenesis of TGW cells was mostly dependent on Src family kinase activity
and not ERK activity, indicating that the increased expression of CRMP-2 alone
was not sufficient for neuritogenesis.

PMID: 15207709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Br J Haematol. 2004 Jul;126(1):3-10.

Leukaemia -- a developmental perspective.

Izraeli S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Haemato-Oncology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Cancer
Research Centre, Safra's Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Centre, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat-Gan, Israel. izraelis@netvision.net.il

Leukaemia is characterized by the accumulation of malignant haematopoietic
precursors. Recent studies have revealed that acquired alterations in genes that 
regulate normal haematopoiesis are frequently detected in leukaemia. The
progression to leukaemia depends on additional mutations that promote the
survival of developmentally arrested cells. This review describes three examples 
of this general paradigm of leukaemogenesis: RUNX1 abnormalities in acute
leukaemias, GATA1 mutations in the leukaemias of Down syndrome, and SCL and LMO2 
ectopic expression in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

PMID: 15198727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2004 May;25(5):281-4.

[Up-regulation of transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 induced by Panax
notoginosides in hematopoietic cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao RL(1), Xu WH, Lin XJ, Chen XH, Wu CQ.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang College of Trditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou
310006, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the role of Panax notoginosides (PNS) in up-regulation of
GATA family transcription factors, and explore intracellular signal pathway of
PNS in the proliferation of hematopoietic cells.
METHODS: Human bone marrow cells were incubated with different concentrations of 
PNS for colony-forming assay. Human cell lines HL-60, K562, CHRF-288 and Meg-01
were incubated with PNS (10 mg/L) for 14 days. The cell nuclear proteins were
extracted and analyzed by Western blot with antibodies against GATA-1, GATA-2.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and antibody gel supershift assay was
performed using (32)P labeled GATA consensus oligonucleotide which contains
binding site for GATA transcription factors.
RESULTS: PNS could promote the proliferation of CFU-GM and CFU-E and induce the
expression of GATA-1, GATA-2. The nuclear proteins of both GATA-1 and GATA-2 in
K562, CHRF-288 and Meg-01 cells treated by PNS were increased by (1.5 - 2.8) and 
(2.0 - 3.1)-fold over untreated cells respectively. GATA binding activity
initiated by PNS was apparently elevated to form higher density band of GATA-DNA 
complex. While there was no detectable change in HL-60 cells before and after PNS
treatment. The predominant GATA binding complex was mainly attributable to both
GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins being in phosphorylated status.
CONCLUSION: PNS can induce the synthesis of transcription factors GATA-1 and
GATA-2 and enhance their DNA binding activity, which could play a role in the
up-regulation of the expression genes related to proliferation and
differentiation in hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 15182536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Br J Haematol. 2004 Jun;125(6):729-42.

Microarray transcript profiling distinguishes the transient from the acute type
of megakaryoblastic leukaemia (M7) in Down's syndrome, revealing PRAME as a
specific discriminating marker.

McElwaine S(1), Mulligan C, Groet J, Spinelli M, Rinaldi A, Denyer G, Mensah A,
Cavani S, Baldo C, Dagna-Bricarelli F, Hann I, Basso G, Cotter FE, Nizetic D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haematology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The
London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine, University of London, Medical College
Building, Turner Street, London, UK.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) is a unique, spontaneously regressing
neoplasia specific to Down's syndrome (DS), affecting up to 10% of DS neonates.
In 20-30% of cases, it reoccurs as progressive acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia
(AMKL) at 2-4 years of age. The TMD and AMKL blasts are morphologically and
immuno-phenotypically identical, and have the same acquired mutations in GATA1.
We performed transcript profiling of nine TMD patients comparing them with seven 
AMKL patients using Affymetrix HG-U133A microarrays. Similar overall transcript
profiles were observed between the two conditions, which were only separable by
supervised clustering. Taqman analysis on 10 TMD and 10 AMKL RNA samples verified
the expression of selected differing genes, with statistical significance (P <
0.05) by Student's t-test. The Taqman differences were also reproduced on TMD and
AMKL blasts sorted by a fluorescence-activated cell sorter. Among the significant
differences, CDKN2C, the effector of GATA1-mediated cell cycle arrest, was
increased in AMKL but not TMD, despite the similar level of GATA1. In contrast,
MYCN (neuroblastoma-derived oncogene) was expressed in TMD at a significantly
greater level than in AMKL. MYCN has not previously been described in
leukaemogenesis. Finally, the tumour antigen PRAME was identified as a specific
marker for AMKL blasts, with no expression in TMD. This study provides markers
discriminating TMD from AMKL-M7 in DS. These markers have the potential as
predictive, diagnostic and therapeutic targets. In addition, the study provides
further clues into the pathomechanisms discerning self-regressive from the
progressive phenotype.

PMID: 15180862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Development. 2004 Jul;131(13):3183-93. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

Homotypic signalling regulates Gata1 activity in the erythroblastic island.

Gutiérrez L(1), Lindeboom F, Langeveld A, Grosveld F, Philipsen S, Whyatt D.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC, Department of Cell Biology, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Gata1 is a transcription factor essential for erythropoiesis. Erythroid cells
lacking Gata1 undergo apoptosis, while overexpression of Gata1 results in a block
in erythroid differentiation. However, erythroid cells overexpressing Gata1
differentiate normally in vivo when in the presence of wild-type cells. We have
proposed a model, whereby a signal generated by wild-type cells (red cell
differentiation signal; REDS) overcomes the intrinsic defect in
Gata1-overexpressing erythroid cells. The simplest interpretation of this model
is that wild-type erythroid cells generate REDS. To substantiate this notion, we 
have exploited a tissue specific Cre/loxP system and the process of
X-inactivation to generate mice that overexpress Gata1 in half the erythroid
cells and are Gata1 null in the other half. The results show that the cells
supplying REDS are erythroid cells. This study demonstrates the importance of
intercellular signalling in regulating Gata1 activity and that this homotypic
signalling between erythroid cells is crucial to normal differentiation.

PMID: 15175249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jun 15;101(24):8870-5. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

Modification of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 by SUMO-1.

Collavin L(1), Gostissa M, Avolio F, Secco P, Ronchi A, Santoro C, Del Sal G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Nazionale Consorzio Interuniversitario Biotecnologie, AREA Science
Park, Padriciano 99, 34012 Trieste, Italy.

The activity of transcription factors is tightly modulated by posttranslational
modifications affecting stability, localization, and protein-protein
interactions. Conjugation to SUMO is a reversible posttranslational modification 
that has been shown to regulate important transcription factors involved in cell 
proliferation, differentiation, and tumor suppression. Here, we demonstrate that 
the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 is sumoylated in vitro and in vivo and 
map the single lysine residue involved in SUMO-1 attachment. We show that the
nuclear RING finger protein PIASy promotes sumoylation of GATA-1 and dramatically
represses its transcriptional activity. We present evidence that a
nonsumoylatable GATA-1 mutant is indistinguishable from the WT protein in its
ability to transactivate a reporter gene in mammalian cells and in its ability to
trigger endogenous globin expression in Xenopus explants. These observations open
interesting questions about the biological role of this posttranslational
modification of GATA-1.

PMCID: PMC428439
PMID: 15173587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Hematol J. 2004;5(3):262-72.

Involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase in the cytokine-regulated
phosphorylation of transcription factor GATA-1.

Towatari M(1), Ciro M, Ottolenghi S, Tsuzuki S, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London B, UK.

Gene-targeting experiments in transgenic mice have revealed an essential role for
GATA-1 in the normal differentiation and development of erythroid cells. GATA-1
is phosphorylated in vivo on seven of its serine residues; the regulation and
function of GATA-1 phosphorylation, however, is not understood. Here we
demonstrate a role for MAP kinase (MAPK) signalling in the control of GATA-1
phosphorylation. We show that EGF-induced MAPK signalling results in the
phosphorylation of ectopically expressed GATA-1 in COS cells. This
phosphorylation can be positively or negatively regulated by genetic manipulation
of the MAPK pathway through expression of constitutively activated, or
dominant-negative, mutants of MAPK kinase (MAPKK), an upstream regulator of MAPK 
activity. In vitro phosphorylation experiments using purified MAPK and either
recombinant GATA-1 or synthetic GATA-1 peptides suggest that GATA-1 is a MAPK
substrate with MAPK phosphorylation occurring primarily on Ser26 and Ser178. We
also show that GATA-1 is phosphorylated in factor-dependent haemopoietic
progenitor cells in response to cytokine-induced signalling. Through the further 
use of a dominant-negative MAPKK mutant as well as chemical inhibitors of
specific MAPKs, we identify ERK as an in vivo GATA-1 kinase. Finally, we
demonstrate that mutation of serines 26 and 178 compromises the ability of GATA-1
to interact with the LIM-only protein LMO2 when both proteins are expressed in
COS cells. These data implicate receptor-mediated signalling through the MAPK
pathway as a control point in the regulation of transcription factor GATA-1.

PMID: 15167914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 20;279(34):35604-15. Epub 2004 May 21.

Genomic mechanisms of p210BCR-ABL signaling: induction of heat shock protein 70
through the GATA response element confers resistance to paclitaxel-induced
apoptosis.

Ray S(1), Lu Y, Kaufmann SH, Gustafson WC, Karp JE, Boldogh I, Fields AP, Brasier
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas 77555-1060, USA.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) results from a t(9,22) translocation,
producing the p210(BCR-ABL) oncoprotein, a tyrosine kinase that causes
transformation and chemotherapy resistance. To further understand mechanisms
mediating chemotherapy resistance, we identified 556 differentially regulated
genes in HL-60 cells stably expressing p210(BCR-ABL) versus those expressing an
empty vector using cDNA macro- and oligonucleotide microarrays. These
BCR-ABL-regulated gene products play diverse roles in cellular function including
apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, intracellular signaling, transcription, and
cellular adhesion. In particular, we identified up-regulation of the inducible
form of heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70), and further explored the mechanism for its
up-regulation. In HL-60/BCR-ABL and K562 cells (expressing p210(BCR-ABL)),
abundant cytoplasmic Hsp70 expression was detected by immunoblot analysis.
Moreover, cells isolated from bone marrow aspirates of patients in different
stages of CML (chronic, aggressive, and blast crisis) express Hsp70. Expression
of p210(BCR-ABL) in BCR-ABL negative cells induced transcription of the proximal 
Hsp70 promoter. Mutational analysis mapped the major p210(BCR-ABL) responsive
element to a high affinity 5'(A/T)GATA(A/G)-3' "GATA" response element (GATA-RE) 
that binds GATA-1 in CML cells. The GATA-RE was sufficient to confer
p210(BCR-ABL)- and p185(BCR-ABL)-mediated trans-activation to an inert promoter. 
Short interfering RNA mediated "knockdown" of Hsp70 expression in K562 cells
induced marked sensitivity to paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Together these
findings indicate that BCR-ABL confers chemotherapeutic resistance through
intracellular signaling to the GATA-RE element found in the promoter region of
the anti-apoptotic Hsp70 protein. We suggest that down-regulation of the
GATA-Hsp70 pathway may be useful in the treatment of chemotherapy-resistant CML.

PMID: 15155749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Jul;40(3):179-89.

Molecular heterogeneity in AML/MDS patients with 3q21q26 rearrangements.

Lahortiga I(1), Vázquez I, Agirre X, Larrayoz MJ, Vizmanos JL, Gozzetti A,
Calasanz MJ, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Patients with 3q21q26 rearrangements seem to share similar clinicopathologic
features and a common molecular mechanism, leading to myelodysplasia or acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). The ectopic expression of EVI1 (3q26) has been implicated
in the dysplasia that characterizes this subset of myeloid neoplasias. However,
lack of EVI1 expression has been reported in several cases, and overexpression of
EVI1 was detected in 9% of AML cases without 3q26 abnormalities. We report the
molecular characterization of seven patients with inv(3)(q21q26), t(3;3)(q21;q26)
or related abnormalities. EVI1 expression was detected in only one case, and thus
ectopic expression of this gene failed to explain all of these cases. GATA2
(3q21) was found to be overexpressed in 5 of the 7 patients. GATA2 is highly
expressed in stem cells, and its expression dramatically decreases when erythroid
and megakaryocytic differentiation proceeds. No mutations in GATA1 were found in 
any patient, excluding loss of function of GATA1 as the cause of GATA2
overexpression. We report finding molecular heterogeneity in patients with
3q21q26 rearrangements in both breakpoints and in the expression pattern of the
genes near these breakpoints. Our data suggest that a unique mechanism is not
likely to be involved in 3q21q26 rearrangements.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15138998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Haematologica. 2004 May;89(5):613-5.

No mutations in the GATA-1 gene detected in patients with acquired essential
thrombocythemia.

Gandini D, Allen AJ, Nash MJ, Linch DC, Gale RE.

Mutations in the GATA-1 gene have been identified in patients with familial
macrothrombocytopenia and Down's syndrome patients with a transient
myeloproliferative disorder and/or acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. We screened
this gene in 46 patients with essential thrombocythemia and identified only a
common single nucleotide polymorphism that is unlikely to be of pathological
significance.

PMID: 15136229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 23;279(30):31348-56. Epub 2004 Apr 28.

Neurokinin-B transcription in erythroid cells: direct activation by the
hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1.

Pal S(1), Nemeth MJ, Bodine D, Miller JL, Svaren J, Thein SL, Lowry PJ, Bresnick 
EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology
Program, Department of Pharmacology, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors establishes genetic networks that
control developmental processes including hematopoiesis, vasculogenesis, and
cardiogenesis. We found that GATA-1 strongly activates transcription of the Tac-2
gene, which encodes proneurokinin-B, a precursor of neurokinin-B (NK-B).
Neurokinins function through G protein-coupled transmembrane receptors to mediate
diverse physiological responses including pain perception and the control of
vascular tone. Whereas an elevated level of NK-B was implicated in
pregnancy-associated pre-eclampsia (Page, N. M., Woods, R. J., Gardiner, S. M.,
Lomthaisong, K., Gladwell, R. T., Butlin, D. J., Manyonda, I. T., and Lowry, P.
J. (2000) Nature 405, 797-800), the regulation of NK-B synthesis and function are
poorly understood. Tac-2 was expressed in normal murine erythroid cells and was
induced upon ex vivo erythropoiesis. An estrogen receptor fusion to GATA-1
(ER-GATA-1) and endogenous GATA-1 both occupied a region of Tac-2 intron-7, which
contains two conserved GATA motifs. Genetic complementation analysis in
GATA-1-null G1E cells revealed that endogenous GATA-2 occupied the same region of
intron-7, and expression of ER-GATA-1 displaced GATA-2 and activated Tac-2
transcription. Erythroid cells did not express neurokinin receptors, whereas
aortic and yolk sac endothelial cells differentially expressed neurokinin
receptor subtypes. Since NK-B induced cAMP accumulation in yolk sac endothelial
cells, these results suggest a new mode of vascular regulation in which GATA-1
controls NK-B synthesis in erythroid cells.

PMID: 15123623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg. 2004;66(1):5-24; discussion 24-7.

Thrombopoiesis: new concepts.

van Geet C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departement of Pediatrics (Hematology), Center for Molecular and Vascular
Biology, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49-B 3000 Leuven.

Although platelets were already discovered light-microscopically in the 19th
century, it became only clear in 1906 that they originate from megakaryocytes.
The discovery of thrombopoietin in 1994 facilitated research on the origin of
platelets, because this growth factor enabled expansion of megakaryocytes in
culture. Thus, cell biological and molecular studies could be undertaken.
Knowledge accumulated further by studying mouse models and by unravelling the
defect in patients with hereditary thrombocytopenia. How a megakaryocyte
originates from a hematopoietic stem cell and how this cell undergoes further
maturation and differentiation is a complex process, controlled at different
stages by several transcription factor. These transcription factors influence the
expression of their own target genes, leading to megakaryocyte maturation and
platelet release. One of the transcription factors that is most studied in this
regard is GATA1, that forms a transcriptional complex with its cofactor FOG1.
Families with hereditary thrombocytopenia have been described due to mutations in
the GATA1 gene, and target genes were studied. This broadens our insight in
normal megakaryocyte differentiation. The final release of platelets from the
megakaryocyte is strongly dependent on the formation of so-called proplatelets.
The formation of pseudopodia requires the presence of microtubuli. Beta 1-tubulin
is a major part of these microtubuli and plays an important role not only in the 
genesis of platelets but also in the final discoid form of the platelet. Despite 
a renewed interest and expanding knowledge in this area, there are more questions
than answers at this day.

PMID: 15074080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Blood. 2004 Apr 15;103(8):3242-3.

The GATA1 mutation in an adult patient with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia not
accompanying Down syndrome.

Harigae H, Xu G, Sugawara T, Ishikawa I, Toki T, Ito E.

PMID: 15070711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Sep;287(3):L477-83. Epub 2004 Mar 26.

Translational physiology: origin and phenotype of lung side population cells.

Summer R, Kotton DN, Sun X, Fitzsimmons K, Fine A.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Sep;287(3):L475-6.

Side population (SP) cells, a rare cell type identified by their ability to
efflux the vital dye Hoechst 33342, are highly enriched for stem cell activity.
Bone marrow (BM) SP cells uniformly express the pan-hematopoietic marker CD45,
whereas tissue SP cells are heterogeneous in CD45 expression. In previous
studies, we found that CD45 is expressed on 75% of lung SP cells. By performing
whole BM transplantations, we determined that CD45-positive and CD45-negative
lung SP cells are marrow derived. Transplantation of 200 highly purified BM SP
cells indicated that both lung SP cell subtypes are derived from this marrow cell
type. Morphologically, CD45-positive lung and BM SP cells possess similar
features. They are small, round, and contain scant cytoplasm. CD45-negative lung 
SP cells are larger and contain abundant granular cytoplasm. Gene expression
patterns for hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and PU.1 further
differentiated SP marrow and lung subtypes. By immunostaining for alpha-smooth
muscle actin and cytokeratin, we found significant differences in the relative
expression patterns of these markers in lung and marrow SP cell subtypes. In
summary, these findings demonstrate that lung SP cells are derived from the BM
and that CD45-positive and -negative subtypes can be distinguished by
morphological differences and gene expression patterns.

PMID: 15047566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2004 Feb;45(2):108-14.

[Mutations of erythroid/megakaryocytic transcription factor GATA-1 and leukemia
in childhood].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito E.

PMID: 15045818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 28;279(22):23597-605. Epub 2004 Mar 22.

Transforming acidic coiled-coil protein 3 (TACC3) controls friend of GATA-1
(FOG-1) subcellular localization and regulates the association between GATA-1 and
FOG-1 during hematopoiesis.

Garriga-Canut M(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Physical association between the transcription factor GATA-1 and the cofactor,
Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1), is essential for the differentiation of two blood cell 
types, erythroid cells and megakaryocytes. However, little is known regarding the
mechanisms that modulate their interaction within cells. In the present study, we
have identified TACC3 as a FOG-1-interacting protein. Transforming acidic
coiled-coil protein 3 (TACC3), a protein that is highly expressed in
hematopoietic cells, has been reported to have a critical role in the expansion
of immature hematopoietic progenitors. We show that TACC3 affects FOG-1 nuclear
localization, altering the interaction between GATA-1 and FOG-1. However, GATA-1 
competes with TACC3 in the interaction with FOG-1. We observe that high levels of
TACC3 inhibit the function of FOG-1 as a transcriptional cofactor of GATA-1.
Furthermore, forced expression of TACC3 to levels similar to those found in
progenitor cells delays terminal maturation of MEL and G1ER cells, two cell
models of erythroid cell development. We suggest a role for TACC3 in regulating
the cellular distribution of FOG-1 and thus the direct interaction of GATA-1 and 
FOG-1 as a mechanism to control the transition between expansion of
multipotential progenitor cell populations and final stages of erythroid
maturation.

PMID: 15037632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Blood. 2004 Jul 1;104(1):89-91. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

Deletion of the major GATA1 enhancer HS 1 does not affect eosinophil GATA1
expression and eosinophil differentiation.

Guyot B(1), Valverde-Garduno V, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford 
Radcliffe Hospital, United Kingdom.

Expression of the myeloid transcription factor GATA1 is required for early stages
of eosinophil differentiation. Defining mechanisms regulating eosinophil GATA1
expression will be important to understand development of this lineage. However, 
the cis-elements required for eosinophil GATA1 expression are not fully
characterized. Previous work identified HS 1 as a major GATA1 enhancer, but its
role in eosinophil GATA1 expression is unclear. Here, we show that mouse HS 1
deletion leaves eosinophil GATA1 mRNA expression and eosinophil differentiation
unaffected. Chromatin isolated from eosinophils and encompassing HS 1 is weakly
enriched for acetylated histones H3/H4. HS 1 deletion does not alter eosinophil
GATA1 locus histone acetylation. In eosinophils, GATA1 and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein epsilon (C/EBP epsilon) do not bind HS 1 but bind selectively a
cis-element in the first GATA1 intron. Thus, HS 1 is not required for eosinophil 
GATA1 expression. Instead, this study suggests a previously unsuspected role for 
the GATA1 intron element for this function.

PMID: 15016648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Apr;19(4):652-60. Epub 2003 Dec 22.

Megakaryocyte-osteoblast interaction revealed in mice deficient in transcription 
factors GATA-1 and NF-E2.

Kacena MA(1), Shivdasani RA, Wilson K, Xi Y, Troiano N, Nazarian A, Gundberg CM, 
Bouxsein ML, Lorenzo JA, Horowitz MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8071, USA.

Mice deficient in GATA-1 or NF-E2 have a 200-300% increase in bone volume and
formation parameters. Osteoblasts and osteoclasts generated in vitro from mutant 
and control animals were similar in number and function. Osteoblast proliferation
increased up to 6-fold when cultured with megakaryocytes. A
megakaryocyte-osteoblast interaction plays a role in the increased bone formation
in these mice.INTRODUCTION: GATA-1 and NF-E2 are transcription factors required
for the differentiation of megakaryocytes. Mice deficient in these factors have
phenotypes characterized by markedly increased numbers of immature
megakaryocytes, a concomitant drastic reduction of platelets, and a striking
increased bone mass. The similar bone phenotype in both animal models led us to
explore the interaction between osteoblasts and megakaryocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Histomorphometry, microCT, and serum and urine
biochemistries were used to assess the bone phenotype in these mice. Wildtype and
mutant osteoblasts were examined for differences in proliferation, alkaline
phosphatase activity, and osteocalcin secretion. In vitro osteoclast numbers and 
resorption were measured. Because mutant osteoblasts and osteoclasts were similar
to control cells, and because of the similar bone phenotype, we explored the
interaction between cells of the osteoblast lineage and megakaryocytes.
RESULTS: A marked 2- to 3-fold increase in trabecular bone volume and bone
formation indices were observed in these mice. A 20- to 150-fold increase in
trabecular bone volume was measured for the entire femoral medullary canal. The
increased bone mass phenotype in these animals was not caused by osteoclast
defects, because osteoclast number and function were not compromised in vitro or 
in vivo. In contrast, in vivo osteoblast number and bone formation parameters
were significantly elevated. When wildtype or mutant osteoblasts were cultured
with megakaryocytes from GATA-1- or NF-E2-deficient mice, osteoblast
proliferation increased over 3- to 6-fold by a mechanism that required
cell-to-cell contact.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations show an interaction between megakaryocytes and
osteoblasts, which results in osteoblast proliferation and increased bone mass,
and may represent heretofore unrecognized anabolic pathways in bone.

PMID: 15005853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Lab Clin Med. 2004 Feb;143(2):75-88.

Interleukin-1beta up-regulates the expression of thrombopoietin and transcription
factors c-Jun, c-Fos, GATA-1, and NF-E2 in megakaryocytic cells.

Chuen CK(1), Li K, Yang M, Fok TF, Li CK, Chui CM, Yuen PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Chinese University of Hong
Kong, People's Republic of China.

The multifunctional cytokine interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) plays a central role in
the body's immune and inflammatory responses. The mechanism of IL-1beta on
thrombocytosis and megakaryocytopoiesis has remained controversial. In previous
reports, we have demonstrated the expression of IL-1 receptors (IL-1RI and
IL-1RII) and enhancing effects of IL-1beta on primary human megakaryocytic (MK)
cells. In this study, we investigated the possible direct effects of IL-1beta on 
the expression of thrombopoietin (TPO) and transcription factors c-Jun, c-Fos,
GATA-1, and p45 nuclear factor-E2 (NF-E2) in MK cell lines CHRF and Meg-01. Our
results demonstrated that IL-1beta up-regulated messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein 
expressions of these transcription factors in a dose- and time-dependent manner. 
In CHRF cells, mRNA: c-Jun [3.4-fold, peaked at 15 minutes], c-Fos [4.2-fold, 15 
minutes], GATA-1 [4.0-fold, 60 minutes], NF-E2 [3.2-fold, 120 minutes] and
protein expression: c-Jun [3.0-fold, 30 minutes], c-Fos [1.7-fold, 30 minutes],
GATA-1 [11.5-fold, 60 minutes], NF-E2 [12.5-fold, 120 minutes] were evidently
enhanced after treatment with IL-1beta. The response to IL-1beta was consistent
in the total cell and nuclear extracts and was significantly reduced by
pretreatment with actinomycin D or cycloheximide. An IL-1-receptor antagonist
(IL-1RA) inhibited the stimulatory effects of IL-1beta on these transcription
factors by as much as 78%. TPO expression was increased by more than 9.9-fold on 
stimulation with IL-1beta. A TPO-neutralizing antibody did not significantly
reduce the effects of IL-1beta. We conclude that IL-1beta up-regulates the
expression of TPO, c-Jun, c-Fos, GATA-1, and NF-E2 in MK cells. The mechanism
might be mediated by IL-1beta receptors and require transcription or protein
synthesis. The direct involvement of IL-1beta in the MK lineage may provide an
explanation for the phenomenon of thrombocytosis during inflammatory responses.

PMID: 14966463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Plant J. 2004 Mar;37(5):741-9.

The Dof domain, a zinc finger DNA-binding domain conserved only in higher plants,
truly functions as a Cys2/Cys2 Zn finger domain.

Umemura Y(1), Ishiduka T, Yamamoto R, Esaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biosphere Science, Hiroshima University, Kagamiyama 1-4-4, 
Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8528, Japan.

The Dof (DNA-binding with one finger) proteins are plant transcription factors
that have a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, called the Dof domain. The Dof
domain, which is composed of 52 amino acid residues, is similar to the Cys2/Cys2 
zinc finger DNA-binding domain of GATA1 and steroid hormone receptors, but has a 
longer putative loop than that in the case of these zinc finger domains. The
DNA-binding function of ascorbate oxidase gene binding protein (AOBP), a Dof
protein, was investigated by gel retardation analysis. When Cys was replaced by
His, the Dof domain could not function as a Cys3/His- or a Cys2/His2-type zinc
finger. The characteristic longer loop was essential for DNA-binding activity.
Furthermore, heavy metals such as Co(II), Ni(II), Cd(II), Cu(II), Hg(II), Fe(II),
and Fe(III) inhibited the DNA-binding activity of the Dof domain. Manganese ion
as well as zinc ion was coordinated by the Dof domain in vitro. On the other
hand, the analysis using inductively coupled argon plasma mass spectrometry
(ICP-MS) showed that the Dof domain contained zinc ion but not manganese ion.
Thus, the Dof domain was proved to function as a Cys2/Cys2 zinc finger domain.

PMID: 14871313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2004 Feb;25(2):231-8.

Effects of chebulinic acid on differentiation of human leukemia K562 cells.

Yi ZC(1), Wang Z, Li HX, Liu MJ, Wu RC, Wang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China.

AIM: To study effects of chebulinic acid on erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation in K562 cells.
METHODS: The benzidine staining method was used to evaluate hemoglobin synthesis;
the expression of erythroid specific glycophorin A (GPA) protein and
megakaryocytic surface marker CD61 was determined by flow cytometry using
fluorescence labeled antibodies; erythroid and megakaryocytic mRNA expression was
analyzed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: During erythroid differentiation induced by butyric acid (BA) or hemin, 
chebulinic acid not only inhibited the hemoglobin synthesis of BA- and
hemin-treated K562 cells in concentration-dependent manner with IC50 of 4
micromol/L and 40 micromol/L respectively, but also inhibited another erythroid
differentiation marker acetylcholinesterase at the concentration of 50 micromol/L
in the cells either treated or untreated with each erythroid differentiation
inducers, whereas chebulinic acid 50 micromol/L did not change GPA protein
expression in these cells significantly. When K562 cells were treated with TPA 50
microg/L for 72 h to induce megakaryocytic differentiation, the presence of
chebulinic acid 50 micromol/L slightly provoked the decrease of GPA protein
expression induced by TPA. Chebulinic acid did not change the TPA-induced CD61
expression at the same concentration. Chebulinic acid also reduced the mRNA
levels of erythroid relative genes including gamma-globin, PBGD, NF-E2, and
GATA-1 genes in K562 cells either treated or untreated with BA, whereas
chebulinic acid upregulated the mRNA levels of GATA-2 transcription factor in
these cells.
CONCLUSION: Chebulinic acid had inhibitory effect on erythroid differentiation
likely through changing transcriptional activation of differentiation relative
genes, which suggests that chebulinic acid or other tannins might influence the
efficiency of some anti-tumor drugs-induced differentiation or the hematopoiesis 
processes.

PMID: 14769215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Feb 1;194(3):230-8.

In vivo erythroid recovery following paclitaxel injury: correlation between
GATA-1, c-MYB, NF-E2, Epo receptor expressions, and apoptosis.

Romero-Benitez MM(1), Aguirre MV, Juaristi JA, Alvarez MA, Trifaró JM, Brandan
NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Northeast National
University, Moreno 1240 (3400), Corrientes, Argentina.

Paclitaxel (Px) is a cancer chemotherapeutic agent that causes bone marrow (BM)
cytotoxicity by microtubule stabilization and by modifications in the expression 
of several genes. Hematopoietic progenitors show severe alterations following Px 
injury. Erythropoietic recovery should be accompanied by changes in the
expression of transcription factors such as c-MYB, GATA-1, NF-E2, Bcl-x(L), and
erythropoietin receptor (Epo-R). The aim of this work was to study the in vivo
recovery of erythropoiesis and to correlate transcription factors, Bcl-x(L), and 
Epo-R expressions to apoptosis and changes in proliferation of murine erythroid
progenitors following a single dose of Px (29 mg/kg, i.p.). BM total and
differential cellularities, apoptosis (TdT-mediated dUTP Nick-End Labeling
[TUNEL] assay), clonogenic assays, and immunoblots for transcription factors,
Epo-R, and Bcl-x(L) were performed each day for 5 days post-injury. Apoptosis (24
+/- 0.81%, P < 0.01), inhibition of colony growth (burst-forming units-erythroid 
[BFU-E] and granulocyte-erythroid-macrophage [GEM]), and decrease in BM
cellularities (28 +/- 4.2% of control) were maximal at 24 h following Px. The
highest apoptosis was concomitant with the lowest BM cellularities. Apoptosis
returned to normal values (3.08 +/- 0.61%) by day 3 post-Px. Up-regulation of
c-MYB, GATA-1, Epo-R, and Bcl-x(L) expressions were observed between 24 and 48 h 
following Px. Correlations among c-MYB, GATA-1, Bcl-x(L), and Epo-R were
extremely significant. Maximal expression of NF-E2 was observed on day 3
concomitant with the rise (threefold) of early erythroid precursors (BFU-E).
Thus, cells that survive injury seem to be stimulated to produce early (24-48 h) 
erythroid-related and antiapoptotic proteins. Therefore, the results suggest an
in vivo interplay between specific transcription factors and Bcl-x(L) during
progenitor cell survival and proliferation; mechanisms triggered to restore size 
and composition of the erythroid compartment.

PMID: 14761679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Toxicol Lett. 2004 Mar 1;147(2):109-19.

Inhibitory effect of tellimagrandin I on chemically induced differentiation of
human leukemia K562 cells.

Yi Z(1), Wang Z, Li H, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China.

Tellimagrandin I is a hydrolysable tannin compound widely present in plants. In
this study, the effect of tellimagrandin I on chemically induced erythroid and
megakaryocytic differentiation was investigated using K562 cells as
differentiation model. It was found that tellimagrandin I not only inhibited the 
hemoglobin synthesis in butyric acid (BA)- and hemin-induced K562 cells with IC50
of 3 and 40microM, respectively, but also inhibited other erythroid
differentiation marker including acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and glycophorin A
(GPA) in BA-induced K562 cells. Tellimagrandin I also inhibited
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced expression of CD61 protein, a 
megakaryocytic marker. RT-PCR analysis showed that tellimagrandin I decreased the
expression of erythroid genes (gamma-globin and porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD))
and related transcription factors (GATA-1 and NF-E2) in BA-induced K562 cells,
whereas tellimagrandin I induced the overexpresison of GATA-2 transcription
factor that played negative regulation on erythroid differentiation. These
results indicated that tellimagrandin I had inhibitory effects on erythroid and
megakaryocytic differentiation, which suggested that tannins like tellimagrandin 
I might influence the anti-tumor efficiency of some drugs and the hematopoiesis
processes.

PMID: 14757314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(4):1439-52.

SCL assembles a multifactorial complex that determines glycophorin A expression.

Lahlil R(1), Lécuyer E, Herblot S, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Institute of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

SCL/TAL1 is a hematopoietic-specific transcription factor of the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family that is essential for erythropoiesis. Here we
identify the erythroid cell-specific glycophorin A gene (GPA) as a target of SCL 
in primary hematopoietic cells and show that SCL occupies the GPA locus in vivo. 
GPA promoter activation is dependent on the assembly of a multifactorial complex 
containing SCL as well as ubiquitous (E47, Sp1, and Ldb1) and tissue-specific
(LMO2 and GATA-1) transcription factors. In addition, our observations suggest
functional specialization within this complex, as SCL provides its HLH protein
interaction motif, GATA-1 exerts a DNA-tethering function through its binding to 
a critical GATA element in the GPA promoter, and E47 requires its N-terminal
moiety (most likely entailing a transactivation function). Finally, endogenous
GPA expression is disrupted in hematopoietic cells through the
dominant-inhibitory effect of a truncated form of E47 (E47-bHLH) on E-protein
activity or of FOG (Friend of GATA) on GATA activity or when LMO2 or Ldb-1
protein levels are decreased. Together, these observations reveal the functional 
complementarities of transcription factors within the SCL complex and the
essential role of SCL as a nucleation factor within a higher-order complex
required to activate gene GPA expression.

PMCID: PMC344179
PMID: 14749362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 15;64(2):728-35.

The role of cytidine deaminase and GATA1 mutations in the increased cytosine
arabinoside sensitivity of Down syndrome myeloblasts and leukemia cell lines.

Ge Y(1), Jensen TL, Stout ML, Flatley RM, Grohar PJ, Ravindranath Y, Matherly LH,
Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of
Michigan, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Myeloblasts from Down syndrome (DS) children with acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
are significantly more sensitive in vitro to 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine
(ara-C) and generate higher 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine 5'-triphosphate
(ara-CTP) than non-DS AML myeloblasts. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR
analyses demonstrated that transcripts for cytidine deaminase (CDA) were 2.7-fold
lower in DS than for non-DS myeloblasts. In contrast, transcripts of
cystathionine-beta-synthase and deoxycytidine kinase were a median 12.5- and
2.6-fold higher in DS compared with non-DS myeloblasts. The ratio of
deoxycytidine kinase/CDA transcripts significantly correlated with ara-C
sensitivities and ara-CTP generation. In clinically relevant AML cell line
models, high cystathionine-beta-synthase transcripts in DS CMK cells were
accompanied by 10-fold greater ara-C sensitivity and 2.4-fold higher levels of
ara-CTP compared with non-DS CMS cells. Overexpression of CDA in non-DS THP-1
cells was associated with a 100-fold decreased ara-C sensitivity and 40-fold
decreased ara-CTP generation. THP-1 cells secreted CDA into the incubation media 
and converted extracellular ara-C completely to 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyluracil
within 30 min. Rapid amplification of 5'-cDNA ends (5'-RACE) and reverse
transcription-PCR assays identified short- (sf) and long-form (lf) CDA
transcripts in THP-1 cells with different 5' untranslated regions and
translational start sites; however, only the latter resulted in the active CDA.
Although 5' flanking sequences for both CDA transcripts exhibited promoter
activity in reporter gene assays, activity for the CDAlf was low. The presence of
several GATA1 binding sites in the CDAsf promoter and the uniform detection of
GATA1 mutations in DS megakaryocytic leukemia suggested the potential role of
GATA1 in regulating CDA transcription and the CDAsf promoter acting as an
enhancer. Transfection of GATA1 into Drosophila Mel-2 cells stimulated the CDAlf 
promoter in a dose-dependent fashion. Additional identification of the mechanisms
of differential expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in ara-C metabolism
between DS and non-DS myeloblasts may lead to improvements in AML therapy.

PMID: 14744791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Development. 2004 Feb;131(3):693-702.

SCL interacts with VEGF to suppress apoptosis at the onset of hematopoiesis.

Martin R(1), Lahlil R, Damert A, Miquerol L, Nagy A, Keller G, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematopoiesis and Leukemia, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

During development, hematopoiesis initiates in the yolk sac through a process
that depends on VEGF/Flk1 signaling and on the function of the SCL/Tal1
transcription factor. Here we show that VEGF modifies the developmental potential
of primitive erythroid progenitors and prolongs their life span. Furthermore, the
survival of yolk sac erythrocytes in vivo depends on the dose of VEGF.
Interestingly, in Vegf(lo/lo) embryos carrying a hypomorph allele, Flk1-positive 
cells reach the yolk sac at E8.5, but are severely compromised in their ability
to generate primitive erythroid precursors. These observations indicate that
during embryonic development, different thresholds of VEGF are required for the
migration and clonal expansion of hematopoietic precursors. The near absence of
primitive erythroid precursors in Vegf(lo/lo) embryos correlates with low levels 
of Scl in the yolk sac. Strikingly, gain-of-function of SCL partially complements
the hematopoietic defect caused by the hypomorph Vegf(lo) allele, and
re-establishes the survival of erythroid cells and the expression of erythroid
genes (Gata1 and betaH1). This indicates that SCL functions downstream of VEGF to
ensure an expansion of the hematopoietic compartment.

PMID: 14729577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):10523-31. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

Deletion of a negatively acting sequence in a chimeric GATA-1 enhancer-long
terminal repeat greatly increases retrovirally mediated erythroid expression.

Testa A(1), Lotti F, Cairns L, Grande A, Ottolenghi S, Ferrari G, Ronchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università di Milano-Bicocca,
20126 Milano, Italy.

The locus control region of the beta-globin gene cluster has been used previously
to direct erythroid expression of globin genes from retroviral vectors for the
purpose of gene therapy. Short erythroid regulatory elements represent a
potentially valuable alternative to the locus control region. Among them, the
GATA-1 enhancer HS2 was used to replace the retroviral enhancer within the
3'-long terminal repeat (LTR) of the retroviral vector SFCM, converting it into
an erythroid-specific regulatory element. In this work, we have functionally
studied an additional GATA-1 enhancer, HS1. HS1 participates in the
transcriptional autoregulation of GATA-1 through an essential GATA-binding site
that is footprinted in vivo. In this work we identified within HS1 a new in vivo 
footprinted region, and we showed that this sequence indeed binds a nuclear
protein in vitro. Addition of HS1 to HS2 within the LTR of SFCM significantly
improves the expression of a reporter gene. The deletion of the newly identified 
footprinted sequence in the retroviral construct further increases expression up 
to a level almost equal to that of the wild type retroviral LTR, without loss of 
erythroid specificity, suggesting that this sequence may act as a negative
regulatory element. An improved vector backbone, MDeltaN, allows even better
expression from the new GATA cassette. These results suggest that substantial
improvement of overall expression can be achieved by the combination of multiple 
changes in both regulatory elements and vectors.

PMID: 14701820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Thromb Haemost. 2004 Jan;91(1):129-40.

Effects of the R216Q mutation of GATA-1 on erythropoiesis and
megakaryocytopoiesis.

Balduini CL(1), Pecci A, Loffredo G, Izzo P, Noris P, Grosso M, Bergamaschi G,
Rosti V, Magrini U, Ceresa IF, Conti V, Poggi V, Savoia A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Medica III, IRCCS Policlinico, San Matteo University, piazzale Golgi
27100 Pavia, Italy. c.balduini@smatteo.pv.it

The transcription factor GATA-1, together with its cofactor FOG-1, regulates
erythropoiesis and megakaryocytopoiesis. Mutations in the DNA or FOG-1 binding
sites of its N-terminal zinc finger result in different illnesses. Alterations of
the FOG-1 face are responsible for dyserythropoietic anemia with thrombocytopenia
while R216Q, the only mutation identified in the DNA face, induces X-linked
thrombocytopenia with thalassemia (XLTT). The former disorder has been studied in
detail whereas little is known about the latter since only one family has been
investigated. We studied a second family with an R216Q, showing that XLTT and
dyserythropoietic anemia with thrombocytopenia, even if different clinical
entities, are closely related disorders. In both cases, patients present mild
dyserythropoiesis, red cell hemolysis, severely defective maturation of
megakaryocytes, macrothrombocytopenia with alpha-granule deficiency, and
abnormalities of the cytoplasmic membrane system. However, a thalassemia minor
phenotype has only been described in patients with XLTT whereas severe anemia and
thrombocytopenia with evident defects of platelet composition and function may be
observed only in dyserythropoietic anemia with thrombocytopenia.

PMID: 14691578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Blood. 2004 Jan 1;103(1):366.

Fetal origin of the GATA1 mutation in identical twins with transient
myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia accompanying Down
syndrome.

Shimada A, Xu G, Toki T, Kimura H, Hayashi Y, Ito E.

PMID: 14684662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncogene. 2003 Dec 11;22(57):9176-84.

Altered interaction of HDAC5 with GATA-1 during MEL cell differentiation.

Watamoto K(1), Towatari M, Ozawa Y, Miyata Y, Okamoto M, Abe A, Naoe T, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya
University, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA-1 plays a significant role in erythroid
differentiation and association with CBP stimulates its activity by acetylation. 
It is possible that histone deacetylases (HDACs) repress the activity of GATA-1. 
In the present study, we investigated whether class I and class II HDACs interact
with GATA-1 to regulate its function and indeed, GATA-1 is directly associated
with HDAC3, HDAC4 and HDAC5. The expression profiling and our previous
observation that GATA-2 interacts with members of the HDAC family prompted us to 
investigate further the biological relevance of the interaction between GATA-1
and HDAC5. Coexpression of HDAC5 suppressed the transcriptional potential of
GATA-1. Our results demonstrated that GATA-1 and HDAC5 colocalized to the nucleus
of murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. Furthermore, a portion of HDAC5 moved to
the cytoplasm concomitant with MEL cell erythroid differentiation, which was
induced by treatment with N,N'-hexamethylenebisacetamide. These observations
support the suggestion that control of the HDAC5 nucleocytoplasmic distribution
might be associated with MEL cell differentiation, possibly through regulated
GATA-1 transactivation.

PMID: 14668799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. EMBO J. 2003 Dec 15;22(24):6516-25.

Cooperation between the GATA and RUNX factors Serpent and Lozenge during
Drosophila hematopoiesis.

Waltzer L(1), Ferjoux G, Bataillé L, Haenlin M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, CNRS UMR 5547, 118 route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse, France. haenlin@cict.fr

Members of the GATA and RUNX families of genes appear to have conserved functions
during hematopoiesis from Drosophila to mammals. In Drosophila, the GATA factor
Serpent (Srp) is required in blood cell progenitors for the formation of the two 
populations of blood cells (plasmatocytes and crystal cells), while the RUNX
factor Lozenge (Lz) is specifically required for crystal cell development. Here
we investigate the function and the mechanisms of action of Lz during
hematopoiesis. Our results indicate that Lz can trigger crystal cell development.
Interestingly, we show that Lz function is strictly dependent on the presence of 
functional Srp and that Srp and Lz cooperate to induce crystal cell
differentiation in vivo. Furthermore, we show that Srp and Lz directly interact
in vitro and that this interaction is conserved between Drosophila and mammals.
Moreover, both Srp and mouse GATA1 synergize with mouse RUNX1 to activate
transcription. We propose that interaction and cooperation between GATA and RUNX 
factors may play an important role in regulating blood cell formation from
Drosophila to mammals.

PMCID: PMC291817
PMID: 14657024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2004 Apr 1;103(7):2560-7. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Transgenic rescue of GATA-1-deficient mice with GATA-1 lacking a FOG-1
association site phenocopies patients with X-linked thrombocytopenia.

Shimizu R(1), Ohneda K, Engel JD, Trainor CD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan.

Association of GATA-1 and its cofactor Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) is essential for 
erythroid and megakaryocyte development. To assess functions of GATA-1-FOG-1
association during mouse development, we used the GATA-1 hematopoietic regulatory
domain to generate transgenic mouse lines expressing a mutant GATA-1, which
contains a substitution of glycine 205 for valine (V205G) that abrogates its
association with FOG-1. We examined whether the transgenic expression of mutant
GATA-1 rescues GATA-1 germ line mutants from embryonic lethality. In
high-expressor lines we observed that the GATA-1(V205G) rescues GATA-1-deficient 
mice from embryonic lethality at the expected frequency, revealing that excess
GATA-1(V205G) can eliminate the lethal anemia that is due to GATA-1 deficiency.
In contrast, transgene expression comparable to the endogenous GATA-1 level
resulted in much lower frequency of rescue, indicating that the GATA-1-FOG-1
association is critical for normal embryonic hematopoiesis. Rescued mice in these
analyses exhibit thrombocytopenia and display dysregulated proliferation and
impaired cytoplasmic maturation of megakaryocytes. Although anemia is not
observed under steady-state conditions, stress erythropoiesis is attenuated in
the rescued mice. Our findings reveal an indispensable role for the association
of GATA-1 and FOG-1 during late-stage megakaryopoiesis and provide a unique model
for X-linked thrombocytopenia with inherited GATA-1 mutation.

PMID: 14656885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Blood. 2004 Apr 1;103(7):2480-9. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Natural history of GATA1 mutations in Down syndrome.

Ahmed M(1), Sternberg A, Hall G, Thomas A, Smith O, O'Marcaigh A, Wynn R, Stevens
R, Addison M, King D, Stewart B, Gibson B, Roberts I, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

Acquired mutations in megakaryocyte transcription factor GATA1 have recently been
reported in Down syndrome (DS), transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD), and 
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). To provide novel insight into GATA1
mutations in DS, genomic DNA was assayed from 12 AMKL and 4 TMD cases (including 
neonatal, prediagnosis samples in 4 of 16), neonatal blood spots from 21 DS
children without clinically evident TMD or AMKL, and 62 non-DS cord blood
samples, using techniques not previously employed with such samples. GATA1
mutations were present in all TMD and AMKL cases and at birth in 3 of 4 children 
without known clinical TMD, who later developed AMKL. They were present at birth 
in 2 of 21 DS neonates, who have not yet, but could still, develop AMKL (now 26
and 31 months). GATA1 mutations were not detected in 62 non-DS cord blood
samples. In 4 AMKL patients multiple independent GATA1 mutations were observed.
These data show GATA1 mutations occur in utero in most DS TMD and AMKL, that they
may occur without clinical signs of disease, and that multiple separate GATA1
mutant clones can occur in an individual. The findings have implications for
pathogenesis of DS TMD and AMKL and highlight parallels between DS AMKL and other
childhood leukemias.

PMID: 14656875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Science. 2003 Nov 28;302(5650):1578-81.

Mutation of MEF2A in an inherited disorder with features of coronary artery
disease.

Wang L(1), Fan C, Topol SE, Topol EJ, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland Clinic Lerner
College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The early genetic pathway(s) triggering the pathogenesis of coronary artery
disease (CAD) and myocardial infarction (MI) remain largely unknown. Here, we
describe an autosomal dominant form of CAD/MI (adCAD1) that is caused by the
deletion of seven amino acids in transcription factor MEF2A. The deletion
disrupts nuclear localization of MEF2A, reduces MEF2A-mediated transcription
activation, and abolishes synergistic activation by MEF2A and by the
transcription factor GATA-1 through a dominant-negative mechanism. The MEF2A
protein demonstrates strong expression in the endothelium of coronary arteries.
These results identify a pathogenic gene for a familial vascular disease with
features of CAD and implicate the MEF2A signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of 
CAD/MI.

PMCID: PMC1618876
PMID: 14645853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2003 Nov-Dec;31(3):351-6.

Mutations in GATA1 in both transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.

Greene ME(1), Mundschau G, Wechsler J, McDevitt M, Gamis A, Karp J, Gurbuxani S, 
Arceci R, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA.

Mutations in transcription factors often contribute to human leukemias by
providing a block to normal differentiation. To determine whether mutations in
the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1 are associated with leukemia, we
assayed for alterations in the GATA1 gene in bone marrow samples from patients
with various subtypes of acute leukemia. Here we summarize our findings that
GATA1 is mutated in the leukemic blasts of patients with Down syndrome acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL). We did not find mutations in GATA1 in
leukemic cells of DS patients with other types of acute leukemia, or in other
patients with AMKL who did not have DS. Furthermore, we did not detect GATA1
mutations in DNAs from over 75 other patients with acute leukemia or from 21
healthy individuals. Since the GATA1 mutations were restricted to DS-AMKL, we
also investigated whether GATA1 was altered in the "preleukemia" of DS, transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD). TMD is a common myeloid disorder that affects 
10% of DS newborns and evolves to AMKL in nearly 30% patients. We detected GATA1 
mutations in TMD blasts from every infant examined. Together, these results
demonstrate that GATA1 is likely to play a critical role in the etiology of TMD
and DS-AMKL, and that mutagenesis of GATA1 represents a very early event in DS
myeloid leukemogenesis. We hypothesize that disruption of normal GATA-1 function 
is an essential step in the initiation of megakaryoblastic leukemia in DS.

PMID: 14636651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Nov 28;311(4):815-21.

Expression of glutathione S-transferase P1-1 in differentiating K562: role of
GATA-1.

Schnekenburger M(1), Morceau F, Duvoix A, Delhalle S, Trentesaux C, Dicato M,
Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche sur le Cancer et les Maladies du Sang (RCMS), Centre 
Universitaire de Luxembourg, Bâtiment des Sciences, 162A, avenue de la
Fai;encerie, L-1511, Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

Glutathione S-transferase P1-1 (GSTP1-1) conjugates glutathione to electrophilic 
compounds and its expression is correlated to chemotherapeutic drug resistance.
Results show that GSTP1-1 mRNA as well as protein expressions are increased
during Aclarubicin (Acla)- and Doxorubicin (Dox)-induced erythroid
differentiation of human K562 cells. In contrast, during megakaryocytic
differentiation by 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate (TPA), GSTP1-1
expression decreased at both mRNA and protein levels. In order to clarify the
molecular mechanisms leading to these variations, we identified a GATA sequence
located at -1208 relative to the transcriptional start site of the GSTP1-1
promoter. By gel shift, competition, and supershift analyses we show here the
specificity of the GATA-1 binding regulated by both anthracyclines and TPA.
Altogether, these results demonstrate for the first time the implication of
GATA-1 in differentiation-specific variations of GSTP1-1 expression.

PMID: 14623254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Nov 25;100(24):14030-5. Epub 2003 Nov 12.

Endothelial lineage-mediated loss of the GATA cofactor Friend of GATA 1 impairs
cardiac development.

Katz SG(1), Williams A, Yang J, Fujiwara Y, Tsang AP, Epstein JA, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

GATA transcription factors, together with Friend of GATA (FOG) cofactors, are
required for the differentiation of diverse cell types. Multiple aspects of
hematopoiesis are controlled by the interaction of FOG-1 with the GATA-1/2/3
subfamily. Likewise, FOG-2 is coexpressed with the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily at other 
sites, including the heart and gonads. FOG-2 and GATA-4 are required for cardiac 
development. Through transgenic rescue of hematopoietic defects of FOG-1-/-
embryos we define an unsuspected role for FOG-1 in heart development. In
particular, rescued FOG-1-/- mice die at embryonic day (E) 14.5 with cardiac
defects that include double outlet right ventricle and a common atrioventricular 
valve. Using conditional inactivation of Fog-1 we assign the cell of origin in
which FOG-1 function is required. Neural crest cells migrate properly into
FOG-1-/- hearts and mice with FOG-1 conditionally excised from neural crest
derivatives fail to develop cardiac abnormalities. In contrast, conditional
inactivation of FOG-1 in endothelial-derived tissues by means of Tie-2-expressed 
Cre recapitulates the rescue-knockout defects. These findings establish a
nonredundant requirement for FOG-1 in the outlet tract and atrioventricular
valves of the heart that depend on expression in endothelial-derived tissue and
presumably reflect cooperation with the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily.

PMCID: PMC283540
PMID: 14614148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nat Immunol. 2003 Dec;4(12):1238-46. Epub 2003 Nov 9.

Transplantation and in vivo imaging of multilineage engraftment in zebrafish
bloodless mutants.

Traver D(1), Paw BH, Poss KD, Penberthy WT, Lin S, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 320
Longwood Avenue, Enders 720, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The zebrafish is firmly established as a genetic model for the study of
vertebrate blood development. Here we have characterized the blood-forming system
of adult zebrafish. Each major blood lineage can be isolated by flow cytometry,
and with these lineal profiles, defects in zebrafish blood mutants can be
quantified. We developed hematopoietic cell transplantation to study cell
autonomy of mutant gene function and to establish a hematopoietic stem cell
assay. Hematopoietic cell transplantation can rescue multilineage hematopoiesis
in embryonic lethal gata1-/- mutants for over 6 months. Direct visualization of
fluorescent donor cells in embryonic recipients allows engraftment and homing
events to be imaged in real time. These results provide a cellular context in
which to study the genetics of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 14608381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2003 Dec;130(25):6187-99. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Lmo2 and Scl/Tal1 convert non-axial mesoderm into haemangioblasts which
differentiate into endothelial cells in the absence of Gata1.

Gering M(1), Yamada Y, Rabbitts TH, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

The LIM domain protein Lmo2 and the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
Scl/Tal1 are expressed in early haematopoietic and endothelial progenitors and
interact with each other in haematopoietic cells. While loss-of-function studies 
have shown that Lmo2 and Scl/Tal1 are essential for haematopoiesis and angiogenic
remodelling of the vasculature, gain-of-function studies have suggested an
earlier role for Scl/Tal1 in the specification of haemangioblasts, putative
bipotential precursors of blood and endothelium. In zebrafish embryos, Scl/Tal1
can induce these progenitors from early mesoderm mainly at the expense of the
somitic paraxial mesoderm. We show that this restriction to the somitic paraxial 
mesoderm correlates well with the ability of Scl/Tal1 to induce ectopic
expression of its interaction partner Lmo2. Co-injection of lmo2 mRNA with
scl/tal1 dramatically extends its effect to head, heart, pronephros and
pronephric duct mesoderm inducing early blood and endothelial genes all along the
anteroposterior axis. Erythroid development, however, is expanded only into
pronephric mesoderm, remaining excluded from head, heart and somitic paraxial
mesoderm territories. This restriction correlates well with activation of gata1
transcription and co-injection of gata1 mRNA along with scl/tal1 and lmo2 induces
erythropoiesis more broadly without ventralising or posteriorising the embryo.
While no ectopic myeloid development from the Scl/Tal1-Lmo2-induced
haemangioblasts was observed, a dramatic increase in the number of endothelial
cells was found. These results suggest that, in the absence of inducers of
erythroid or myeloid haematopoiesis, Scl/Tal1-Lmo2-induced haemangioblasts
differentiate into endothelial cells.

PMID: 14602685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(22):8295-305.

Self-association of Gata1 enhances transcriptional activity in vivo in zebra fish
embryos.

Nishikawa K(1), Kobayashi M, Masumi A, Lyons SE, Weinstein BM, Liu PP, Yamamoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, and Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Gata1 is a prototype transcription factor that regulates hematopoiesis, yet the
molecular mechanisms by which Gata1 transactivates its target genes in vivo
remain unclear. We previously showed, in transgenic zebra fish, that Gata1
autoregulates its own expression. In this study, we characterized the molecular
mechanisms for this autoregulation by using mutations in the Gata1 protein which 
impair autoregulation. Of the tested mutations, replacement of six lysine
residues with alanine (Gata1KA6), which inhibited self-association activity of
Gata1, reduced the Gata1-dependent induction of reporter gene expression driven
by the zebra fish gata1 hematopoietic regulatory domain (gata1 HRD). Furthermore,
overexpression of wild-type Gata1 but not Gata1KA6 rescued the expression of
Gata1 downstream genes in vlad tepes, a germ line gata1 mutant fish.
Interestingly, both GATA sites in the double GATA motif in gata1 HRD were
critical for the promoter activity and for binding of the self-associated Gata1
complex, whereas only the 3'-GATA site was required for Gata1 monomer binding.
These results thus provide the first in vivo evidence that the ability of Gata1
to self-associate critically contributes to the autoregulation of the gata1 gene.

PMCID: PMC262353
PMID: 14585986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7585-99.

Identification of a TAL1 target gene reveals a positive role for the LIM
domain-binding protein Ldb1 in erythroid gene expression and differentiation.

Xu Z(1), Huang S, Chang LS, Agulnick AD, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA.

The TAL1 (or SCL) gene, originally identified from its involvement by a recurrent
chromosomal translocation, encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor 
essential for erythropoiesis. Although presumed to regulate transcription, its
target genes are largely unknown. We show here that a nuclear complex containing 
TAL1, its DNA-binding partner E47, zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1, LIM
domain protein LMO2, and LIM domain-binding protein Ldb1 transactivates the
protein 4.2 (P4.2) gene through two E box GATA elements in its proximal promoter.
Binding of this complex to DNA was dependent on the integrity of both E box and
GATA sites and was demonstrated to occur on the P4.2 promoter in cells. Maximal
transcription in transiently transfected cells required both E box GATA elements 
and expression of all five components of the complex. This complex was shown, in 
addition, to be capable of linking in solution double-stranded oligonucleotides
corresponding to the two P4.2 E box GATA elements. This DNA-linking activity
required Ldb1 and increased with dimethyl sulfoxide-induced differentiation of
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. In contrast, enforced expression in MEL cells
of dimerization-defective mutant Ldb1, as well as wild-type Ldb1, significantly
decreased E box GATA DNA-binding activities, P4.2 promoter activity, and
accumulation of P4.2 and beta-globin mRNAs. These studies define a physiologic
target for a TAL1- and GATA-1-containing ternary complex and reveal a positive
role for Ldb1 in erythroid gene expression and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC207591
PMID: 14560005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7460-74.

PU.1 and pRB interact and cooperate to repress GATA-1 and block erythroid
differentiation.

Rekhtman N(1), Choe KS, Matushansky I, Murray S, Stopka T, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

PU.1 and GATA-1 are two hematopoietic specific transcription factors that play
key roles in development of the myeloid and erythroid lineages, respectively. The
two proteins bind to one another and inhibit each other's function in
transcriptional activation and promotion of their respective differentiation
programs. This mutual antagonism may be an important aspect of lineage commitment
decisions. PU.1 can also act as an oncoprotein since deregulated expression of
PU.1 in erythroid precursors causes erythroleukemias in mice. Studies of cultured
mouse erythroleukemia cell lines indicate that one aspect of PU.1 function in
erythroleukemogenesis is its ability to block erythroid differentiation by
repressing GATA-1 (N. Rekhtman, F. Radparvar, T. Evans, and A. I. Skoultchi,
Genes Dev. 13:1398-1411, 1999). We have investigated the mechanism of
PU.1-mediated repression of GATA-1. We report here that PU.1 binds to GATA-1 on
DNA. We localized the repression activity of PU.1 to a small acidic N-terminal
domain that interacts with the C pocket of pRB, a well-known transcriptional
corepressor. Repression of GATA-1 by PU.1 requires pRB, and pRB colocalizes with 
PU.1 and GATA-1 at repressed GATA-1 target genes. PU.1 and pRB also cooperate to 
block erythroid differentiation. Our results suggest that one of the mechanisms
by which PU.1 antagonizes GATA-1 is by binding to it at GATA-1 target genes and
tethering to these sites a corepressor that blocks transcriptional activity and
thereby erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC207581
PMID: 14559995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 1;63(19):6363-9.

Reversal of tumorigenicity and the block to differentiation in erythroleukemia
cells by GATA-1.

Choe KS(1), Radparvar F, Matushansky I, Rekhtman N, Han X, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Oncogenic transformation usually inhibits normal cell differentiation processes. 
Certain chemical agents can force some tumor cells to resume their
differentiation program and undergo cell cycle arrest, an approach termed
differentiation therapy. Mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells represent an important
cell culture model system for investigating the principles of differentiation
therapy. MEL cells are malignant erythroblasts that are blocked from
differentiating into mature erythroid cells because of inappropriate expression
of the transcription factor PU.1, which binds to and represses GATA-1, a key
transcriptional stimulator of red blood cell differentiation. We report here that
the block to differentiation in MEL cells can be overcome by providing the cells 
with additional GATA-1. A conditionally active form of GATA-1 can trigger the
cells to differentiate, undergo terminal cell division, and lose their
tumorigenicity. We also show that the gene for the cell cycle inhibitor p21 is
transcriptionally regulated by GATA-1 and is a likely downstream effector of
GATA-1 that helps to promote differentiation and proliferation arrest.

PMID: 14559825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Br J Haematol. 2003 Oct;123(2):235-42.

Possible regulation of Wilms' tumour gene 1 (WT1) expression by the paired box
genes PAX2 and PAX8 and by the haematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 in
human acute myeloid leukaemias.

Siehl JM(1), Thiel E, Heufelder K, Snarski E, Schwartz S, Mailänder V, Keilholz
U.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik III (Haematology, Oncology and Transfusion Medicine),
Universitätsklinikum Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität, Berlin, Germany.
jsiehl@zedat.fu-berlin.de

Overexpression of the embryonic transcription factor, Wilms' tumour protein 1
(WT1), is common in acute myeloid leukaemias (AML). Mutations of Wilms' tumour
gene 1 (WT1) in AML are rare and WT1 expression may be increased by other
transcription factors. PAX2, PAX8 and GATA-1 are known physiological regulators
of WT1. In the present study, we analysed either bone marrow or blood samples of 
43 AML patients for the expression levels of WT1, PAX2, PAX8 and GATA-1 by
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (LightCycler). Bone
marrow samples of patients without haematological malignancies and stem cell
preparation samples from healthy donors and lymphoma patients served as controls.
PAX2 expression was found in 11 of 43 AML samples, with a clear correlation of
PAX2 with WT1 expression levels observed. PAX8 expression was found in two
additional samples. GATA-1 expression was detectable in 41 of 43 AML samples and 
also in all control samples; no significant differences between these groups were
observed and no correlation of GATA-1 expression with WT1 expression levels was
apparent. In conclusion, PAX2, and possibly PAX8, appears to be a candidate for
the upregulation of WT1 in a proportion of AML, whereas GATA-1 expression cannot 
be explained as an inducer of WT1. In two-thirds of leukaemias from our series,
the basis of WT1 upregulation cannot be explained by the simple upregulation of
the known WT1 activators.

PMID: 14531904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Blood. 2004 Jan 15;103(2):399-406. Epub 2003 Sep 25.

Recent insights into the mechanisms of myeloid leukemogenesis in Down syndrome.

Gurbuxani S(1), Vyas P, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, 924 E 57th St, Rm R116, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

GATA-1 is the founding member of a transcription factor family that regulates
growth and maturation of a diverse set of tissues. GATA-1 is expressed primarily 
in hematopoietic cells and is essential for proper development of erythroid
cells, megakaryocytes, eosinophils, and mast cells. Although loss of GATA-1 leads
to differentiation arrest and apoptosis of erythroid progenitors, absence of
GATA-1 promotes accumulation of immature megakaryocytes. Recently, we and others 
have reported that mutagenesis of GATA1 is an early event in Down syndrome (DS)
leukemogenesis. Acquired mutations in GATA1 were detected in the vast majority of
patients with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL) and in nearly every
patient with transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD), a "preleukemia" that
may be present in as many as 10% of infants with DS. Although the precise pathway
by which mutagenesis of GATA1 contributes to leukemia is unknown, these findings 
confirm that GATA1 plays an important role in both normal and malignant
hematopoiesis. Future studies to define the mechanism that results in the high
frequency of GATA1 mutations in DS and the role of altered GATA1 in TMD and
DS-AMKL will shed light on the multistep pathway in human leukemia and may lead
to an increased understanding of why children with DS are markedly predisposed to
leukemia.

PMID: 14512321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Blood. 2004 Jan 15;103(2):583-5. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

Functional overlap of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in primitive hematopoietic development.

Fujiwara Y(1), Chang AN, Williams AM, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Enders 760, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 are required for normal hematopoiesis.
The loss of either leads to embryonic lethality in knockout mice because of the
failure of erythroid maturation and the expansion of progenitors, respectively.
As the expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 overlaps within hematopoietic progenitors,
the extent to which these factors functionally compensate for each other during
embryogenesis is unknown. As shown here, we have analyzed double-knockout embryos
at the yolk sac stage of development and have shown that the combined absence of 
these GATA factors virtually ablates primitive erythroid cell formation. Thus,
the function of GATA-1 and GATA-2 overlaps at the yolk sac stage. Moreover, a
GATA factor, either GATA-1 or GATA-2, is required to initiate blood formation in 
the embryo.

PMID: 14504093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Immunity. 2003 Sep;19(3):451-62.

GATA-1 converts lymphoid and myelomonocytic progenitors into the
megakaryocyte/erythrocyte lineages.

Iwasaki H(1), Mizuno S, Wells RA, Cantor AB, Watanabe S, Akashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

GATA-1 is an essential transcription factor for megakaryocyte and erythrocyte
(MegE) development. Here we show that hematopoietic progenitors can be
reprogrammed by the instructive action of GATA-1. Enforced expression of GATA-1
in hematopoietic stem cells led to loss of self-renewal activity and the
exclusive generation of MegE lineages. Strikingly, ectopic GATA-1 reprogrammed
common lymphoid progenitors as well as granulocyte/monocyte (GM) progenitors to
differentiate into MegE lineages, while inhibiting normal lymphoid or GM
differentiation. GATA-1 upregulated critical MegE-related transcription factors
such as FOG-1 and GATA-2 in lymphoid and GM progenitors, and their MegE
development did not require "permissive" erythropoietin signals. Furthermore,
GATA-1 induced apoptosis of proB and myelomonocytic cells, which could not be
prevented by enforced permissive Bcl-2 or myeloid cytokine signals. Thus, GATA-1 
specifically instructs MegE commitment while excluding other fate outcomes in
stem and progenitor cells, suggesting that regulation of GATA-1 is critical in
maintaining multilineage homeostasis.

PMID: 14499119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Aug;11(4):329-34.

[Effect of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells on hematopoietic differentiation of
murine embryonic stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XY(1), Liu B, Yuan CH, Yao HY, Mao N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Academy of
Military Medical Science, Beijing 100850, China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), precursors of diverse stromal cells, can support
hematopoiesis in vitro and can promote the implantation of hematopoietic stem
cells in vivo when co-transplanted with CD34(+) cells. The aim of this study was 
to investigate the potential effect of MSCs on the hematopoietic development of
embryonic stem cells (ES cells) and the feasibility of a novel system in which ES
cells will be co-cultured with MSCs. The murine bone marrow MSCs were isolated
and cultured and then their phenotype and differentiation function were
identified with FCM and histochemical technique. The CCE cells, murine ES cell
line, were co-cultured with the isolated MSCs and the hematopoietic
differentiation of CCE cells was observed with hematopoietic clonogenic assay and
RT-PCR. The results showed that the morphology of MSCs became gradually
homogeneous with the passage culture of cells. After passage 4, the marker of
Sca-1, CD29, CD44 and CD105 were highly expressed, however, CD34 and CD45, the
specific marker of hematopoietic and endothelial cells, could hardly be
identified. The isolated MSCs differentiated into adipocytes and osteoblasts in
specific induction culture system. After maintaining culture on mouse embryonic
fibroblasts, CCE cells were plated in suspended culture system with only
differentiation inductive agents and co-culture system in which MSCs were added. 
Compared with CCE cell suspended culture, the cells differentiated into embryoid 
body were obviously enhanced and there were no colony-forming cells in the
co-culture system of ES cells and MSCs. In addition, transcription factor Oct-4
in co-cultured CCE cells was expressed and hematopoietic markers, Flk-1, GATA-1
and beta-H1, were negative. The ability of embryoid bodies derived from the
co-culture system to produce hematopoietic colonies was markedly higher than that
from the suspended culture system. It is concluded that MSCs inhibit the initial 
differentiation of ESC and enhance hematopoietic differentiation ability of the
co-cultured ES cells.

PMID: 12962556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 15;31(18):5405-12.

A tissue-specific knockout reveals that Gata1 is not essential for Sertoli cell
function in the mouse.

Lindeboom F(1), Gillemans N, Karis A, Jaegle M, Meijer D, Grosveld F, Philipsen
S.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC, Department of Cell Biology, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The transcription factor Gata1 is essential for the development of erythroid
cells. Consequently, Gata1 null mutants die in utero due to severe anaemia.
Outside the haematopoietic system, Gata1 is only expressed in the Sertoli cells
of the testis. To elucidate the function of Gata1 in the testis, we made a
Sertoli cell-specific knockout of the Gata1 gene in the mouse. We deleted a
normally functioning 'floxed' Gata1 gene in pre-Sertoli cells in vivo through the
expression of Cre from a transgene driven by the Desert Hedgehog promoter.
Surprisingly, Gata1 null testes developed to be morphologically normal,
spermatogenesis was not obviously affected and expression levels of putative
Gata1 target genes, and other Gata factors, were not altered. We conclude that
expression of Gata1 in Sertoli cells is not essential for testis development or
spermatogenesis in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC203309
PMID: 12954777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(18):6646-61.

GATA- and Smad1-dependent enhancers in the Smad7 gene differentially interpret
bone morphogenetic protein concentrations.

Benchabane H(1), Wrana JL.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Molecular Biology and Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Room 1075, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

Smad7, an inhibitor of transforming growth factor beta superfamily signaling, is 
induced by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) in an inhibitory feedback loop. Here,
we identify multiple BMP response elements (BREs) in the Smad7 gene and
demonstrate that they function differentially to interpret BMP signals in a cell 
type-specific manner. Two BREs (BRE-1 and -2) reside in the promoter region. One 
of these contains several conserved Smad1 and Smad4 binding sites that cooperate 
to mediate BMP-dependent induction, most likely in the absence of DNA binding
partners. The third BRE (I-BRE) resides in the first intron and contains GATA
factor binding sites. GATA-1, -5, or -6 is required for strong activation of
I-BRE, and we show that they assemble with Smad1 on the I-BRE in living cells.
Activation of the I-BRE is mediated by a specific region in GATA-5 and -6 but
does not require direct physical interaction with Smad1. Comparison of I-BRE to
BRE-1 showed that I-BRE is more responsive to low BMP concentrations. Moreover,
analysis by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrates that the
endogenous I-BRE is occupied more robustly by endogenous Smad1 than is BRE-1.
This correlates with regulation of the Smad7 gene, which is induced at lower BMP 
concentrations in GATA-expressing cell lines compared to non-GATA-expressing
lines. These data thus define how cooperative and noncooperative Smad-dependent
transcriptional regulation can function to interpret different BMP
concentrations.

PMCID: PMC193708
PMID: 12944489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Ann Hematol. 2003 Aug;82(8):506-10. Epub 2003 Jun 21.

Terminal differentiation in vitro of patient-derived post-TMD megakaryoblastic
AML cells.

Classen CF(1), Gnekow A, Debatin KM.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital Ulm, Prittwitzstrasse 43, 89070, Ulm, Germany. 
carl.classen@medizin.uni-ulm.de

Differentiation induction is a therapeutic principle in acute promyelocytic
leukemia (AML) using all- trans retinoic acid. In cell lines with properties of
AML M6/M7 (K562 and CMK), differentiation towards megakaryopoietic and
erythropoietic phenotypes can be induced in vitro. Transitory myeloproliferative 
disorder (TMD) is a self-limited disorder of newborn infants with Down syndrome, 
phenotypically resembling acute myeloid leukemia of megakaryoblastic lineage.
Despite spontaneous disappearance of blasts from blood and bone marrow, in about 
10% of the patients, overt acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AML M7) develops up
to 4 years later. Recently, mutations of the GATA1 transcription factor have been
identified in the megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome. Here, we studied
cells from a patient suffering from megakaryoblastic AML at the age of 2.5 years 
after spontaneous remission of neonatal TMD. In vitro, terminal differentiation
towards a megakaryocyte-like phenotype could be induced by phorbol myristate
acetate (PMA), with typical morphological features, upregulation of
platelet-specific and downregulation of erythroid antigens, going along with
downregulation of c-myc. Whether spontaneous resolution of TMD is a process due
to terminal differentiation is still open; however, here we give evidence that in
vitro differentiation can be induced even in blasts deriving from an overt AML
French-American-British (FAB) M7 after TMD.

PMID: 12910377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 15;171(4):1927-33.

A novel -66T/C polymorphism in Fc epsilon RI alpha-chain promoter affecting the
transcription activity: possible relationship to allergic diseases.

Hasegawa M(1), Nishiyama C, Nishiyama M, Akizawa Y, Mitsuishi K, Ito T, Kawada H,
Furukawa S, Ra C, Okumura K, Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

We found a novel polymorphism, -66T/C, in the promoter region of human
FcepsilonRIalpha, the specific component of the high affinity receptor for IgE
(FcepsilonRI), which is essential for the cell surface expression of FcepsilonRI 
and the binding of IgE Ab. When the effect of the single nucleotide replacement
on the promoter function was analyzed, the transcription activity of the T allele
promoter was found to be higher than that of the C allele promoter, and was
markedly up-regulated by the overexpression of GATA-1 when compared with the C
allele promoter. This is probably because the promoter with T at -66 has an
additional GATA-1-binding motif in the region, which may assure higher affinity
of the transcription factor to the promoter. In accordance with this, EMSA
actually indicated that GATA-1 bound to the T allele probe (-80/-59) with the
affinity higher than that to the C allele probe. Statistical analysis suggested
that a significant portion of nonallergic individuals has heterozygous -66T/C
genotype, while most of allergic individuals have homozygous -66T/T genotype in
Japanese population. Our findings for the first time demonstrate the presence of 
FcepsilonRIalpha polymorphism related to the allergic diseases.

PMID: 12902495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2143-53.

ERF, an ETS-related transcriptional repressor, can induce erythroid
differentiation.

Athanasiou M(1), Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD
21702, USA. athanasi@ncifcrf.gov

Ets-family genes have been implicated in leukemia, as well as in normal
hematopoiesis. ERF is an ets-related gene that represses transcription and is
regulated by MAPK phosphorylation through its effect on ERF sub-cellular
localization. Using pluripotent human cell lines, we studied the effect of ERF on
erythroid differentiation. K562 and HEL cells expressing ERF expressed elevated
levels of the erythroid-specific markers CD71 and Glycophorin A, as well as
hemoglobin and GATA1. Treatment with the Erk kinase inhibitor PD98058 further
enhanced the erythroid phenotype in ERF-expressing cells and cells expressing a
non-phosphorylatable ERF mutant exhibited an even more enhanced phenotype. These 
results are consistent with the fact that ERF function is regulated by MAPK, and 
suggest that the effect of the MAPK pathway in erythroid differentiation is
partially mediated by ERF. The effect of ERF is similar to the one shown for ETS1
and opposite to the FLI1 function in these cells, suggesting that several ets
genes may play key roles in hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 12894589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Blood. 2003 Nov 15;102(10):3575-83. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Identification and characterization of 2 types of erythroid progenitors that
express GATA-1 at distinct levels.

Suzuki N(1), Suwabe N, Ohneda O, Obara N, Imagawa S, Pan X, Motohashi H, Yamamoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for the development of the erythroid
lineage. To ascertain whether strict control of GATA-1 expression level is
necessary for achieving proper erythropoiesis, we established transgenic mouse
lines expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of the GATA-1 
gene hematopoietic regulatory domain. We examined the GATA-1 expression level by 
exploiting the transgenic mice and found 2 GFP-positive hematopoietic progenitor 
fractions in the bone marrow. One is the GFPhigh fraction containing mainly CFU-E
and proerythroblasts, which coexpress transferrin receptor, while the other is
the GFPlow/transferrin receptor-negative fraction containing BFU-E. Since the
intensity of green fluorescence correlates well with the expression level of
GATA-1, these results indicate that GATA-1 is highly expressed in erythroid
colony-forming unit (CFU-E) but low in erythroid burst-forming unit (BFU-E),
suggesting that the incremental expression of GATA-1 is required for the
formation of erythroid progenitors. We also examined GFP-positive fractions in
the transgenic mouse spleen and fetal liver and identified fractions containing
BFU-E and CFU-E, respectively. This study also presents an efficient method for
enriching the CFU-E and BFU-E from mouse hematopoietic tissues.

PMID: 12893747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. EMBO J. 2003 Aug 1;22(15):3887-97.

Myeloid lineage switch of Pax5 mutant but not wild-type B cell progenitors by
C/EBPalpha and GATA factors.

Heavey B(1), Charalambous C, Cobaleda C, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter,Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, 
A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

The developmental potential of hematopoietic progenitors is restricted early on
to either the erythromyeloid or lymphoid lineages. The broad developmental
potential of Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells is in apparent conflict with such a strict
separation, although these progenitors realize the myeloid and erythroid
potential with lower efficiency compared to the lymphoid cell fates. Here we
demonstrate that ectopic expression of the transcription factors C/EBPalpha,
GATA1, GATA2 and GATA3 strongly promoted in vitro macrophage differentiation and 
myeloid colony formation of Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells. GATA2 and GATA3 expression
also resulted in efficient engraftment and myeloid development of Pax5(-/-) pro-B
cells in vivo. The myeloid transdifferentiation of Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells was
accompanied by the rapid activation of myeloid genes and concomitant repression
of B-lymphoid genes by C/EBPalpha and GATA factors. These data identify the
Pax5(-/-) pro-B cells as lymphoid progenitors with a latent myeloid potential
that can be efficiently activated by myeloid transcription factors. The same
regulators were unable to induce a myeloid lineage switch in Pax5(+/+) pro-B
cells, indicating that Pax5 dominates over myeloid transcription factors in
B-lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC169053
PMID: 12881423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cell Death Differ. 2003 Aug;10(8):905-13.

Control of erythroid cell production via caspase-mediated cleavage of
transcription factor SCL/Tal-1.

Zeuner A(1), Eramo A, Testa U, Felli N, Pelosi E, Mariani G, Srinivasula SM,
Alnemri ES, Condorelli G, Peschle C, De Maria R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome
00161, Italy.

SCL/Tal-1 is a helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factor required for blood
cell development, whose abnormal expression is responsible for induction of
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We show here that SCL/Tal-1 is a key target 
of caspases in developing erythroblasts. SCL/Tal-1 degradation occurred rapidly
after caspase activation and preceded the cleavage of the major erythroid
transcription factor GATA-1. Expression of a caspase-resistant SCL/Tal-1 in
erythroid progenitors was able to prevent amplification of caspase activation,
GATA-1 degradation and impaired erythropoiesis induced by growth factor
deprivation or death receptor triggering. The potent proerythropoietic activity
of uncleavable SCL/Tal-1 was clearly evident in the absence of erythropoietin, a 
condition that did not allow survival of normal erythroid cells or expansion of
erythroblasts expressing caspase-resistant GATA-1. In the absence of
erythropoietin, cells expressing caspase-resistant SCL/Tal-1 maintain high levels
of Bcl-X(L), which inhibits amplification of the caspase cascade and mediates
protection from apoptosis. Thus, SCL/TAL-1 is a survival factor for erythroid
cells, whereas caspase-mediated cleavage of SCL/Tal-1 results in amplification of
caspase activation, GATA-1 degradation and impaired erythropoiesis.

PMID: 12867998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jul 22;100(15):8811-6. Epub 2003 Jul 11.

GATA-1-dependent transcriptional repression of GATA-2 via disruption of positive 
autoregulation and domain-wide chromatin remodeling.

Grass JA(1), Boyer ME, Pal S, Wu J, Weiss MJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Wisconsin Medical School, 383 Medical Sciences Center, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Interplay among GATA transcription factors is an important determinant of cell
fate during hematopoiesis. Although GATA-2 regulates hematopoietic stem cell
function, mechanisms controlling GATA-2 expression are undefined. Of particular
interest is the repression of GATA-2, because sustained GATA-2 expression in
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells alters hematopoiesis. GATA-2
transcription is derepressed in erythroid precursors lacking GATA-1, but the
underlying mechanisms are unknown. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, 
we show that GATA-1 binds a highly restricted upstream region of the
approximately 70-kb GATA-2 domain, despite >80 GATA sites throughout the domain. 
GATA-2 also binds this region in the absence of GATA-1. Genetic complementation
studies in GATA-1-null cells showed that GATA-1 rapidly displaces GATA-2, which
is coupled to transcriptional repression. GATA-1 also displaces CREB-binding
protein (CBP), despite the fact that GATA-1 binds CBP in other contexts.
Repression correlates with reduced histone acetylation domain-wide, but not
altered methylation of histone H3 at lysine 4. The GATA factor-binding region
exhibited cell-type-specific enhancer activity in transient transfection assays. 
We propose that GATA-1 instigates GATA-2 repression by means of disruption of
positive autoregulation, followed by establishment of a domain-wide repressive
chromatin structure. Such a mechanism is predicted to be critical for the control
of hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC166395
PMID: 12857954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Genes Cells. 2003 Jul;8(7):619-30.

GATA-1 testis activation region is essential for Sertoli cell-specific expression
of GATA-1 gene in transgenic mouse.

Wakabayashi J(1), Yomogida K, Nakajima O, Yoh K, Takahashi S, Engel JD, Ohneda K,
Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 
305-8577, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 is also expressed in
Sertoli cells of the testis. The testicular expression of GATA-1 is regulated in 
a developmental and spermatogenic stage-specific manner. To further clarify the
regulatory mechanisms of testicular GATA-1 gene expression, we carried out
transgenic reporter gene expression analyses.
RESULTS: We found that GATA-1 expression in Sertoli cells is markedly decreased
concomitant with the emergence of elongated spermatids in the seminiferous
tubules. Transgenic reporter mouse analyses revealed that a 15 kb GATA-1 genomic 
region is sufficient to recapitulate the gene expression profile in Sertoli
cells. While the GATA-1 haematopoietic enhancer and the proximal first exon are
included within the 15 kb genomic region, these regulatory elements are not
essential for GATA-1 expression in Sertoli cells. Further analyses using deletion
constructs revealed that a 1.5 kb region 5' to the GATA-1 haematopoietic enhancer
is essential for gene expression in Sertoli cells and this region is referred to 
as the GATA-1 testis activation region.
CONCLUSION: These results thus demonstrated that the GATA-1 testis activation
region is essential for Sertoli cell-specific expression of GATA-1 gene. The 15
kb genomic region is applicable and useful for the expression vector system
specific for adult Sertoli cells in stage VII to IX.

PMID: 12839622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Med Sci (Paris). 2003 Feb;19(2):201-10.

[Oncogenes and leukemia: history and perspectives].

[Article in French]

Gisselbrecht S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Hématologie de l'Institut Cochin, Inserm U.567, Cnrs UMR 8104,
Bâtiment Gustave Roussy, 27, rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. 
gisselbrecht@cochin.inserm.fr

Oncogenes involved in the development of hematological malignancies were first
discovered through the study of experimental leukemias induced in animals by
retroviruses. The discovery that some of these genes were located at the
breakpoints of chromosome rearrangements in human malignancies, such as the MYC
gene in Burkitt's lymphoma and the ABL gene in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has
suggested that chromosome abnormalities were causally implicated in the
pathogenesis of human diseases. Numerous nonrandom somatically acquired
chromosomal translocations or inversions have been identified in human leukemias.
The molecular cloning of the genes located at the breakpoints of these
rearrangements allowed to identify more than 100 new oncogenes, the products of
which affect normal programs of cell proliferation, differentiation and survival.
Chromosome translocations can lead to the deregulated expression of a normal gene
product, but in most cases of leukemia, chromosome rearrangements result in the
expression of a chimeric fusion protein. Oncogene products associated with acute 
leukemias are often transcription factors while tyrosine kinases and
antiapoptotic proteins are more commonly activated or overexpressed in chronic
leukemias and in lymphomas. Recent data indicated that gene rearrangements were
not the sole gene alterations occurring in human leukemia since point mutations
could also affect the function of transcription factors playing a key role in
hematopoiesis such as C/EBP alpha, GATA1 and AML1. But the most exciting finding 
was the discovery of activating point mutations in tyrosine kinase receptors such
as FLT3 and c-KIT in acute leukemia. Treatment of leukemia could therefore
benefit from new therapeutic approaches targeting the function of specific
oncogene products as already demonstrated for CML and acute promyelocytic
leukemia.

PMID: 12836614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Blood. 2003 Oct 15;102(8):2960-8. Epub 2003 Jun 19.

Frequent mutations in the GATA-1 gene in the transient myeloproliferative
disorder of Down syndrome.

Xu G(1), Nagano M, Kanezaki R, Toki T, Hayashi Y, Taketani T, Taki T, Mitui T,
Koike K, Kato K, Imaizumi M, Sekine I, Ikeda Y, Hanada R, Sako M, Kudo K, Kojima 
S, Ohneda O, Yamamoto M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki,
Aomori, 036-8563 Japan.

Transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) is a leukemoid reaction occurring
occasionally in Down syndrome newborn infants. Acute megakaryocytic leukemia
(AMKL) develops in approximately 20% to 30% of the cases with TMD. Recently,
acquired mutations in the N-terminal activation domain of the GATA-1 gene,
encoding the erythroid/megakaryocytic transcription factor GATA-1, have been
reported in Down syndrome-related AMKL (DS-AMKL). To understand the multistep
leukemogenesis in Down syndrome, GATA-1 mutations were investigated in patients
with TMD. We show here that mutations in the GATA-1 gene were detected in 21 of
22 cases with TMD. Most of the mutations in TMD were located in the regions
including exon 2 and were essentially identical to those observed in DS-AMKL. In 
the DS-AMKL cell line, MGS, which itself expresses only a truncated mutant of
GATA-1, expression of full-length GATA-1 induced the differentiation toward the
erythroid lineage. However, expression of the short form of GATA-1 did not induce
erythroid differentiation. These results indicate that expression of GATA-1 with 
a defective N-terminal activation domain contributes to the expansion of TMD
blast cells and that other genetic changes contribute to the development of AMKL 
in Down syndrome.

PMID: 12816863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):5087-8; author reply 5088-9.

Lack of alteration in GATA-1 expression in CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors from
patients with idiopathic myelofibrosis.

Martyré MC, Steunou V, LeBousse-Kerdilès MC, Wietzerbin J.

Comment on
    Blood. 2002 Aug 15;100(4):1123-32.

PMID: 12788793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jun 10;100(12):7009-14. Epub 2003 May 28.

A major role for the TATA box in recruitment of chromatin modifying complexes to 
a globin gene promoter.

Gui CY(1), Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The developmentally regulated mammalian beta-globin genes are activated by a
distant locus control region/enhancer. To understand the role of chromatin
remodeling complexes in this activation, we used stably replicated chromatin
templates, in which transcription activation of the human embryonic
epsilon-globin gene depends on the tandem Maf-recognition elements (MAREs) within
the beta-globin locus control region HS2 enhancer, to which the erythroid factor 
NF-E2 binds. The HS2 MAREs are required for nucleosome mobilization and histone
hyperacetylation at the distant promoter. Nucleosome mobilization also requires
the promoter TATA box, and is independent of histone hyperacetylation. In
contrast, promoter hyperacetylation requires the promoter GATA-1, and CACC-factor
activator motifs, as well as the TATA box. ChIP analysis reveals that NF-E2 is
associated with the active epsilon-globin promoter, which lacks an NF-E2 binding 
sequence, in a TATA box and HS2/MARE-dependent fashion. NF-E2 association with
the epsilon-globin promoter coincides with that of RNA polymerase II at both
regulatory sites. The results emphasize MARE-TATA box interactions in the
recruitment of complexes modifying promoter chromatin for transcription
activation and imply close physical interaction between widely separated
regulatory sequences mediated through these sites.

PMCID: PMC165821
PMID: 12773626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jun 13;305(4):1061-6.

Selection of peptides with affinity for the N-terminal domain of GATA-1:
Identification of a potential interacting protein.

Secco P(1), Cotella D, Santoro C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences and Interdisciplinary Research Center on
Autoimmune Diseases, University of Eastern Piedmont A.Avogadro, via Solaroli 17, 
28100 Novara, Italy.

As most transcription factors, GATA-1 activities are mediated by interactions
with multiple proteins. Those identified so far associate with the zinc-finger
domain and/or surrounding sequences. In contrast, no proteins interacting with
the N-terminal domain have been identified although several evidences suggest its
involvement in the control of hematopoiesis. In an attempt to identify proteins
that interact with the N-terminal transactivation domain of GATA-1, a random
phage peptide library was screened with recombinant GATA-1 protein and the
sequence of a selected peptide was used for database protein sequence retrieval. 
We selected a set of peptides sharing the core sequence phi-B((2-3))-nu((2-4))
(where phi, B, and nu represent hydrophobic, basic, and neutral residues,
respectively). Using the sequence of the most represented peptide (pep5) as
query, we retrieved the HIV accessory protein Nef. We show that Nef binds GATA-1 
and GATA-3 in vitro in virtue of its sequence homology with pep5.

PMID: 12767938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 Sep;285(3):L719-29. Epub 2003 May 23.

Zinc chelators inhibit eotaxin, RANTES, and MCP-1 production in stimulated human 
airway epithelium and fibroblasts.

Richter M(1), Cantin AM, Beaulieu C, Cloutier A, Larivée P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de recherche pulmonaire, Faculté de médecine, Université de Sherbrooke, 
3001 12e Ave. Nord, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada J1H 5N4. Pierre.Larivee@USherbrooke.ca

Asthma is characterized by an increased production of eosinophil-active C-C
chemokines by the airway epithelium. Recent studies have identified the presence 
of important quantities of labile zinc in the conducting airways. We hypothesized
that modulation of this labile zinc could influence the production of
proinflammatory chemokines in respiratory epithelial cells. The zinc chelator
N,N,N',N'-tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine (TPEN) and the heavy metal
chelator 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonic acid (DMPS) were used to reduce the
labile zinc content of A549, BEAS-2B, and HFL-1 cells. Northern blot analysis and
RNase protection assay were used to study the effects of the zinc chelators on
mRNA expression. DMPS and TPEN specifically inhibited the production of eotaxin, 
regulated on activation, normal T-cell expressed, and presumably secreted, and
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 in TNF-alpha-stimulated respiratory epithelial
cells and fibroblasts through labile zinc chelation. The inhibitory effects of
DMPS and TPEN were associated with the decreased binding of the zinc-finger
transcription factor GATA-1, whereas no change in NF-kappaB activation was
observed. Together these results demonstrate that modulation of the labile pool
of zinc can regulate gene expression and protein synthesis of C-C chemokines in
lung epithelial cells and fibroblasts.

PMID: 12765881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Lancet. 2003 May 10;361(9369):1617-20.

Acquired mutations in GATA1 in neonates with Down's syndrome with transient
myeloid disorder.

Groet J(1), McElwaine S, Spinelli M, Rinaldi A, Burtscher I, Mulligan C, Mensah
A, Cavani S, Dagna-Bricarelli F, Basso G, Cotter FE, Nizetic D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Saint Bartholomew's and The Royal London Hospital, 
Queen Mary's School of Medicine, University of London, Medical College Building, 
Turner Street, E1 2AD, London, UK.

Transient myeloid disorder is a unique self-regressing neoplasia specific to
Down's syndrome. The transcription factor GATA1 is needed for normal growth and
maturation of erythroid cells and megakaryocytes. Mutations in GATA1 have been
reported in acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia in Down's syndrome. We aimed to
investigate changes in GATA1 in patients with Down's syndrome and either
transient myeloid disorder (n=10) or acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (n=6). We
recorded mutations eliminating exon 2 from GATA1 in all patients with transient
myeloid disorder (age 0-24 days) and in all with acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia
(age 14-38 months). The range of mutations did not differ between patients with
each disorder. Patients with transient myeloid disorder with mutations in GATA1
can regress spontaneously to complete remission, and mutations do not necessarily
predict later acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia.

PMID: 12747884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3427-41.

Protein-protein interaction between Fli-1 and GATA-1 mediates synergistic
expression of megakaryocyte-specific genes through cooperative DNA binding.

Eisbacher M(1), Holmes ML, Newton A, Hogg PJ, Khachigian LM, Crossley M, Chong
BH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, School of Medical Sciences and
Department of Medicine, St. George Clinical School, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):5088.

Friend leukemia integration 1 (Fli-1) is a member of the Ets family of
transcriptional activators that has been shown to be an important regulator
during megakaryocytic differentiation. We undertook a two-hybrid screen of a K562
cDNA library to identify transcription factors that interacted with Fli-1 and
were potential regulators of megakaryocyte development. Here we report the
physical interaction of Fli-1 with GATA-1, a well-characterized, zinc finger
transcription factor critical for both erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation. We map the minimal domains required for the interaction and show
that the zinc fingers of GATA-1 interact with the Ets domain of Fli-1. GATA-1 has
previously been shown to interact with the Ets domain of the Fli-1-related
protein PU.1, and the two proteins appear to inhibit each other's activity. In
contrast, we demonstrate that GATA-1 and Fli-1 synergistically activate the
megakaryocyte-specific promoters GPIX and GPIbalpha in transient transfections.
Quantitative electrophoretic mobility shift assays using oligonucleotides derived
from the GPIX promoter containing Ets and GATA binding motifs reveal that Fli-1
and GATA-1 exhibit cooperative DNA binding in which the binding of GATA-1 to DNA 
is increased approximately 26-fold in the presence of Fli-1 (from 4.2 to 0.16
nM), providing a mechanism for the observed transcriptional synergy. To test the 
effect on endogenous genes, we stably overexpressed Fli-1 in K562 cells, a line
rich in GATA-1. Overexpression of Fli-1 induced the expression of the endogenous 
GPIX and GPIbalpha genes as measured by Northern blot and fluorescence-activated 
cell sorter analysis. This work suggests that Fli-1 and GATA-1 work together to
activate the expression of genes associated with the terminal differentiation of 
megakaryocytes.

PMCID: PMC154245
PMID: 12724402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2003 Mar;67(3):654-8.

Molecular cloning of rat transcription factor YY1.

Nishiyama C(1), Yokota T, Nishiyama M, Ra C, Okumura K, Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. chinishi@med.juntendo.ac.jp

YY1 is a ubiquitously expressed multifunctional transcription factor that is
involved in both positive and negative regulation of gene expression as well as
initiation of transcription. Here, we isolated cDNA encoding a full-length open
reading frame (ORF) of rat YY1. Rat YY1 is composed of 411 amino acid residues
and its amino acid sequence is 97.6% identical to that of mouse YY1 and 97.8%
identical to that of human YY1. The transactivating abilities of wild-type rat
YY1 and four truncated mutant forms of YY1 were examined by transient reporter
assays. When residues 114-193, which sequence includes a portion of the
activation region and most of the Gly/Lys-rich region, were lacking,
transactivation activity decreased somewhat, but the further deletion in the
activation region (of residues 56-113) did not cause further decrease of the
activity. On the other hand, N-terminus of the activation region (1-78/100-106)
did not have transactivation activity by itself as well as synergistic activity
with an erythroid specific transcription factor GATA-1.

PMID: 12723621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Exp Cell Res. 2003 May 1;285(2):258-67.

5-azacytidine reactivates the erythroid differentiation potential of the
myeloid-restricted murine cell line 32D Ro.

Baiocchi M(1), Di Rico C, Di Pietro R, Di Baldassarre A, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Instituto Superiore Sanità, Rome, Italy.

32D cells grown for 1 year in interleukin-3 (IL-3) and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) generated the 32D Ro cell line which retained
the parental mast cell phenotype but lost ability to generate erythroid cells in 
response to erythropoietin (EPO). In order to clarify the mechanisms underlying
such restriction, we compared 32D and 32D Ro cells for their capacity to express 
erythroid-specific transcription factors (Gata1, Gata2, Scl, Nef2, Eklf, and Id) 
and the capacity of short exposure to 5-azacytidine (5-AzaC) to reactivate
erythroid differentiation potential in 32D Ro cells. By Northern analysis, the
two cell lines expressed similar levels of all these genes. However, after being 
treated with 5-AzaC, 32D Ro cells acquired the ability to generate EPO-dependent 
clones (1 clone/10(4) cells) which gave rise to EPO-dependent cell lines. All the
10 EPO-responsive cell lines independently isolated from 5-AzaC-treated 32D Ro
cells had erythroid morphology and expressed high levels of alpha- and
beta-globin. In contrast, none of the IL-3-dependent and granulocyte/macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-dependent clones concurrently isolated, as a control,
showed erythroid properties. Therefore, 5-AzaC treatment reactivates the
potential of the myeloid-restricted 32D Ro cells to generate EPO-responsive
erythroid clones suggesting that gene methylation played an important role in the
G-CSF-mediated restriction/activation of the differentiation potential of these
cells.

PMID: 12706120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Oncogene. 2003 Apr 3;22(13):1927-35.

GATA-1 and c-myb crosstalk during red blood cell differentiation through GATA-1
binding sites in the c-myb promoter.

Bartunek P(1), Králová J, Blendinger G, Dvorák M, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

GATA-1 and c-Myb transcription factors represent key regulators of red blood cell
development. GATA-1 is upregulated and c-myb proto-oncogene expression is
downregulated when red cell progenitors differentiate into erythrocytes. Here we 
have employed a culture system, that faithfully recapitulates red blood cell
differentiation in vitro, to follow the kinetics of GATA-1 and c-myb expression. 
We show that c-myb proto-oncogene expression is high in progenitors and
effectively downregulated at the time when nuclear GATA-1 accumulates and cells
differentiate into erythrocytes. Additionally, we identified two GATA-1 binding
sites within the c-myb promoter and demonstrate that GATA-1 protein binds to
these sites in vitro. Furthermore, GATA-1 represses c-myb expression through one 
of the GATA-1 binding sites in transient transfection experiments and this
requires FOG-1. Thus, our study provides evidence for a direct molecular link
between GATA-1 activity and c-myb proto-oncogene expression during terminal red
cell differentiation.

PMID: 12673198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cytokine. 2003 Jan 21;21(2):51-64.

Platelet-derived growth factor up-regulates the expression of transcription
factors NF-E2, GATA-1 and c-Fos in megakaryocytic cell lines.

Chui CM(1), Li K, Yang M, Chuen CK, Fok TF, Li CK, Yuen PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, 6th Floor, Clinical Sciences Building, Shatin, N T, Hong Kong,
People's Republic of China.

Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is a platelet alpha-granule protein. In
previous reports, we demonstrated the expression of PDGF receptors on platelets
and megakaryocytic cells and that PDGF enhanced the proliferation of
megakaryocytic progenitor cells. In this study, we investigated the effects of
PDGF on mRNA and protein expressions of megakaryocyte-associated transcription
factors, c-Fos, GATA-1, NF-E2 and PU.1, in two human megakaryocytic cell lines
CHRF-288-11 and DAMI. RT-PCR/Southern blot analysis and Real-time PCR
demonstrated that PDGF increased the mRNA expression of c-Fos, GATA-1 and NF-E2, 
but not PU.1 in a dose- and time-dependent manner. The activation was confirmed
at the protein level by Western blot analysis of both total cell and nuclear
lysates. The addition of increasing concentrations of Tyrphostin AG1295, an
inhibitor of PDGF receptor kinase, blocked the stimulatory effect of PDGF on the 
mRNA and protein expressions of these transcription factors. The up-regulation of
c-Fos, GATA-1 and NF-E2 protein by PDGF was inhibited by actinomycin D and
cycloheximide, suggesting that mRNA and protein synthesis might be involved in
the mechanism. Our data suggest a direct stimulatory effect of PDGF on c-Fos,
GATA-1 and NF-E2 expressions and we speculate that these transcription factors
might be involved in the signal transduction of PDGF on the regulation of
megakaryocytopoiesis.

PMID: 12670444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Blood. 2003 Aug 1;102(3):981-6. Epub 2003 Mar 20.

Mutations in exon 2 of GATA1 are early events in megakaryocytic malignancies
associated with trisomy 21.

Rainis L(1), Bercovich D, Strehl S, Teigler-Schlegel A, Stark B, Trka J,
Amariglio N, Biondi A, Muler I, Rechavi G, Kempski H, Haas OA, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel 52621.

Patients with Down syndrome (DS) frequently develop 2 kinds of clonal
megakaryocytosis: a common, congenital, spontaneously resolving, transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) and, less commonly, childhood acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). Recently, acquired mutations in exon 2 of
GATA1, an X-linked gene encoding a transcription factor that promotes
megakaryocytic differentiation, were described in 6 DS patients with AMKL. The
mutations prevent the synthesis of the full-length GATA1, but allow the synthesis
of a shorter GATA1 protein (GATA1s) that lacks the transactivation domain. To
test whether mutated GATA1 is involved in the initiation of clonal
megakaryoblastic proliferation or in the progression to AMKL, we screened 35 DS
patients with either AMKL or TMD and 7 non-DS children with AMKL for mutations in
exon 2 of GATA1. Mutations were identified in 16 of 18 DS patients with AMKL, in 
16 of 17 DS patients with TMD, and in 2 identical twins with AMKL and acquired
trisomy 21. Analysis revealed various types of mutations in GATA1, including
deletion/insertions, splice mutations, and nonsense and missense point mutations,
all of which prevent the generation of full-length GATA1, but preserve the
translation of GATA1s. We also show that the likely mechanism of generation of
GATA1 isoforms is alternative splicing of exon 2 rather than, or in addition to, 
alternative translation initiation, as was proposed before. These findings
suggest that acquired intrauterine inactivating mutations in GATA1 and generation
of GATA1s cooperate frequently with trisomy 21 in initiating megakaryoblastic
proliferation, but are insufficient for progression to AMKL.

PMID: 12649131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 28;303(1):140-5.

Regulation of YB-1 gene expression by GATA transcription factors.

Yokoyama H(1), Harigae H, Takahashi S, Takahashi S, Furuyama K, Kaku M, Yamamoto 
M, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

GATA-1 is a transcription factor essential for erythroid cell development, and
knockdown of GATA-1 gene results in maturation arrest and transformation of
erythroblasts. To clarify the mechanism that gives rise to this abnormal
phenotype, genes that are aberrantly expressed in the spleen of heterozygous
GATA-1 knockdown mutant mouse (referred to as GATA-1 mutant mouse) were
identified by using cDNA array. One of these genes, YB-1, was found to be highly 
expressed in the spleen of GATA-1 mutant mouse. Reporter and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays revealed that the proximal GATA element in 5'-UTR region of
YB-1 gene functions positively in K562 cells. Furthermore, both GATA-1 and
GATA-2, which were transiently expressed in COS-7 cells, bound to this element
and activated the YB-1 promoter through this element. These results suggest that 
YB-1 functions under the regulation of GATA factors in erythroid differentiation 
and aberrant expression of YB-1 gene may result in dyserythropoiesis.

PMID: 12646178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genomics. 2003 Feb;81(2):221-33.

Molecular cloning of the mouse AMY-1 gene and identification of the synergistic
activation of the AMY-1 promoter by GATA-1 and Sp1.

Furusawa M(1), Taira T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information: 
(1)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi,
Saitama 332-0012, Japan.

We have reported that a novel c-Myc binding protein, AMY-1, stimulated the
transcription activity of c-Myc and was translocated from the cytoplasm to the
nucleus in a c-Myc-dependent manner. AMY-1 works as an inducer of human K562 cell
differentiation upon induction of AraC. To characterize the expression or
functional importance of AMY-1, the genomic DNA of mouse AMY-1 was cloned and
characterized. Both mouse and human genomic DNAs, the latter of which was
retrieved from a human DNA database, comprise five exons spanning about 11 kb. To
characterize the promoter of the mouse AMY-1 gene, a series of deletion
constructs of the region upstream of the first ATG was linked to the luciferase
gene, and their luciferase activities were measured in human HeLa and K562 cells.
The results showed that Sp1 was essential for AMY-1 expression in both cell lines
and that GATA-1 is also necessary in K562 cells. Sp1 in both cell lines and
GATA-1 only in K562 cells were identified as proteins binding to these sites by a
mobility shift assay. Furthermore, it was found that GATA-1 stimulated AMY-1
expression synergistically with Sp1 in ectopically expressed insect cells and
that both proteins were associated in K562 cells.

PMID: 12620400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Chin Med J (Engl). 2002 Nov;115(11):1701-5.

A novel erythroid differentiation related gene EDRF1 upregulating globin gene
expression in HEL cells.

Wang D(1), Li Y, Shen B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Academy of Military Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100850, China.

OBJECTIVE: To further characterize the differentiation inducing properties of
EDRF1 and demonstrate its functional pathway involved in regulation of globin
gene expression.
METHODS: By transfecting EDRF1 sense and antisense constructs into HEL cells, we 
identified the expression of globin and erythropoietin receptor genes by Northern
blot analysis. RT-PCR and EMSA (electrophoresis mobility shift assay) were
performed to monitor the expression and DNA-binding activity of erythroid
specific transcription factors GATA-1 and NF-E2.
RESULTS: It was shown that when EDRF1 was overexpressed, production of
alpha-globin increased. In antisense EDRF1, overexpression of HEL cells,
significant loss of alpha-, gamma-globin mRNA synthesis was observed. The
transcription of endogenous GATA-1 and NF-E2 mRNA expression were maintained at
the same levels compared with control experiments. However, the transcription
activity of GATA-1 was severely impaired. Expression of erythropoietin receptor
gene was not influenced by EDRF1 gene overexpression.
CONCLUSION: The results suggested that EDRF1 regulated alpha- and gamma-globin
gene synthesis by modulating DNA-binding activity of GATA-1 transcription factor.

PMID: 12609092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Gene. 2003 Feb 13;305(1):113-20.

Genomic structure and promoter analysis of human NeuAc alpha2,3Gal beta1,3GalNAc 
alpha2,6-sialyltransferase (hST6GalNAc IV) gene.

Kim SW(1), Kang NY, Lee SH, Kim KW, Kim KS, Lee JH, Kim CH, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, Faculty of Natural Resources and Life Science,
Dong-A University, Busan 604-714, South Korea.

We have cloned the genomic DNA encoding the human NeuAc alpha2,3Gal beta1,3GalNAc
alpha2,6-sialyltransferase (hST6GalNAc IV) and analysed its structure. The
hST6GalNAc IV gene was found to span about 9 kb and to be composed of six exons. 
The 5'-RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA ends) results indicated that mRNA
isoform of the hST6GalNAc IV was generated by alternative splicing in the
5'-untranslated region. The expression of this gene was highly restricted in
human fetal tissues. The potential transcriptional start site was determined by
CapSite hunting. Sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region of this gene lacked 
canonical TATA and CAAT boxes, but contained several putative binding sites for
transcription factors SP1, MZF1, GATA1, LMO2COM, NFAT, HFH8 and USF, etc.
Functional analysis of the 5'-flanking region by transient expression method
revealed a high transcriptional activity in both HepG2 cells and Molt4 cells in a
cell type-dependent manner, but not in SK-N-MC cells. These results suggest cell 
type-specific regulation of the basal hST6GalNAc IV promoter activity.

PMID: 12594047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):4789-96. Epub 2003 Feb 13.

Mechanisms and implications of platelet discoid shape.

Italiano JE Jr(1), Bergmeier W, Tiwari S, Falet H, Hartwig JH, Hoffmeister KM,
André P, Wagner DD, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The platelet marginal band consists of a single peripheral microtubule (MT) that 
is wound in 8 to 12 coils and maintains discoid cell shape. About 90% of
beta-tubulin in the marginal band is of the divergent, megakaryocyte
(MK)/platelet-restricted beta1 isoform. beta1-tubulin-null mice show reduced
proplatelet formation, thrombocytopenia, and platelet spherocytosis. Here, we
show that structural abnormalities in resting beta1-tubulin-/- platelets include 
frequent kinks and breaks in the marginal band. Platelets derived from mice
lacking the transcription factor GATA1 show similar defects, probably as a direct
consequence of absent beta1-tubulin. beta1-tubulin+/- platelets have normal
ratios of beta-tubulin isotypes but the marginal band is half the normal
thickness, which is sufficient to maintain elliptical cell shape. Thus, a
threshold 50% or less of the normal amount of beta1-tubulin is required to
preserve marginal band integrity and cell shape. beta1-tubulin-/- platelets have 
normal size and contents and show no defects in serotonin release or aggregation.
Accordingly, the apparently isolated spherocytosis allows investigation of the
role of discoid platelet shape in hemostasis. On agonist stimulation, the
disorganized MTs in beta1-tubulin-/- platelets fail to condense into central
rings and instead are dispersed in short bundles and linear arrays. Nevertheless,
intravital microscopy and flow chamber studies demonstrate full functionality of 
these spherocytic platelets under physiologic shear conditions. Together, these
findings highlight the essential requirements of the MK/platelet-restricted
beta1-tubulin isoform in platelet structure and suggest that spherocytosis does
not impair many aspects of platelet function.

PMID: 12586623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Blood. 2003 Jun 1;101(11):4301-4. Epub 2003 Feb 13.

GATA1 mutations in transient leukemia and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down
syndrome.

Hitzler JK(1), Cheung J, Li Y, Scherer SW, Zipursky A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, ON, Canada. johann.hitzler@sickkids.ca

Children with constitutional trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) have an approximately
500-fold increased risk of developing acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), a
form of acute myeloid leukemia. Unique to newborn infants with Down syndrome is a
transient leukemia (TL), also referred to as transient myeloproliferative
syndrome, that undergoes spontaneous remission in the majority of cases but in
approximately 20% is followed by AMKL later in life. Recently mutations of the
gene encoding the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1 were shown to be
specific for AMKL of Down syndrome. Here, we demonstrate that GATA1 mutations are
present in blasts of TL and show the identical GATA1 mutation in sequential
samples collected from a patient during TL and subsequent AMKL. These findings
suggest a model of malignant transformation in Down syndrome AMKL in which GATA1 
mutations are an early event and AMKL arises from latent TL clones following
initial apparent remission.

PMID: 12586620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Br J Haematol. 2003 Feb;120(3):542-3.

GATA-1 transcription factor is mutated in CMK megakaryoblastic cell line.

Kunishima S, Kojima T, Inoue C, Kamiya T, Saito H.

PMID: 12580977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2001 Jan;21(1):40-2.

[Effect of ginsenosides in inducing proliferation and transcription factor of
erythrocytic, granulo-monocytic and megakarocytic cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XH(1), Gao RL, Xu WH.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Hospital of TCM, Hangzhou 310006.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the action of Ginsenosides (GS) in inducing
transcription factor c-fos and GATA-1 to explore the mechanism of GS in
hematopoietic cells.
METHODS: The proliferation effects of GS on granulocytic (HL-60), monocytic
(U937), erythrocytic (K562) and megaryocytic (Meg-01) cell lines were observed by
using proliferation test of MTT and colony formation of progenitor cells. The
combining reaction of transcription factors c-fos and GATA-1 with nuclear protein
antigen were analyzed by Western Blot after being treated by GS.
RESULTS: (1) GS (10 micrograms/ml) could stimulate and promote proliferation of 3
cell lines with significant difference between GS and non-GS control (P < 0.05 in
all) in both MTT test and colony assay. (2) After treatment with GS, c-fos
protein in HL-60, K562 and Meg-01 cell lines was increased by 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5
fold respectively, while U937 cell did not express c-fos. (3) Except that U937
cell hadn't expressed GATA-1, the other cell lines after the treatment by GS, the
GATA-1 protein level was elevated to 1.5, 2.1 and 1.3 fold of that before
treatment.
CONCLUSION: The proliferation of three lines initiated by GS was involved in
transcription factor c-fos or GATA-1, which could pay the role in the GS induced 
up-regulation correlated with proliferation and differentiation of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 12577377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2003 Jun 1;101(11):4333-41. Epub 2003 Feb 6.

RUNX1 and GATA-1 coexpression and cooperation in megakaryocytic differentiation.

Elagib KE(1), Racke FK, Mogass M, Khetawat R, Delehanty LL, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22908-0904, USA.

Megakaryocytic and erythroid lineages derive from a common bipotential progenitor
and share many transcription factors, most prominently factors of the GATA
zinc-finger family. Little is known about transcription factors unique to the
megakaryocytic lineage that might program divergence from the erythroid pathway. 
To identify such factors, we used the K562 system in which megakaryocyte lineage 
commitment is dependent on sustained extracellular regulatory kinase (ERK)
activation and is inhibited by stromal cell contact. During megakaryocytic
induction in this system, the myeloid transcription factor RUNX1 underwent
up-regulation, dependent on ERK signaling and inhibitable by stromal cell
contact. Immunostaining of healthy human bone marrow confirmed a strong
expression of RUNX1 and its cofactor, core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta), in
megakaryocytes and a minimal expression in erythroblasts. In primary human
hematopoietic progenitor cultures, RUNX1 and CBFbeta up-regulation preceded
megakaryocytic differentiation, and down-regulation of these factors preceded
erythroid differentiation. Functional studies showed cooperation among RUNX1,
CBFbeta, and GATA-1 in the activation of a megakaryocytic promoter. By contrast, 
the RUNX1-ETO leukemic fusion protein potently repressed GATA-1-mediated
transactivation. These functional interactions correlated with physical
interactions observed between GATA-1 and RUNX1 factors. Enforced RUNX1 expression
in K562 cells enhanced the induction of the megakaryocytic integrin proteins
alphaIIb and alpha2. These results suggest that RUNX1 may participate in the
programming of megakaryocytic lineage commitment through functional and physical 
interactions with GATA transcription factors. By contrast, RUNX1-ETO inhibition
of GATA function may constitute a potential mechanism for the blockade of
erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation seen in leukemias with t(8;21).

PMID: 12576332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 1999 Aug;21(4):252-6.

[Functional analysis of human A gamma-globin gene promoter with-173 T-->C
mutation].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang X(1), Zhang J, Yang X, Wang Y, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic of
Medical Sciences, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing 100005.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of the human A gamma-globin gene-173 T-->C
mutation on the binding of transacting factors to the promoter and the activity
of the promoter.
METHODS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and transient transfection assay
were used in this study.
RESULTS: The A gamma-globin gene-173 T-->C mutation decreased the affinity of
GATA-1 to the mutant promoter fragment (-201(-)-158) 96% (P < 0.01) and the
binding of Oct-1 to the same DNA fragment 55% (P < 0.05). The activity of the
mutant promoter was 2-fold (P < 0.05) as strong as that of the normal one in
MELGM979 cells. The mutant and the normal promoters exhibited basically same
activities in K562 and Hela cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The -173 T-->C mutation decreased dramatically the binding of
GATA-1, implicating that GA-TA-1 may act as a negative regulator of A
gamma-globin gene in adults. The -173 T-->C mutation may enhance the activity of 
A gamma-globin gene promoter in the adult erythroid cell environment.

PMID: 12567445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Exp Med. 2003 Feb 3;197(3):281-96.

GATA-1 as a regulator of mast cell differentiation revealed by the phenotype of
the GATA-1low mouse mutant.

Migliaccio AR(1), Rana RA, Sanchez M, Lorenzini R, Centurione L, Bianchi L,
Vannucchi AM, Migliaccio G, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomorphology, University G. D'Annunzio, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
migliar@iss.it

Here it is shown that the phenotype of adult mice lacking the first enhancer (DNA
hypersensitive site I) and the distal promoter of the GATA-1 gene (neo Delta HS
or GATA-1(low) mutants) reveals defects in mast cell development. These include
the presence of morphologically abnormal alcian blue(+) mast cells and apoptotic 
metachromatic(-) mast cell precursors in connective tissues and peritoneal lavage
and numerous (60-70% of all the progenitors) "unique" trilineage cells committed 
to erythroid, megakaryocytic, and mast pathways in the bone marrow and spleen.
These abnormalities, which were mirrored by impaired mast differentiation in
vitro, were reversed by retroviral-mediated expression of GATA-1 cDNA. These data
indicate an essential role for GATA-1 in mast cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2193836
PMID: 12566412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Blood. 2003 Jun 1;101(11):4298-300. Epub 2003 Jan 30.

Mutagenesis of GATA1 is an initiating event in Down syndrome leukemogenesis.

Mundschau G(1), Gurbuxani S, Gamis AS, Greene ME, Arceci RJ, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

As many as 10% of infants with Down syndrome (DS) present with transient
myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) at or shortly after birth. TMD is characterized
by an abundance of blasts within the peripheral blood and liver, and notably
undergoes spontaneous remission in the majority of cases. TMD may be a precursor 
to acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), with an estimated 30% of TMD patients 
developing AMKL within 3 years. We recently reported that mutations in the
transcription factor GATA1 are associated with DS-AMKL. To determine whether the 
acquisition of GATA1 mutations is a late event restricted to acute leukemia, we
analyzed GATA1 in DNA from TMD patients. Here we report that GATA1 is mutated in 
the TMD blasts from every infant examined. These results demonstrate that GATA1
is likely to play a critical role in the etiology of TMD, and mutagenesis of
GATA1 represents a very early event in DS myeloid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 12560215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(4):1390-402.

Functional cross-antagonism between transcription factors FLI-1 and EKLF.

Starck J(1), Cohet N, Gonnet C, Sarrazin S, Doubeikovskaia Z, Doubeikovski A,
Verger A, Duterque-Coquillaud M, Morle F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5534, 69622
Villeurbanne, France.

FLI-1 is an ETS family transcription factor which is overexpressed in Friend
erythroleukemia and contributes to the blockage of differentiation of
erythroleukemic cells. We show here that FLI-1 represses the transcriptional
activity of the beta-globin gene promoter in MEL cells and interacts with two of 
its critical transactivators, GATA-1 and EKLF. Unexpectedly, FLI-1 enhances the
stimulating activity of GATA-1 on a GATA-1-responsive promoter but represses that
of EKLF on beta-globin and an EKLF-responsive artificial promoters. This
repressive effect of FLI-1 requires the ETS DNA binding domain and its
association with either the N- or C-terminal domain, which themselves interact
with EKLF but not with GATA-1. Furthermore, the FLI-1 ETS domain alone behaves as
an autonomous repression domain when linked to the Gal4 DNA binding domain. Taken
together, these data indicate that FLI-1 represses EKLF-dependent transcription
due to the repression activity of its ETS domain and its indirect recruitment to 
erythroid promoters by protein-protein interaction with EKLF. Reciprocally, we
also show that EKLF itself represses the FLI-1-dependent megakaryocytic GPIX gene
promoter, thus further suggesting that functional cross-antagonism between FLI-1 
and EKLF might be involved in the control of the erythrocytic versus
megakaryocytic differentiation of bipotential progenitors.

PMCID: PMC141137
PMID: 12556498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(4):1334-40.

Formation of a tissue-specific histone acetylation pattern by the hematopoietic
transcription factor GATA-1.

Letting DL(1), Rakowski C, Weiss MJ, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

One function of lineage-restricted transcription factors may be to control the
formation of tissue-specific chromatin domains. In erythroid cells, the
beta-globin gene cluster undergoes developmentally regulated hyperacetylation of 
histones at the active globin genes and the locus control region (LCR). However, 
it is unknown which transcription factor(s) governs the establishment of this
erythroid-specific chromatin domain. We measured histone acetylation at the
beta-globin locus in the erythroid cell line G1E, which is deficient for the
essential hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1. Restoration of GATA-1
activity in G1E cells led to a substantial increase in acetylation of histones H3
and H4 at the beta-globin promoter and the LCR. Time course experiments showed
that histone acetylation occurred rapidly after GATA-1 activation and coincided
with globin gene expression, indicating that the effects of GATA-1 are direct.
Moreover, increases in histone acetylation correlated with occupancy of GATA-1
and the acetyltransferase CBP at the locus in vivo. Together, these results
suggest that GATA-1 and its cofactor CBP are essential for the formation of an
erythroid-specific acetylation pattern that is permissive for high levels of gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC141148
PMID: 12556492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Shi Yan Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 1999 Sep;32(3):243-9.

[Analysis of the binding of GATA factors to the regulatory elements of human
beta-globin gene in hydroxyurea-induced and uninduced HEL cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao H(1), Zhang SB, Jiang S, Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Science, Shanghai
200031, China.

HEL cells, a human erythroleukemia cell line, expressing mainly the gamma-globin 
genes, small amount of epsilon-globin gene, but not beta-globin gene. Our
previous studies demonstrated that beta-globin gene could be expressed in HEL
cells induced by hydroxyurea. However, the molecular mechenism is still unknown. 
Here the binding patterns of GATA factors (GATA-1 and GATA-2) to the regulatory
elements of human beta-globin gene were examined with the nuclear extracts from
hydroxyurea-induced and uninduced HEL cells. Our results showed in EMSA assay
that GATA factors could bind to the core sequence of HS2(-10681 to -10971 bp),
the 3' flanking sequence of HS2 core(-10323 to -10680 bp) and the promoter of
human beta-globin gene(+20 to -112 bp). However, the binding patterns between
hydroxyurea-induced and uninduced HEL cells were different. Furthermore, by using
Western-blot analysis, our data showed that the amount of GATA-2 was decreased in
hydroxyurea-induced HEL cells. In contrast to GATA-2, the amount of GATA-1 was
increased in hydroxyurea-induced HEL cells. These results showed that the
different members of GATA family might play different roles during the
differentiation of erythrocytes. GATA-1 may stimulate the differentiation of HEL 
cells, while GATA-2 can probably inhibit the differentiation of HEL cells.

PMID: 12548806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3265-73. Epub 2002 Dec 19.

Regulation of neutrophil and eosinophil secondary granule gene expression by
transcription factors C/EBP epsilon and PU.1.

Gombart AF(1), Kwok SH, Anderson KL, Yamaguchi Y, Torbett BE, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
90048, USA. gombarta@csmc.edu

In the bone marrow of C/EBP epsilon(-/-) mice, expression of neutrophil secondary
and tertiary granule mRNAs is absent for lactoferrin (LF), neutrophil gelatinase 
(NG), murine cathelin-like protein (MCLP), and the cathelin B9; it is severely
reduced for neutrophil collagenase (NC) and neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin (NGAL). In addition, the expression of eosinophil granule genes, major 
basic protein (MBP), and eosinophil peroxidase (EPX) is absent. These mice
express C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta, and C/EBP delta in the bone marrow at levels
similar to those of their wild-type counterparts, suggesting a lack of functional
redundancy among the family in vivo. Stable inducible expression of C/EBP epsilon
and C/EBP alpha in the murine fibroblast cell line NIH 3T3 activated expression
of mRNAs for B9, MCLP, NC, and NGAL but not for LF. In transient transfections of
C/EBP epsilon and C/EBP alpha, B9 was strongly induced with weaker induction of
the other genes. C/EBP beta and C/EBP delta proteins weakly induced B9
expression, but C/EBP delta induced NC expression more efficiently than the other
C/EBPs. The expression of MBP was inefficiently induced by C/EBP epsilon alone
and weakly induced with C/EBP epsilon and GATA-1, but the addition of PU.1
resulted in a striking cooperative induction of MBP in NIH 3T3 cells. Mutation of
a predicted PU.1 site in the human MBP promoter-luciferase reporter construct
abrogated the response to PU.1. Gel-shift analysis demonstrated binding of PU.1
to this site. MBP and EPX mRNAs were absent in a PU.1-null myeloid cell line
established from the embryonic liver of PU.1(-/-) mice. Restitution of PU.1
protein expression restored MBP and EPX protein expression. This study
demonstrates that C/EBP epsilon is essential and sufficient for the expression of
a particular subset of neutrophil secondary granule genes. Furthermore, it
indicates the importance of PU.1 in the cooperative activation of eosinophil
granule genes.

PMID: 12515729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Apr;10(2):100-3.

Sequence analysis of 5'-flanking region of human pax-5 gene exon 1B.

Liu ML(1), Rahman M, Hirabayashi Y, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital,
Jiangxi Medical College, Nanchang 330008, China.

Pax-5 gene is important transcription factor in B-lymphopoiesis and B-cell
development. To understand the regulatory mechanism of pax-5 expression, the
immediate 5'-flanking region (6 671 bp) of human pax-gene exon 1B was isolated
and characterized. Analysis of the total sequence showed that the proximal
promoter includes 3 CAT boxes, 1 SP1 and 1 E box. However, there was no consensus
sequence for a TATA box in the 5'-flanking region. Putative regulatory sites of
further upstream in the sequence revealed 6 LMO(2)COM, 5 NFAT, 2 LPOLYA-B, 3
GATA1, 2 AP4, 10 MZF1, 1 ETS1-B, 1 GATA3, 1 NKX25, 2 RORA1, 1 LYF1, 2 Ikaros2, 2 
TCF11, 1 GATA-C and 1 FREAC7. Therefore, the 5'-flanking region of human pax-5
exon 1B could be involved in regulating the expression of human pax-5 and B-cell 
differentiation and development.

PMID: 12513807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Aug;10(4):366-70.

[WT1-mediated pathway of transcriptional regulation and leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Duan WM(1), Chen ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Suzhou
University, Suzhou 215006, China.

WT1 gene encodes a zinc finger transcription factor that regulates transcription 
of its downstream genes. Some of target genes for WT1 are involved in regulating 
both cell cycle and cellular proliferation and differentiation. However, WT1
itself is regulated by its upstream genes such as NF-kappaB and GATA-1. Thus
there exists a pathway of transcriptional regulation mediated by WT1, which
controls development of hematopoietic system. Leukemia results from disrupting
the homeostasis among hematopoietic proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis,
which is often the consequence of an inappropriate expression of transcription
factors and subsequent disruption of the normal gene expression pattern. This
article reviews the relationship between the WT1-mediated pathway of
transcriptional regulation and leukemia.

PMID: 12513776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Dec;10(6):580-5.

The role of cytokines and transcription factors in megakaryocytopoiesis.

Yang M(1), Li K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China. yang1019@cuhk.edu.hk

The role of cytokines and transcription factors on the regulation of megakaryocy 
topoiesis and platelet production are reviewed in this article.
Megakaryocytopoiesis involves the proliferation and differentiation of
megakaryocytic pro genitor cells into immature megakaryocytes, and the
differentiation of immature megakaryocytes to mature megakaryocytes which produce
platelets. The former is regulated mainly by thrombopoietin (TPO) and to a lesser
degree by other cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-3 and platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF), the later by TPO and probably IL-6 and IL-11. A number of
transcription factors have been implicated in the control of megakaryocyte
differentiation. GATA-1, FOG-1 and Fli-1 are essential regulators in early- and
mid-stages of megakaryocytopoiesis. NF-E2 regulates late-stage of
megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet production. However, the platelet release
mechanism is poorly understood. Nitric oxide (NO) may act in the stage of
platelet release through induction of apoptosis in megakaryocytes.

PMID: 12513728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):334-40.

Regulation of cell type-specific mouse Fc epsilon RI beta-chain gene expression
by GATA-1 via four GATA motifs in the promoter.

Maeda K(1), Nishiyama C, Tokura T, Akizawa Y, Nishiyama M, Ogawa H, Okumura K, Ra
C.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The FcR beta-chain, a subunit of two related multisubunit receptor complexes, the
FcepsilonRI and FcgammaRIII, amplifies the mast cell response and is necessary
for the cell surface expression of FcepsilonRI in mouse. The transient reporter
assay indicated that -69/+4 region is required for cell type-specific
transcriptional regulation of mouse beta-chain gene. EMSA using Abs against
transcription factors or competitive oligonucleotides demonstrated that -58/-40
region (containing overlapping three GATA-1 sites, -53/-48, -46/-51, and -42/-47)
and -31/-26 region (containing one GATA-1 site) are recognized by GATA-1. The
promoter activity of beta-chain was decreased by nucleotide replacements of the
GATA-1 sites in mouse mast cell line PT18. Furthermore, exogenously produced
GATA-1 up-regulated the promoter activity in CV-1 cells, which are negative in
the beta-chain production and the up-regulation was apparently suppressed by
GATA-1 site mutations. These results indicate that cell type-specific
transcription of mouse beta-chain gene is regulated by GATA-1.

PMID: 12496417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2002 Sep-Oct;29(2):213-24.

Progesterone upregulates GATA-1 on erythroid progenitors cells in liquid culture.

da Silva Santos Duarte A(1), Sales TS, Mengel JO, Costa FF, Saad ST.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Hemotherapy Centre, State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP,
Brazil.

Steroids hormones modify the hematological features of homozygous sickle cell
disease, including the levels of fetal hemoglobin. We used semi-quantitative
RT-PCR analysis of GATA-1, GATA-2, NF-E2, and gamma-globin mRNA levels in a
two-phase liquid culture system of human adult erythroid cells in order to assay 
the effect of progesterone upon gene expression. The levels of expression of
GATA-1 and gamma-globin mRNA were significantly increased in cells treated with
progesterone compared to untreated cells (1.7- to 2.0-fold). Progesterone
treatment did not produce any stimulatory effect upon GATA-2 and NF-E2 mRNA
expression. Differences in the synthesis of HbF protein could not be detected by 
flow cytometry, although we observed a small difference in mean intensity
fluorescence between cells treated and cells untreated with progesterone on days 
7 and 9. Using anti-transferrin receptor and anti-glycophorin A antibodies, we
verified that addition of progesterone did not cause any change in erythroid
proliferation and differentiation. In conclusion, it is possible that the
increased expression of gamma-globin mRNA after progesterone treatment observed
in this study may be related to the increased GATA-1 mRNA expression.
Interactions of the steroid receptors with the basal transcriptional machinery
and with transcription factors might mediate their transcriptional effects.

PMID: 12490288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biol Cell. 2002 Sep;94(4-5):267-73.

Nuclear transcription factor GATA-1 is activated during aclacinomycin-induced
erythroid differentiation.

Gillet R(1), Bobichon H, Trentesaux C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité MEDIAN, CNRS FRE 2141, UFR Pharmacie, IFR53, 1, rue du Maréchal-Juin,
51096 Reims cedex, France.

Anthracycline antitumor drugs induce erythroid differentiation of the K562
erythroleukemic cell line at subtoxic concentrations. Aclacinomycin (ACM)
stimulates this process by activating the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1, 
that controls genes involved in hemoglobin biosynthesis. To investigate the
implication of GATA-1 in this process, we used a specific anti-GATA-1 polyclonal 
antibody that we produced in our laboratory. The GATA-1 transcription factor was 
then monitored during erythroid differentiation induced by aclacinomycin. Here we
show that a cellular redistribution and a modification of the phosphorylation
state of this transcription factor occurred during ACM-mediated cell
differentiation. It suggests that anthracyclines can induce the erythroid
differentiation of neoplastic cells by activating the transcription factor
GATA-1, probably via its clustering into nuclear foci.

PMID: 12489695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Genes Cells. 2002 Dec;7(12):1243-54.

A minigene containing four discrete cis elements recapitulates GATA-1 gene
expression in vivo.

Ohneda K(1), Shimizu R, Nishimura S, Muraosa Y, Takahashi S, Engel JD, Yamamoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The GATA-1haematopoietic enhancer (G1HE), located between 3.9 and 2.6
kb 5' to the haematopoietic first exon, is essential for GATA-1 gene
transcription in erythroid cells. However, G1HE is not sufficient to confer
tissue specificity on the GATA-1 gene in vivo, indicating that additional
regulatory sequences are necessary.
RESULTS: We demonstrate here that two other upstream promoter elements containing
a double GATA motif or two CACCC boxes are also indispensable for reporter gene
expression in erythroid cells in the transgenic mouse. The combination of these
three cis-acting regions was sufficient for reporter expression in primitive
erythroid cells, as demonstrated by linking the elements together into a 659 bp
artificial (GdC) minigene. The minigene activated the transcription of a reporter
gene from either the endogenous or an exogenous thymidine kinase promoter,
retaining cell type-specificity. The addition of a 320 bp fragment in the first
intron to the GdC minigene sustained reporter expression in the definitive stage.
Moreover, a line of transgenic mouse that expressed GATA-1 cDNA under the control
of the complete 979 bp minigene rescued GATA-1 germ line mutant mice from
embryonic lethality.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of four distinct sequence motifs co-operatively serve 
as a fundamental functional unit for GATA-1 erythroid transcription in vivo.

PMID: 12485164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;112(1):42-9. Epub 2002 Oct 16.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the GATA1 cofactor human FOG1 and
assessment of its binding to GATA1 proteins carrying D218 substitutions.

Freson K(1), Thys C, Wittewrongel C, Vermylen J, Hoylaerts MF, Van Geet C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven,
UZ-Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Erythroid and megakaryocytic lineage differentiation and maturation are regulated
via cooperation between transcription factor GATA1 and its essential cofactor
friend-of-GATA1 (FOG1). The interaction between these two murine proteins is well
studied in vitro and depends on the binding of Fog1 to the N-terminal zinc finger
(N-finger) of Gata1. We identified the human FOG1 gene on chromosome 16q24 and
found expression mainly in hematopoietic cells and also in several other tissues.
Sequencing of FOG1 cDNA revealed a 1006 amino-acid protein that contained nine
zinc fingers, highly homologous to murine Fog1 fingers. The amino acid sequence
and the GATA1-binding capacity of the human and murine finger 5 are however
different. Ex vivo binding studies demonstrated that FOG1 interacts with both
GATA1 and GATA2. We and others have described patients with mutations in the
GATA1 N-finger (V205 M, D218G, D218Y, or G208S), who suffer from
macrothrombocytopenia and erythrocyte abnormalities. We now show ex vivo that the
interaction between GATA1 and FOG1 is indeed disturbed in platelets and
erythrocytes of those patients carrying D218 GATA1 mutations. The identification 
of the human FOG1 gene will enable the genetic screening of patients with non
X-linked thrombocytopenia and dyserythropoiesis.

PMID: 12483298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Br J Haematol. 2002 Dec;119(4):1098-105.

Hydroxyurea exerts bi-modal dose-dependent effects on erythropoiesis in human
cultured erythroid cells via distinct pathways.

Wang M(1), Tang DC, Liu W, Chin K, Zhu JG, Fibach E, Rodgers GP.

Author information: 
(1)The Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Hydroxyurea (HU) has been shown to increase the proportion of fetal haemoglobin
(HbF) in most sickle cell patients. A low-dosage regimen increased total
haemoglobin (Hb) levels in some thalassaemia intermedia patients by
preferentially increasing beta-globin biosynthesis. To further characterize these
apparent dose-dependent effects of HU, we examined erythroid cells exposed to HU 
(5-100 micro mol/l) in two-phase liquid culture. Low doses (from 5 to 25 micro
mol/l) increased Hb levels by up to 2.7-fold, and a high dose (100 micro mol/l)
increased Hb levels when added at d 3-6 of phase II, with no significant changes 
in response to HU during the late stage of phase II culture (> or = 9 d). HU
exposure during d 0-3 of phase II culture increased the number of erythroid
colonies to a maximum of fivefold at 5 micro mol/l HU. GATA-1 mRNA was
downregulated at a high dose and GATA-2 was dose dependently upregulated over a
lower dosage range. Treatment with 100 micro mol/l HU dramatically upregulated
the death receptor DR-5, caspase 3, as determined by cDNA microarray analysis. In
contrast, 10 micro mol/l HU modestly upregulated mRNA levels of the early growth 
response gene. Our results suggest that HU exerts concentration-dependent effects
on HbF production and erythropoiesis and that these two effects are mediated by
distinct molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 12472594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Pediatr Res. 2002 Dec;52(6):831.

GATA1--a player in normal and leukemic megakaryopoiesis.

Hitzler JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology and Program for Developmental Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8
Canada.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):148-52.

PMID: 12438656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):633-8. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

Core-binding factor beta interacts with Runx2 and is required for skeletal
development.

Yoshida CA(1), Furuichi T, Fujita T, Fukuyama R, Kanatani N, Kobayashi S, Satake 
M, Takada K, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2
Yamada-oka Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta, also called polyomavirus enhancer binding
protein 2beta (PEBP2B)) is associated with an inversion of chromosome 16 and is
associated with acute myeloid leukemia in humans. CBFbeta forms a heterodimer
with RUNX1 (runt-related transcription factor 1), which has a DNA binding domain 
homologous to the pair-rule protein runt in Drosophila melanogaster. Both RUNX1
and CBFbeta are essential for hematopoiesis. Haploinsufficiency of another
runt-related protein, RUNX2 (also called CBFA1), causes cleidocranial dysplasia
in humans and is essential in skeletal development by regulating osteoblast
differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. Mice deficient in Cbfb (Cbfb(-/-))
die at midgestation, so the function of Cbfbeta in skeletal development has yet
to be ascertained. To investigate this issue, we rescued hematopoiesis of
Cbfb(-/-) mice by introducing Cbfb using the Gata1 promoter. The rescued
Cbfb(-/-) mice recapitulated fetal liver hematopoiesis in erythroid and
megakaryocytic lineages and survived until birth, but showed severely delayed
bone formation. Although mesenchymal cells differentiated into immature
osteoblasts, intramembranous bones were poorly formed. The maturation of
chondrocytes into hypertrophic cells was markedly delayed, and no endochondral
bones were formed. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and reporter assays
showed that Cbfbeta was necessary for the efficient DNA binding of Runx2 and for 
Runx2-dependent transcriptional activation. These findings indicate that Cbfbeta 
is required for the function of Runx2 in skeletal development.

PMID: 12434152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Acta Haematol. 2002;108(4):237-45.

Roles of hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 in the development
of red blood cell lineage.

Ohneda K(1), Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

The transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 play key roles in gene regulation
during erythropoiesis. Gene ablation studies in mouse revealed that GATA-2 is
crucial for the maintenance and proliferation of immature hematopoietic
progenitors, whereas GATA-1 is essential for the survival of erythroid
progenitors as well as the terminal differentiation of erythroid cells. Both
GATA-1 and GATA-2 are regulated in a cell-type-specific manner, their expression 
being strictly controlled during the development and differentiation of erythroid
cells. Closer examination revealed a cross-regulatory mechanism by which GATA-1
can control the expression of GATA-2 and vice versa, possibly via essential GATA 
binding sites in their cis-acting elements. In addition, recent studies
identified several human inherited hematopoietic disorders that are caused by
mutations in cis-acting GATA binding motifs or mutations in GATA-1 itself.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12432220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2571-80. Epub 2002 Nov 8.

Regulation of expression of the phospholipid hydroperoxide/sperm nucleus
glutathione peroxidase gene. Tissue-specific expression pattern and
identification of functional cis- and trans-regulatory elements.

Borchert A(1), Savaskan NE, Kuhn H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Humboldt University Medical School Charité,
Monbijoustrasse 2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

A sperm nucleus glutathione peroxidase (snGPx), which is closely related to the
phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (phGPx), was recently
discovered in late spermatids. Both GPx isoforms originate from a joint ph/snGPx 
gene, but their N-terminal peptides are encoded by alternative first exons. The
expression of the two enzymes is differentially regulated in various cells, but
little is known about the regulatory mechanisms. To explore the tissue-specific
regulation of expression of the two isoenzymes, we first investigated their
tissue distribution. Whereas phGPx is expressed at low levels in many organs,
snGPx was only detected in testis, kidney, and in the human embryonic kidney cell
line HEK293. Subcellular fractionation studies and immunoelectron microscopy
revealed a cytosolic localization. To explore the mechanistic reasons for the
differential expression pattern, we first tested the activity of the putative
phGPx and snGPx promoters. The 5'-flanking region of the joint ph/snGPx gene
exhibits strong promoter activity. In contrast, the putative snGPx promoter,
which comprises 334 bp of intronic sequences, lacks major promoter activity.
However, it strongly suppresses the activity of the ph/snGPx promoter. These data
suggest negative regulatory elements in the first intron of the ph/snGPx gene,
and DNase protection assays revealed the existence of several protein-binding
sites. The corresponding trans-regulatory proteins (SP1, ERG1, GATA1, SREBP1,
USF1, and CREBP1) were identified, and in vivo binding of EGR1 and SREBP1 was
shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation. These data indicate for the first time
somatic expression of the snGPx and provide evidence for the existence of
intronic negative cis-regulatory elements in the ph/snGPx gene. Our failure to
detect an alternative snGPx promoter suggests that transcription of the ph/snGPx 
gene may be regulated by a joint basic promoter. The decision, which GPx isoform 
is expressed in a given cell, appears to be made by alternative splicing of a
joint primary transcript.

PMID: 12427732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 12;99(23):14925-30. Epub 2002 Nov 4.

Expression profiling of CD34+ hematopoietic stem/ progenitor cells reveals
distinct subtypes of therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia.

Qian Z(1), Fernald AA, Godley LA, Larson RA, Le Beau MM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology and the Cancer Research Center, University of
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. zqian@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

One of the most serious consequences of cytotoxic cancer therapy is the
development of therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML), a neoplastic
disorder arising from a multipotential hematopoietic stem cell. To gain insights 
into the molecular basis of this disease, we performed gene expression profiling 
of CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells from t-AML patients. Our analysis
revealed that there are distinct subtypes of t-AML that have a characteristic
gene expression pattern. Common to each of the subgroups are gene expression
patterns typical of arrested differentiation in early progenitor cells. Leukemias
with a -5/del(5q) have a higher expression of genes involved in cell cycle
control (CCNA2, CCNE2, CDC2), checkpoints (BUB1), or growth (MYC), and loss of
expression of the gene encoding IFN consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP). A
second subgroup of t-AML is characterized by down-regulation of transcription
factors involved in early hematopoiesis (TAL1, GATA1, and EKLF) and
overexpression of proteins involved in signaling pathways in myeloid cells (FLT3)
and cell survival (BCL2). Establishing the molecular pathways involved in t-AML
may facilitate the identification of selectively expressed genes that can be
exploited for the development of urgently needed targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC137521
PMID: 12417757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood. 2002 Nov 15;100(10):3578-87.

Furin gene (fur) regulation in differentiating human megakaryoblastic Dami cells:
involvement of the proximal GATA recognition motif in the P1 promoter and impact 
on the maturation of furin substrates.

Laprise MH(1), Grondin F, Cayer P, McDonald PP, Dubois CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Sherbrooke, Québec, PQ, Canada.

The convertase furin is involved in the maturation of key growth/aggregation
mediators synthesized by the platelet producers, megakaryocytes, but the
regulation of furin in these cells remains unknown. Computer-assisted search of
the furin promoter sequence revealed multiple potential binding motifs for
GATA-1, suggesting that furin is expressed and regulated in these cells. Using
megakaryoblastic Dami cells, we observed that fur mRNA expression increased
gradually on phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-induced differentiation, reaching
maximum levels (8.3-fold increase) at 10 days. Transient transfections with P1,
P1A, or P1B fur-LUC-promoter constructs revealed that in Dami cells, the P1
promoter is the strongest and the most sensitive to forced expression of GATA-1. 
Coexpression of GATA-1 and its comodulator, Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1), resulted in
a cooperative increase in P1 activity. Deletion analysis indicated that important
GATA-1-regulated sequences are located in the most proximal region of the P1
promoter. Further analysis revealed 2 potential GATA-binding motifs at positions 
-66 and +62. Point mutation of each of the 2 motifs indicated that the intactness
of the first GATA site is required for full basal and GATA-1-stimulated promoter 
activity. Finally, the inhibition of furin activity through gene transfer of the 
inhibitor alpha1-AT-PDX led to a block in maturation of the furin substrates
transforming growth factor-beta1 and platelet-derived growth factor. Taken
together, these results indicate that the most proximal GATA element in the P1
promoter is needed for fur gene expression in megakaryoblastic cells. They also
suggest that proper regulation of the fur gene in megakaryocytes has an impact on
the activation of furin substrates involved in megakaryocyte maturation and
platelet functions.

PMID: 12411321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Br J Haematol. 2002 Nov;119(2):510-5.

Developmental changes in the expression of transcription factors GATA-1, -2 and
-3 during the onset of human medullary haematopoiesis.

Dame C(1), Sola MC, Fandrey J, Rimsza LM, Freitag P, Knöpfle G, Christensen RD,
Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville 32610-0296, USA. 
damec@peds.ufl.edu

Regulation of gene expression during the ontogeny of haematopoiesis in the human 
fetal bone marrow is poorly understood. Studies in mice demonstrated that GATA-1,
-2 and -3 play pivotal roles in haematopoiesis. In this study, we identified
GATA-1-, GATA-2- and GATA-3-expressing cells in bone marrow sections and analysed
the expression of GATA-transcription factors during the development of human
fetal bone marrow haematopoiesis using semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We showed that GATA-1, -2 and
-3 were expressed only in haematopoietic cells in the bone marrow. RT-PCR
analysis demonstrated that (1) GATA-1 expression significantly increased during
gestation; (2) GATA-2 expression peaked at the onset of medullary haematopoiesis,
declined thereafter, and remained at a constant level after 30 weeks post
conception; and (3) GATA-3 expression revealed no changes during development. The
results indicated that the onset of medullary haematopoiesis in humans is
accompanied by high expression of GATA-2, reflecting high proliferation rates of 
early haematopoietic progenitor cells, whereas expression of GATA-1 mirrors
haematopoietic activity.

PMID: 12406094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5093-101.

HrT is required for cardiovascular development in zebrafish.

Szeto DP(1), Griffin KJ, Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Box 357350, University of Washington, Seattle
98195-7530, USA.

The recently identified zebrafish T-box gene hrT is expressed in the developing
heart and in the endothelial cells forming the dorsal aorta. Orthologs of hrT are
expressed in cardiovascular cells from Drosophila to mouse, suggesting that the
function of hrT is evolutionarily conserved. The role of hrT in cardiovascular
development, however, has not thus far been determined in any animal model. Using
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides, we show that zebrafish embryos lacking hrT
function have dysmorphic hearts and an absence of blood circulation. Although the
early events in heart formation were normal in hrT morphant embryos, subsequently
the hearts failed to undergo looping, and late onset defects in chamber
morphology and gene expression were observed. In particular, we found that the
loss of hrT function led to a dramatic upregulation of tbx5, a gene required for 
normal heart morphogenesis. Conversely, we show that overexpression of hrT causes
a significant downregulation of tbx5, indicating that one key role of hrT is to
regulate the levels of tbx5. Secondly, we found that HrT is required to inhibit
the expression of the blood lineage markers gata1 and gata2 in the most posterior
lateral plate mesoderm. Finally, we show that HrT is required for vasculogenesis 
in the trunk, leading to similar vascular defects to those observed in midline
mutants such as floating head. hrT expression in the vascular progenitors depends
upon midline mesoderm, indicating that this expression is one important component
of the response to a midline-derived signal during vascular morphogenesis.

PMID: 12397116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Blood. 2002 Nov 15;100(10):3828-31. Epub 2002 Jul 5.

Immortalization of yolk sac-derived precursor cells.

Yu WM(1), Hawley TS, Hawley RG, Qu CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoiesis and the Flow Cytometry Facility, Jerome H. Holland
Laboratory for the Biomedical Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD 20855, 
USA.

Hematopoiesis initiates in the extraembryonic yolk sac. To isolate various types 
of precursor cells from this blood cell-forming tissue, yolk sac cells were
immortalized by retroviral-mediated expression of the HOX11 homeobox-containing
gene. Among the cell lines derived, some were able to spontaneously generate
adherent stromal-like cells capable of taking up acetylated low-density
lipoprotein, and they could be induced to form tubelike structures when cultured 
on Matrigel. Although these cell lines were negative for hematopoietic cell
surface markers, they gave rise to hematopoietic colonies--containing cells
belonging to the monocytic, megakaryocytic, and definitive erythroid
lineages--when plated in methylcellulose medium supplemented with hematopoietic
growth factors. Low amounts of Flk-1 mRNA could be detected in these cells, and
they showed significant responsiveness to vascular endothelial growth factor,
stem cell factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, and interleukin 6. They also
expressed the transcription factors SCL, GATA2, GATA1, PU.1, and c-myb. These
yolk sac-derived cell lines may represent a transitional stage of early
hematopoietic development.

PMID: 12393673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Blood. 2003 Feb 15;101(4):1603-10. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

LCR-regulated transgene expression levels depend on the Oct-1 site in the AT-rich
region of beta -globin intron-2.

Bharadwaj RR(1), Trainor CD, Pasceri P, Ellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Human beta-globin transgenes regulated by the locus control region (LCR) express 
at all integration sites in transgenic mice. For such LCR activity at ectopic
sites, the 5'HS3 element requires the presence of the AT-rich region (ATR) in
beta-globin intron-2. Here, we examine the dependence of 5'HS3 LCR activity on
transcription factor binding sites in the ATR. In vitro DNaseI footprint analysis
and electrophoretic mobility shift assays of the ATR identified an inverted
double Gata-1 site composed of 2 noncanonical sequences (GATT and GATG) and an
Oct-1 consensus site. Mutant Oct-1, Gata-1, or double mutant sites were created
in the ATR of the BGT50 construct composed of a 5'HS3 beta/gamma-globin hybrid
transgene. Transgenes with double mutant sites expressed at all sites of
integration, but mean expression levels in transgenic mice were reduced from 64% 
per copy (BGT50) to 37% (P <.05). Mutation of the inverted double Gata-1 site had
no effect at 61% per copy expression levels. In contrast, mutation of the Oct-1
site alone reduced per-copy expression levels to 31% (P <.05). We conclude that
the ability of 5'HS3 to activate expression from all transgene integration sites 
is dependent on sequences in the ATR that are not bound at high affinity by
transcription factors. In addition, the Oct-1 site in the ATR is required for
high-level 5'HS3 beta/gamma-globin transgene expression and should be retained in
LCRbeta-globin expression cassettes designed for gene therapy.

PMID: 12393478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Physiol Genomics. 2002 Oct 29;11(2):91-8.

Isolation and characterization of zebrafish NFE2.

Pratt SJ(1), Drejer A, Foott H, Barut B, Brownlie A, Postlethwait J, Kato Y,
Yamamoto M, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Vertebrate hematopoiesis is regulated by distinct cell-specific transcription
factors such as GATA-1 and SCL. Mammalian p45-NFE2 was characterized for its
ability to bind the hypersensitive sites of the globin locus control region. NFE2
is a member of a cap'n'collar (CNC) and basic zipper (BZIP) superfamily that
regulates gene transcription. It has been implicated in diverse processes such as
globin gene expression, oxidative stress, and platelet lineage differentiation.
Here, we have isolated the zebrafish ortholog of NFE2. The gene is highly
homologous, particularly in the DNA-binding domain. Mapping the zebrafish NFE2 to
linkage group 23 establishes a region of chromosomal synteny with human
chromosome 12, further suggesting evolutionary conservation. During
embryogenesis, the zebrafish gene is expressed specifically in erythroid cells
and also in the developing ear. NFE2 expression is lacking in zebrafish mutants
that have no hematopoietic cells. An analysis of the sauternes mutant, which
carries a mutation in the ALAS-2 gene and thus has defective heme synthesis,
demonstrates higher levels of NFE2 expression than normal. This further
establishes the block to erythroid differentiation in the sauternes mutant. Our
studies demonstrate conservation of the vertebrate genetic program for the
erythroid lineage.

PMID: 12388799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Gene. 2002 Aug 21;296(1-2):151-9.

Characterization of the promoter controlling Mona/Gads expression in the
megakaryocytic lineage.

Guyot B(1), Mouchiroud G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR CNRS 5534, Université
Claude Bernard Lyon-1, 43, boulevard du 11 novembre 1918, Bâtiment Gregor Mendel,
16 rue Raphael Dubois, 69622 Villeurbanne Cedex, France.

Mona/grb2 related adapter downstream of shc is a molecular adapter expressed in
platelets, T lymphocytes and myelomonocytic cells. Using human hematopoietic cell
lines, we have previously shown that lineage-specific Mona expression is achieved
through the production of two transcripts (named 1A and 1B) differing by their 5'
untranslated region (5'UTR). Thus, platelets and megakaryocytic cell lines K562
and HEL (Human Erythro-Leukemia) specifically express 1B messenger RNA (mRNA). We
report here characterization of the (-2031/+72) genomic region relative to the
putative transcription start site of 1B mRNA. We show this region is sufficient
to ensure specific reporter gene expression in megakaryocytic cell lines, and
that most promoter activity is contained in the (-225/+72) fragment.
Electro-mobility shift assay and mutational analyses indicated that GATA-1 and a 
yet unidentified E-26 family member transcription factor are required for 1B
(-2031/+72) promoter activity. Thus, Mona 1B promoter exhibits typical features
of megakaryocyte-specific promoters.

PMID: 12383512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 29;99(22):14309-14. Epub 2002 Oct 11.

Hematopoietic-specific activators establish an overlapping pattern of histone
acetylation and methylation within a mammalian chromatin domain.

Kiekhaefer CM(1), Grass JA, Johnson KD, Boyer ME, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Wisconsin Medical School, 1300 University Avenue, 383 Medical
Sciences Center, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Posttranslational modification of histones through acetylation, methylation, and 
phosphorylation is a common mode of regulating chromatin structure and,
therefore, diverse nuclear processes. One such modification, methylated histone
H3 at lysine-4 (H3-meK4), colocalizes with hyperacetylated histones H3 and H4 in 
mammalian chromatin. Whereas activators directly recruit acetyltransferases, the 
process whereby H3-meK4 is established is unknown. We tested whether the
hematopoietic-specific activators NF-E2 and GATA-1, which mediate transactivation
of the beta-globin genes, induce both histone acetylation and H3-meK4. Through
the use of NF-E2- and GATA-1-null cell lines, we show that both activators induce
H3 acetylation at the promoter upon transcriptional activation. However, analysis
of H3-mek4 revealed that NF-E2 and GATA-1 differentially regulate chromatin
modifications at the betamajor promoter. NF-E2, but not GATA-1, induces H3-meK4
at the promoter. Thus, under conditions in which NF-E2 and GATA-1 activate the
transcription of an endogenous gene at least 570-fold, these activators differ in
their capacity to induce H3-meK4. Despite strong H3-meK4 at hypersensitive site 2
of the upstream locus control region, neither factor was required to establish
H3-meK4 at this site. These results support a model in which multiple
tissue-specific activators collectively function to assemble a composite histone 
modification pattern, consisting of overlapping histone acetylation and
methylation. As GATA-1 induced H3 acetylation, but not H3-meK4, at the promoter, 
H3 acetylation and H3-meK4 components of a composite histone modification pattern
can be established independently.

PMCID: PMC137880
PMID: 12379744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 Oct 1;22(10):1733-9.

Characterization of human glycoprotein VI gene 5' regulatory and promoter
regions.

Furihata K(1), Kunicki TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Roon Research Center for Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, Division of
Experimental Hemostasis and Thrombosis, Department of Molecular and Experimental 
Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, Calif 92037, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Platelet glycoprotein VI is a collagen receptor belonging to the
immunoglobulin-like protein family that is essential for platelet interactions
with collagen and is exclusively expressed in the megakaryocytic lineage. The
objective of this study was to characterize the human glycoprotein VI gene (GP6) 
5' regulatory and promoter regions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We first used 5' RACE to establish experimentally that the
major transcription start site lies 28 bp upstream from the start codon. We next 
subcloned the 5' regulatory region of GP6 into pGL3-basic [pGL3(-1576)] and used 
deletion mutagenesis to identify important regulatory regions, comparing the
activity of transiently expressed promoter-luciferase constructs in Dami and HeLa
cells. We found that megakaryocyte lineage-specific transcription is largely
controlled within the segment -191/-39. By site-directed mutagenesis, we
confirmed that a GATA-1 site at -176 and an Ets-1 site at -45 play important
roles in the regulation of GP6 transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We have determined that the GP6 sequence -191 to -39 represents the 
core promoter and that transcription is driven largely by GATA-1 (-176) and
c-Ets-1 (-45) sites within this segment.

PMID: 12377757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48333-41. Epub 2002 Sep 30.

Cloning and analysis of the thrombopoietin-induced megakaryocyte-specific
glycoprotein VI promoter and its regulation by GATA-1, Fli-1, and Sp1.

Holmes ML(1), Bartle N, Eisbacher M, Chong BH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, St. George Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

The exposure of collagen fibers at sites of vascular injury results in the
adherence of platelets and their subsequent activation. The platelet collagen
receptor glycoprotein (GP)(1) VI plays a crucial role in platelet activation and 
thrombus formation and decreased levels or defective GPVI may lead to excessive
bleeding. In addition, elevated levels of collagen receptors may predispose
individuals to coronary heart disease or strokes. GPVI expression is restricted
to platelets and their precursor cell, the megakaryocyte. In this study we
investigate the regulation of GPVI expression and show that thrombopoietin
induces its expression in the megakaryocytic cell line UT-7/TPO. A 5'-region
flanking the transcription start point of the GPVI gene was cloned (-694 to +29) 
and we report that this putative GPVI promoter bestows megakaryocye-specific
expression. Deletion analyses and site-directed mutagenesis identified Sp1(227), 
GATA(177), and Ets(48) sites as essential for GPVI expression. We show that
transcription factors GATA-1, Fli-1, and Sp1 can bind to and activate this
promoter. Finally, GPVI mRNA was detected only in megakaryocytic cell lines
expressing both Fli-1 and GATA-1, and we show that overexpression of Fli-1 in a
stable cell line (which expresses endogenous GATA-1 and Sp1) results in
expression of the endogenous GPVI gene.

PMID: 12359731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 1;21(19):5225-34.

Control of megakaryocyte-specific gene expression by GATA-1 and FOG-1: role of
Ets transcription factors.

Wang X(1), Crispino JD, Letting DL, Nakazawa M, Poncz M, Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1 and its cofactor FOG-1 are essential for the
normal development of erythroid cells and megakaryocytes. FOG-1 can stimulate or 
inhibit GATA-1 activity depending on cell and promoter context. How the
GATA-1-FOG-1 complex controls the expression of distinct sets of gene in
megakaryocytes and erythroid cells is not understood. Here, we examine the
molecular basis for the megakaryocyte-restricted activation of the alphaIIb gene.
FOG-1 stimulates GATA-1-dependent alphaIIb gene expression in a manner that
requires their direct physical interaction. Transcriptional output by the
GATA-1-FOG-1 complex is determined by the hematopoietic Ets protein Fli-1 that
binds to an adjacent Ets element. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments show 
that GATA-1, FOG-1 and Fli-1 co-occupy the alphaIIb promoter in vivo. Expression 
of several additional megakaryocyte-specific genes that bear tandem GATA and Ets 
elements in their promoters also depends on the physical interaction between
GATA-1 and FOG-1. Our studies define a molecular context for transcriptional
activation by GATA-1 and FOG-1, and may explain the occurrence of tandem GATA and
Ets elements in the promoters of numerous megakaryocyte-expressed genes.

PMCID: PMC129049
PMID: 12356738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Oncogene. 2002 Sep 26;21(43):6669-79.

PLZF induces megakaryocytic development, activates Tpo receptor expression and
interacts with GATA1 protein.

Labbaye C(1), Quaranta MT, Pagliuca A, Militi S, Licht JD, Testa U, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome,
Italy. clabbaye@iss.it

We investigated the expression of the PLZF gene in purified human hematopoietic
progenitors induced to unilineage erythroid, granulocytic or megakaryocytic
differentiation and maturation in serum-free culture. PLZF is expressed in
quiescent progenitors: the expression level progressively rises through
megakaryocytic development, whereas it gradually declines in erythroid and
granulopoietic culture. To investigate the role of PLZF in megakaryopoiesis, we
transduced the PLZF gene into the erythro-megakaryocytic TF1 cell line. PLZF
overexpression upmodulates the megakaryocytic specific markers (CD42a, CD42b,
CD61, PF4) and induces the thrombopoietin receptor (TpoR). The proximal promoter 
of the TpoR gene is activated in PLZF-expressing TF1 cells: in this promoter
region, a PLZF DNA-binding site was identified by deletion constructs studies.
Interestingly, PLZF and GATA1 proteins coimmunoprecipitate in PLZF-expressing TF1
cells: enforced expression of both PLZF and GATA1 in TF1 cells results in
increased upregulation of megakaryocytic markers, as compared to exogenous PLZF
or GATA1 alone, suggesting a functional role for the PLZF/GATA1 complex. Our data
indicate that PLZF plays a significant stimulatory role in megakaryocytic
development, seemingly mediated in part by induction of TpoR expression at
transcriptional level. This stimulatory effect is potentiated by physical
interaction of PLZF and GATA1, which are possibly assembled in a multiprotein
transcriptional complex.

PMID: 12242665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002 Sep;147(3):397-406.

Developmental expression and spermatogenic stage specificity of transcription
factors GATA-1 and GATA-4 and their cofactors FOG-1 and FOG-2 in the mouse
testis.

Ketola I(1), Anttonen M, Vaskivuo T, Tapanainen JS, Toppari J, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-4 have been implicated in
the regulation of testicular development and function. Their cofactors FOG-1 and 
FOG-2 are expressed in the gonads, but their cell-specific and developmental
expression in the testis remains unresolved. Therefore, we analyzed GATA-1,
GATA-4, FOG-1 and FOG-2 expression in detail, from undifferentiated male
urogenital ridge to adult testis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization were applied on mouse
testicular samples.
RESULTS: GATA-4 and FOG-2, but not GATA-1 or FOG-1, were expressed as early as in
the male urogenital ridge. FOG-2 expression was localized in the Sertoli cells at
embryonal day 12.5 (E12.5), but it diminished with advancing fetal testicular
development. In E17.5 testis, FOG-2 was present only in the testicular capsule
and a subset of fetal Leydig cells. FOG-1 was expressed from E15.5 Sertoli cells 
onwards, whereas GATA-1 was not detected during the fetal period at all. In the
postnatal testis, FOG-2 was abundantly expressed immediately after birth, but in 
adult testis its expression was predominantly restricted to stage VII-XII
seminiferous tubules. Stage specificity was also found for FOG-1, which,
similarly to GATA-1, was abundantly expressed in stage VII-XII tubules during
adulthood.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that FOG-2, in addition to GATA-4, has a role
in early gonadal development and sexual differentiation, and FOG-1 at later fetal
stages, while GATA-1 executes its action postnatally. The findings suggest that, 
in contrast to the hematopoietic system and the heart, GATA-1 and GATA-4 do not
use FOG-1 and FOG-2 respectively as their only cofactors during the early stages 
of testicular development.

PMID: 12213678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 8;277(45):43481-94. Epub 2002 Aug 28.

Novel combinatorial interactions of GATA-1, PU.1, and C/EBPepsilon isoforms
regulate transcription of the gene encoding eosinophil granule major basic
protein.

Du J(1), Stankiewicz MJ, Liu Y, Xi Q, Schmitz JE, Lekstrom-Himes JA, Ackerman SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

GATA-1 and the ets factor PU.1 have been reported to functionally antagonize one 
another in the regulation of erythroid versus myeloid gene transcription and
development. The CCAAT enhancer binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) is
expressed as multiple isoforms and has been shown to be essential to myeloid
(granulocyte) terminal differentiation. We have defined a novel synergistic, as
opposed to antagonistic, combinatorial interaction between GATA-1 and PU.1, and a
unique repressor role for certain C/EBPepsilon isoforms in the transcriptional
regulation of a model eosinophil granulocyte gene, the major basic protein (MBP).
The eosinophil-specific P2 promoter of the MBP gene contains GATA-1, C/EBP, and
PU.1 consensus sites that bind these factors in nuclear extracts of the
eosinophil myelocyte cell line, AML14.3D10. The promoter is transactivated by
GATA-1 alone but is synergistically transactivated by low levels of PU.1 in the
context of optimal levels of GATA-1. The C/EBPepsilon(27) isoform strongly
represses GATA-1 activity and completely blocks GATA-1/PU.1 synergy. In vitro
mutational analyses of the MBP-P2 promoter showed that both the GATA-1/PU.1
synergy, and repressor activity of C/EBPepsilon(27) are mediated via
protein-protein interactions through the C/EBP and/or GATA-binding sites but not 
the PU.1 sites. Co-immunoprecipitations using lysates of AML14.3D10 eosinophils
show that both C/EBPepsilon(32/30) and epsilon(27) physically interact in vivo
with PU.1 and GATA-1, demonstrating functional interactions among these factors
in eosinophil progenitors. Our findings identify novel combinatorial
protein-protein interactions for GATA-1, PU.1, and C/EBPepsilon isoforms in
eosinophil gene transcription that include GATA-1/PU.1 synergy and repressor
activity for C/EBPepsilon(27).

PMID: 12202480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood. 2002 Sep 15;100(6):2040-5.

X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia from a mutation in the amino finger of
GATA-1 affecting DNA binding rather than FOG-1 interaction.

Yu C(1), Niakan KK, Matsushita M, Stamatoyannopoulos G, Orkin SH, Raskind WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital, 
300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for the development of erythroid cells
and megakaryocytes. Each of its 2 zinc fingers is critical for normal function.
The C-terminal finger is necessary for DNA binding. The N finger mediates
interaction with FOG-1, a cofactor for GATA-1, and also modulates DNA-binding
affinity, notably at complex or palindromic GATA sites. Residues of the N
finger-mediating interaction with FOG-1 lie on the surface of the N finger facing
away from DNA. Strong sequence conservation of residues facing DNA suggests that 
this other surface may also have an important role. We report here that a
syndrome of X-linked thrombocytopenia with thalassemia in humans is caused by a
missense mutation (Arg216Gln) in the GATA-1 N finger. To investigate the
functional consequences of this substitution, we used site-directed mutagenesis
to alter the corresponding residue in GATA-1. Compared with wild-type GATA-1,
Arg216Gln GATA-1 shows comparable affinity to single GATA sites but decreased
affinity to palindromic sites. Arg216Gln GATA-1 interacts with FOG-1 similarly
with wild-type GATA-1. Arg216Gln GATA-1 supports erythroid maturation of GATA-1
erythroid cells, albeit at reduced efficiency compared with wild-type GATA-1.
Together, these findings suggest that residues of the N finger of GATA-1-facing
DNA contribute to GATA-1 function apart from interaction with the cofactor FOG-1.
This is also the first example of beta-thalassemia in humans caused by a mutation
in an erythroid transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC2808424
PMID: 12200364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):41563-70. Epub 2002 Aug 23.

Erythroid expression of the human alpha-spectrin gene promoter is mediated by
GATA-1- and NF-E2-binding proteins.

Boulanger L(1), Sabatino DE, Wong EY, Cline AP, Garrett LJ, Garbarz M, Dhermy D, 
Bodine DM, Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U409, Association Claude Bernard, Universite Paris 7, Faculte X.
Bichat, 75870 Paris Cedex 18, France.

alpha-Spectrin is a highly expressed membrane protein critical for the
flexibility and stability of the erythrocyte. Qualitative and quantitative
defects of alpha-spectrin are present in the erythrocytes of many patients with
abnormalities of red blood cell shape including hereditary spherocytosis and
elliptocytosis. We wished to determine the regulatory elements that determine the
erythroid-specific expression of the alpha-spectrin gene. We mapped the 5' end of
the alpha-spectrin erythroid cDNA and cloned the 5' flanking genomic DNA
containing the putative alpha-spectrin gene promoter. Using transfection of
promoter/reporter plasmids in human tissue culture cell lines, in vitro DNase I
footprinting analyses, and gel mobility shift assays, an alpha-spectrin gene
erythroid promoter with binding sites for GATA-1- and NF-E2-related proteins was 
identified. Both binding sites were required for full promoter activity. In
transgenic mice, a reporter gene directed by the alpha-spectrin promoter was
expressed in yolk sac, fetal liver, and erythroid cells of bone marrow but not
adult reticulocytes. No expression of the reporter gene was detected in
nonerythroid tissues. We conclude that this alpha-spectrin gene promoter contains
the sequences necessary for low level expression in erythroid progenitor cells.

PMID: 12196550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Curr Biol. 2002 Aug 20;12(16):1405-12.

Analysis of a zebrafish VEGF receptor mutant reveals specific disruption of
angiogenesis.

Habeck H(1), Odenthal J, Walderich B, Maischein H, Schulte-Merker S; Tübingen
2000 screen consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Artemis Pharmaceuticals/Exelixis Deutschland GmbH, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.

Blood vessels form either by the assembly and differentiation of mesodermal
precursor cells (vasculogenesis) or by sprouting from preexisting vessels
(angiogenesis). Endothelial-specific receptor tyrosine kinases and their ligands 
are known to be essential for these processes. Targeted disruption of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or its receptor kdr (flk1, VEGFR2) in mouse
embryos results in a severe reduction of all blood vessels, while the complete
loss of flt1 (VEGFR1) leads to an increased number of hemangioblasts and a
disorganized vasculature. In a large-scale forward genetic screen, we identified 
two allelic zebrafish mutants in which the sprouting of blood vessels is
specifically disrupted without affecting the assembly and differentiation of
angioblasts. Molecular cloning revealed nonsense mutations in flk1. Analysis of
mRNA expression in flk1 mutant embryos showed that flk1 expression was severely
downregulated, while the expression of other genes (scl, gata1, and fli1)
involved in vasculogenesis or hematopoiesis was unchanged. Overexpression of
vegf(121+165) led to the formation of additional vessels only in sibling larvae, 
not in flk1 mutants. We demonstrate that flk1 is not required for proper
vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis in zebrafish embryos. However, the disruption of
flk1 impairs the formation or function of vessels generated by sprouting
angiogenesis.

PMID: 12194822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Sep 3;99(18):11760-5. Epub 2002 Aug 22.

Cooperative activities of hematopoietic regulators recruit RNA polymerase II to a
tissue-specific chromatin domain.

Johnson KD(1), Grass JA, Boyer ME, Kiekhaefer CM, Blobel GA, Weiss MJ, Bresnick
EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program,
University of Wisconsin Medical School, 383 Medical Science Center, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 regulates erythropoiesis and
beta-globin expression. Although consensus GATA-1 binding sites exist throughout 
the murine beta-globin locus, we found that GATA-1 discriminates among these
sites in vivo. Conditional expression of GATA-1 in GATA-1-null cells
recapitulated the occupancy pattern. GATA-1 induced RNA polymerase II (pol II)
recruitment to subregions of the locus control region and to the beta-globin
promoters. The hematopoietic factor NF-E2 cooperated with GATA-1 to recruit pol
II to the promoters. We propose that only when GATA-1 attracts pol II to the
locus control region can pol II access the promoter in a NF-E2-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC129342
PMID: 12193659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):83-4. Epub 2002 Aug 12.

A leukemogenic twist for GATA1.

Look AT.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):148-52.

PMID: 12172549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):148-52. Epub 2002 Aug 12.

Acquired mutations in GATA1 in the megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.

Wechsler J(1), Greene M, McDevitt MA, Anastasi J, Karp JE, Le Beau MM, Crispino
JD.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Pediatr Res. 2002 Dec;52(6):831.
    Nat Genet. 2002 Sep;32(1):83-4.

Children with Down syndrome have a 10-20-fold elevated risk of developing
leukemia, particularly acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). While a subset of 
pediatric AMKLs is associated with the 1;22 translocation and expression of a
mutant fusion protein, the genetic alterations that promote Down syndrome-related
AMKL (DS-AMKL) have remained elusive. Here we show that leukemic cells from every
individual with DS-AMKL that we examined contain mutations in GATA1, encoding the
essential hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1 (GATA binding protein 1 or
globin transcription factor 1). Each mutation results in the introduction of a
premature stop codon in the gene sequence that encodes the amino-terminal
activation domain. These mutations prevent synthesis of full-length GATA1, but
not synthesis of a shorter variant that is initiated downstream. We show that the
shorter GATA1 protein, which lacks the N-terminal activation domain, binds DNA
and interacts with its essential cofactor Friend of GATA1 (FOG1; encoded by
ZFPM1) to the same extent as does full-length GATA1, but has a reduced
transactivation potential. Although some reports suggest that the activation
domain is dispensable in cell-culture models of hematopoiesis, one study has
shown that it is required for normal development in vivo. Together, these
findings indicate that loss of wildtype GATA1 constitutes one step in the
pathogenesis of AMKL in Down syndrome.

PMID: 12172547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Blood. 2002 Aug 15;100(4):1123-32.

Development of myelofibrosis in mice genetically impaired for GATA-1 expression
(GATA-1(low) mice).

Vannucchi AM(1), Bianchi L, Cellai C, Paoletti F, Rana RA, Lorenzini R,
Migliaccio G, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ematologia, University of Florence, Italy.

Comment in
    Blood. 2002 Aug 15;100(4):1109.
    Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):5087-8; author reply 5088-9.

The phenotype induced by the GATA-1(low) (neodeltaHS) mutation is here further
characterized by analyzing the hemopoietic system during the aging (up to 20
months) of a GATA-1(low) colony (135 mutants and 40 normal littermates). Mutants 
expressed normal hematocrit values (Hct = 45.9 +/- 4.0) until 12 months but
became anemic from 15 months on (Hct = 30.9 +/- 3.9; P <.05). Anemia was
associated with several markers of myelofibrosis such as the presence of
tear-drop poikilocytes and progenitor cells in the blood, collagen fibers in the 
marrow and in the spleen, and hemopoietic foci in the liver. Semiquantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction showed that growth factor genes
implicated in the development of myelofibrosis (such as osteocalcin, transforming
growth factor-beta1, platelet-derived growth factor, and vascular endothelial
growth factor) were all expressed in the marrow from the mutants at higher levels
than in corresponding normal tissues. The GATA-1(low) mutants experienced a slow 
progression of the disease because the final exitus was not observed until at
least 15 months with a probability of survival more favorable than that of W/Wv
mice concurrently kept in the animal facility (P <.001, by Kaplan-Meier
analysis). In conclusion, impaired GATA-1 expression may contribute to the
development of myelofibrosis, and the GATA-1(low) mutants may represent a
suitable animal model for the human disease that may shed light on its
pathogenesis.

PMID: 12149188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Leukemia. 2002 Aug;16(8):1563-5.

GATA-1 and GATA-2 gene expression is related to the severity of dysplasia in
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Fadilah SA, Cheong SK, Roslan H, Rozie-Hanisa M, Yen GK.

PMID: 12145700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Br J Haematol. 2002 Aug;118(2):646-53.

Protein kinase C-zeta overexpression induces erythroid phenotype in the monocytic
leukaemia cell line U937.

Mansat-De Mas V(1), de Thonel A, Gaulin V, Demur C, Laurent G, Quillet-Mary A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) E9910,
Institut Claudius Régaud, 20 Rue du pont Saint-Pierre, 31052 Toulouse Cedex,
France. demas.v@chu-toulouse.fr

Previous studies have established that protein kinase C-zeta (PKC-zeta) is
critical for neuronal cell differentiation. However, the role of PKC-zeta in
haematopoietic cell differentiation is less clear. In this study, we have
investigated the influence of PKC-zeta overexpression on the phenotype of the
human monocytic U937 leukaemic cells. In two PKC-zeta-overexpressing clones (U937
zetaJ and U937 zetaB), PKC-zeta expression levels and activity were three to
fourfold higher, and the enzyme accumulated both in the cytoplasm and in the
nucleus compared with U937 control cells. PKC-zeta-overexpressing U937 cells
exhibited an erythroid phenotype characterized by high levels of glycophorin A,
cell haemoglobinization, increased GATA-1 transcripts and protein expression,
compared with controls. Immunoprecipitation studies revealed that GATA-1 protein 
was constitutively phosphorylated in PKC-zeta-overexpressing cells. Moreover,
GATA-1 did not interact with PKC-zeta but interacted with ERK1, which was
constitutively activated and accumulated in the nucleus of U937 zetaJ. However,
ERK1 phosphorylation inhibition by PD098059 did not influence either GATA-1
phosphorylation or GATA-1/ERK1 interaction. Collectively, these results suggest a
model in which PKC-zeta induces MEK-dependent ERK1 activation, ERK1 translocation
to the nucleus, GATA-1/ERK1 interaction and ERK1-independent GATA-1
phosphorylation resulting in GATA-1 accumulation. To conclude, this study
provides evidence for the role of PKC-zeta in erythroid gene regulation.

PMID: 12139760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Acta Biochim Pol. 2002;49(1):19-28.

GATA-1 binding to the alphaV promoter negatively regulates expression of the
integrin alphaV subunit in human leukemic K562 cells.

Czyz M(1), Stasiak M, Boncela J, Cierniewsk CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Physiology and Biochemistry,
Medical University of Lódz Poland. mczyz@csk.am.lodz.pl

Recently we observed that the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bind to the
CTCCTCCTC sequence located between positions -194 and -172 of the alphaV promoter
region and are directly involved in the regulation of transcriptional activity of
the alphaV gene in human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) (Czyz &
Cierniewski, 1999, Eur. J. Biochem. 265, 638). In this report we provide evidence
that the GATA-1 factor regulates alphaV expression during differentiation of
pluripotent K562 cells induced either by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) or
butyric acid (BA) through interaction with the GATA element in the alphaV gene
promoter. DNase I footprinting analysis revealed that region -413 to -408,
covering the GATA binding site, was protected by nuclear extract from K562 cells.
There was no protection of this region by HUVEC nuclear extract. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay (EMSA) analysis of nuclear extract of K562 cells treated
with BA revealed an increase in GATA binding activity, which was associated with 
reduced alphaV mRNA and alphaV protein on the cell surface. Stimulation of K562
cells with PMA resulted in opposite effects: lower expression of GATA-1 was
associated with increased levels of alphaV. We conclude that the GATA-1
transcription factor specifically binds to the GATA element in the alphaV gene
promoter and negatively regulates alphaV gene expression.

PMID: 12136940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jul 9;99(14):9237-42. Epub 2002 Jun 20.

GATA-factor dependence of the multitype zinc-finger protein FOG-1 for its
essential role in megakaryopoiesis.

Chang AN(1), Cantor AB, Fujiwara Y, Lodish MB, Droho S, Crispino JD, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The function of GATA transcription factors in diverse developmental contexts
depends in part on physical interaction with cofactors of the Friend of GATA
(FOG) family. However, previous studies indicate that FOG-1 may play a
GATA-1-independent role in early megakaryopoiesis, suggesting that FOG proteins
might act in a GATA factor-independent manner. Here, we have generated mouse
knock-in (KI) mutants harboring a critical valine-to-glycine substitution in the 
amino-terminal zinc fingers of GATA-1 and GATA-2 to ablate FOG interaction. In
contrast to male GATA-1(KI) (GATA-1 is located on the X-chromosome) or
GATA-2(KI/KI) mice, compound GATA-1(KI) GATA-2(KI/KI) mutant mice display
complete megakaryopoietic failure, a phenocopy of FOG-1(-/-) mice. We conclude
that FOG-1 requires an interaction with either GATA-1 or -2 as part of its
essential role in early megakaryopoiesis. On the basis of these and previous
reports, we infer that GATA factor dependence is a critical aspect of FOG protein
function.

PMCID: PMC123124
PMID: 12077323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Nature. 2002 Jun 13;417(6890):758-63.

An abundant erythroid protein that stabilizes free alpha-haemoglobin.

Kihm AJ(1), Kong Y, Hong W, Russell JE, Rouda S, Adachi K, Simon MC, Blobel GA,
Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Hematology and the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-616, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Jun 13;417(6890):703-5.

The development of red blood cells (erythrocytes) is distinguished by high-level 
production of the oxygen carrier, haemoglobin A (HbA), a heterotetramer of alpha-
and beta-haemoglobin subunits. HbA synthesis is coordinated to minimize the
accumulation of free subunits that form cytotoxic precipitates. Molecular
chaperones that regulate globin subunit stability, folding or assembly have been 
proposed to exist but have never been identified. Here we identify a protein
stabilizing free alpha-haemoglobin by using a screen for genes induced by the
essential erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 (refs 4, 5). Alpha Haemoglobin
Stabilizing Protein (AHSP) is an abundant, erythroid-specific protein that forms 
a stable complex with free alpha-haemoglobin but not with beta-haemoglobin or
haemoglobin A (alpha(2)beta(2)). Moreover, AHSP specifically protects free
alpha-haemoglobin from precipitation in solution and in live cells.
AHSP-gene-ablated mice exhibit reticulocytosis and abnormal erythrocyte
morphology with intracellular inclusion bodies that stain positively for
denatured haemoglobins. Hence, AHSP is required for normal erythropoiesis,
probably acting to block the deleterious effects of free alpha-haemoglobin
precipitation. Accordingly, AHSP gene dosage is predicted to modulate
pathological states of alpha-haemoglobin excess, such as beta-thalassaemia.

PMID: 12066189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Exp Med. 2002 Jun 3;195(11):1387-95.

Targeted deletion of a high-affinity GATA-binding site in the GATA-1 promoter
leads to selective loss of the eosinophil lineage in vivo.

Yu C(1), Cantor AB, Yang H, Browne C, Wells RA, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-1 reprograms immature myeloid cells to three different 
hematopoietic lineages-erythroid cells, megakaryocytes, and eosinophils. GATA-1
is essential for maturation of erythroid and megakaryocytic precursors, as
revealed by gene targeting in mice. Here we demonstrate that deletion of a
high-affinity GATA-binding site in the GATA-1 promoter, an element presumed to
mediate positive autoregulation of GATA-1 expression, leads to selective loss of 
the eosinophil lineage. These findings suggest that GATA-1 is required for
specification of this lineage during hematopoietic development. Mice lacking the 
ability to produce eosinophils should prove useful in ascertaining the role of
eosinophils in a variety of inflammatory or allergic disorders.

PMCID: PMC2193547
PMID: 12045237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Exp Med. 2002 Jun 3;195(11):1379-86.

Essential and instructive roles of GATA factors in eosinophil development.

Hirasawa R(1), Shimizu R, Takahashi S, Osawa M, Takayanagi S, Kato Y, Onodera M, 
Minegishi N, Yamamoto M, Fukao K, Taniguchi H, Nakauchi H, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

GATA transcription factors are major regulators of hematopoietic and immune
system. Among GATA factors, GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 play crucial roles in the 
development of erythroid cells, hematopoietic stem, and progenitor cells, and T
helper type 2 (Th2) cells, respectively. A high level of GATA-1 and GATA-2
expression has been observed in eosinophils, but their roles in eosinophil
development remain uncertain both in vitro and in vivo. Here we show that
enforced expression of GATA-1 in human primary myeloid progenitor cells
completely switches myeloid cell fate into eosinophils. Expression of GATA-1
exclusively promotes development and terminal maturation of eosinophils.
Functional domain analyses revealed that the COOH-terminal finger is essential
for this capacity while the other domains are dispensable. Importantly,
GATA-1-deficient mice failed to develop eosinophil progenitors in the fetal
liver. On the other hand, GATA-2 also showed instructive capacity comparable to
GATA-1 in vitro and efficiently compensated for GATA-1 deficiency in terms of
eosinophil development in vivo, indicating that proper accumulation of GATA
factors is critical for eosinophil development. Taken together, our findings
establish essential and instructive roles of GATA factors in eosinophil
development. GATA-1 and GATA-2 could be novel molecular targets for therapeutic
approaches to allergic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2193540
PMID: 12045236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncogene. 2002 May 13;21(21):3368-76.

Transcriptional regulation of erythropoiesis: an affair involving multiple
partners.

Cantor AB(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital
Boston and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Previous work has demonstrated that lineage-specific transcription factors play
essential roles in red blood cell development. More recent studies have shown
that these factors participate in critical protein-protein interactions in
addition to binding DNA. The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1, a central
mediator of erythroid gene expression, interacts with multiple proteins including
FOG-1, EKLF, SP1, CBP/p300 and PU.1. The mechanisms by which these interactions
influence GATA-1 function, as well as any possible relationships between these
seemingly disparate complexes, remain incompletely understood. However, several
new findings have provided further insight into the functional significance of
some of these interactions. Studies involving point mutants of GATA-1 have shown 
that a direct physical interaction between GATA-1 and FOG-1 is essential for
normal human erythroid and megakaryocyte maturation in vivo. In addition,
evidence has emerged that physical interaction between GATA-1 and the
myeloid/lymphoid specific factor PU.1, an oncogene implicated in murine
erythroleukemia, acts to functionally cross-antagonize one another. This provides
a possible mechanism by which dysregulated expression of hematopoietic
transcription factors leads to lineage maturation arrest in leukemias.

PMID: 12032775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(12):4268-79.

Distinct domains of the GATA-1 cofactor FOG-1 differentially influence erythroid 
versus megakaryocytic maturation.

Cantor AB(1), Katz SG, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

FOG family zinc finger proteins play essential roles in development through
physical interaction with GATA factors. FOG-1, like its interacting partner
GATA-1, is required for normal differentiation of erythroid and megakaryocytic
cells. Here, we have developed a functional assay for FOG-1 based on its ability 
to rescue erythroid and megakaryocytic maturation of a genetically engineered
FOG-1(-/-) cell line. We demonstrate that interaction through only one of FOG-1's
four GATA-binding zinc fingers is sufficient for rescue, providing evidence
against a model in which FOG-1 acts to bridge multiple GATA-binding DNA elements.
Importantly, we find that distinct regions of FOG-1 differentially influence
erythroid versus megakaryocyte maturation. As such, we propose that FOG-1 may
modulate the fate of a bipotential erythroid/megakaryocytic precursor cell.

PMCID: PMC133877
PMID: 12024038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 26;277(30):27144-53. Epub 2002 May 21.

GATA factors are essential for transcription of the survival gene E4bp4 and the
viability response of interleukin-3 in Ba/F3 hematopoietic cells.

Yu YL(1), Chiang YJ, Yen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Academia
Sinica, No. 128, Sec. 2, Yen-Jiou-Yuan Road, Taipei, 115 Taiwan.

E4bp4, a member of the basic region/leucine zipper transcription factor
superfamily, is up-regulated by the interleukin-3 (IL-3) signaling pathway and
plays an important role in the anti-apoptotic response of IL-3. In this study, we
demonstrated that E4bp4 is regulated by IL-3 mainly at the transcriptional level.
Promoter analysis revealed that a GATA motif downstream of a major transcription 
initiation site is essential for E4bp4 expression in the IL-3-dependent Ba/F3
cell line. Gel shift assays demonstrated that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 proteins
bind to the E4bp4 GATA site in vitro, and the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
further confirmed the in vivo binding of GATA-1 to the E4bp4 promoter.
Overexpression of GATA-1 alone transactivates the E4bp4 reporter, whereas
transactivation of the E4bp4 reporter by GATA-2 is dependent on the stimulation
of IL-3. Last, we demonstrated that alteration of GATA-1 binding to the GATA site
by stably overexpressing GATA-1 or a GATA-1 mutant containing only the
DNA-binding domain not only modulates the expression of the E4bp4 gene but also
influences apoptosis induced by IL-3 removal. Taken together, our results suggest
that the GATA factors play an important role in transducing the survival signal
of IL-3, and one of their cellular targets is E4bp4.

PMID: 12023274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Shi Yan Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 1998 Jun;31(2):179-86.

[Studies on DNA-protein interactions in the HS3 of the human beta-LCR].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang Y(1), Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
200031, China.

Upstream of the human epsilon-globin gene is the Locus Control Region (LCR) of
the human beta-globin cluster, which consists of four DNase-I hypersensitive
sites(HS1-HS4). It has been reported in transgenic experiments that HS3
preferentially regulates epsilon-globin gene expression. In order to elucidate
the regulatory function of HS3 in the expression of globin gene, nuclear extracts
from mouse hematopoietic tissues at several developmental stages were prepared
and the binding of the nuclear factors to HS3 was analysed by using
electrophoresis mobility shift assay(EMSA). Our results showed that the binding
patterns of HS3 with nuclear extracts of mouse hematopoietic tissues at day 13
and day 18 of gestation were completely different; furthermore, by Southwestern
Blot, the distinction between both stages was also demonstrated. It has been
known that GATA and CACCC binding motifs are contained within HS3 core region.
Using competitive gel-retardation assay, we found that no shift bands could be
competed by using CACCC motif as a competitor. However one shift band at day 13
and day 18 of gestation could be competed respectively by using GATA motif as a
competitor. We suggested that the shift bands, which could not be competed by
both motifs, might be novel and stage-specific factors. In addition, by using
Western Blot, we demonstrated that the two shift bands at day 13 and day 18 of
gestation, competed by GATA motif, were GATA-2 and GATA-1 respectively: GATA-1
was expressed in mouse hematopoietic tissues at day 18 of gestation and not
expressed at day 13 of gestation; however, GATA-2 was only expressed in mouse
hematopoietic tissues at day 13 of gestation. According to these results, we
speculated that HS3 might play an important role in regulation of stage-specific 
expression of globin genes through interaction between stage-specific nuclear
factors and HS3.

PMID: 12014146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(11):3729-43.

Inhibition of CBP-mediated protein acetylation by the Ets family oncoprotein
PU.1.

Hong W(1), Kim AY, Ky S, Rakowski C, Seo SB, Chakravarti D, Atchison M, Blobel
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Aberrant expression of PU.1 inhibits erythroid cell differentiation and
contributes to the formation of murine erythroleukemias (MEL). The molecular
mechanism by which this occurs is poorly understood. Here we show that PU.1
specifically and efficiently inhibits CBP-mediated acetylation of several nuclear
proteins, including the hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1, NF-E2, and
erythroid Krüppel-like factor. In addition, PU.1 blocks acetylation of histones
and interferes with acetylation-dependent transcriptional events. CBP
acetyltransferase activity increases during MEL cell differentiation as PU.1
levels decline and is inhibited by sustained PU.1 expression. Finally, PU.1
inhibits the differentiation-associated increase in histone acetylation at an
erythroid-specific gene locus in vivo. Together, these findings suggest that
aberrant expression of PU.1 and possibly other members of the Ets family of
oncoproteins subverts normal cellular differentiation in part by inhibiting the
acetylation of critical nuclear factors involved in balancing cellular
proliferation and maturation.

PMCID: PMC133832
PMID: 11997509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Immunol. 2002 May 1;168(9):4546-52.

Regulation of human Fc epsilon RI alpha-chain gene expression by multiple
transcription factors.

Nishiyama C(1), Hasegawa M, Nishiyama M, Takahashi K, Akizawa Y, Yokota T,
Okumura K, Ogawa H, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy (Atopy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. chinishi@med.juntendo.ac.jp

Transcriptional regulation of the gene-encoding human Fc epsilon RI alpha-chain
was analyzed in detail. EMSA revealed that either YY1 or PU.1 bound to the region
close to that recognized by Elf-1. The alpha-chain promoter activity was
up-regulated approximately 2-fold by exogenously expressed YY1 or PU.1 and
approximately 7-fold by GATA-1, respectively, in KU812 cells. In contrast,
coexpression of GATA-1 with either of PU.1 or YY1 dramatically activated the
promoter approximately 41- or approximately 27-fold, respectively. Especially
synergic activation by GATA-1 and PU.1 was surprising, because these
transcription factors are known to inhibit the respective transactivating
activities of each other. These up-regulating effects of PU.1 and YY1 with GATA-1
were inhibited by overexpression of Elf-1, indicating that Elf-1 serves as a
repressor for the alpha-chain gene expression. Transcriptional regulation of the 
alpha-chain gene through four transcriptional factors is discussed.

PMID: 11971001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Blood. 2002 May 1;99(9):3220-7.

A functional role of Stat3 in in vivo megakaryopoiesis.

Kirito K(1), Osawa M, Morita H, Shimizu R, Yamamoto M, Oda A, Fujita H, Tanaka M,
Nakajima K, Miura Y, Ozawa K, Komatsu N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi,
Japan.

The signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3), a member of the
Stat family of proteins, is commonly activated by thrombopoietic cytokines
including thrombopoietin (TPO), interleukin (IL)-6, and interleukin-11. This
finding strongly suggested that Stat3 has an important role in megakaryopoiesis
and thrombopoiesis. To clarify the functional role of Stat3 in in vivo
megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis, we generated transgenic mice overexpressing 
a dominant-negative Stat3, Stat3F, to suppress the function of endogenous Stat3. 
To accomplish the selective expression of Stat3F in megakaryocytic lineage cells,
we used the regulatory gene region of GATA-1 transcription factor selectively
expressed in megakaryocytic and erythroid lineage cells. Two independent
transgenic (Tg) mice lines were established. It was confirmed by Western blotting
analysis that Stat3F proteins were highly expressed in the platelets from the Tg 
mice. In addition, it was found that Stat3 activation induced by TPO stimulation 
was drastically suppressed in these Tg mice compared with littermates. These
findings indicate that Stat3F works well in the Tg mice. Platelet counts were
within the normal range in steady-state conditions and were recovered normally
from transient thrombocytopenia induced by antiplatelet serum injection.
Interestingly, the platelet recovery from myelosuppression after 5-fluorouracil
treatment was significantly delayed in the Tg mice. Collectively, our results
strongly suggest that Stat3 plays an important role in the early stage of
megakaryopoiesis, presumably through the expansion of megakaryocytic progenitor
cells.

PMID: 11964286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 16;99(8):5454-9.

A nonsense mutation in zebrafish gata1 causes the bloodless phenotype in vlad
tepes.

Lyons SE(1), Lawson ND, Lei L, Bennett PE, Weinstein BM, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Building 49, Room 3A18, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Vlad tepes (vlt(m651)) is one of only five "bloodless" zebrafish mutants isolated
through large-scale chemical mutagenesis screening. It is characterized by a
severe reduction in blood cell progenitors and few or no blood cells at the onset
of circulation. We now report characterization of the mutant phenotype and the
identification of the gene mutated in vlt(m651). Embryos homozygous for the
vlt(m651) mutation had normal expression of hematopoietic stem cell markers
through 24 h postfertilization, as well as normal expression of myeloid and
lymphoid markers. Analysis of erythroid development revealed variable expression 
of erythroid markers. Through positional and candidate gene cloning approaches we
identified a nonsense mutation in the gata1 gene, 1015C --> T (Arg-339 --> Stop),
in vlt(m651). The nonsense mutation was located C-terminal to the two zinc
fingers and resulted in a truncated protein that was unable to bind DNA or
mediate GATA-specific transactivation. A BAC clone containing the zebrafish gata1
gene was able to rescue the bloodless phenotype in vlt(m651). These results show 
that the vlt(m651) mutation is a previously uncharacterized gata1 allele in the
zebrafish. The vlt(m651) mutation sheds new light on Gata1 structure and function
in vivo, demonstrates that Gata1 plays an essential role in zebrafish
hematopoiesis with significant conservation of function between mammals and
zebrafish, and offers a powerful tool for future studies of the hematopoietic
pathway.

PMCID: PMC122790
PMID: 11960002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Virol. 2002 Apr;76(8):3996-4007.

Transcriptional targeting of lentiviral vectors by long terminal repeat enhancer 
replacement.

Lotti F(1), Menguzzato E, Rossi C, Naldini L, Ailles L, Mavilio F, Ferrari G.

Author information: 
(1)TIGET, Istituto Scientifico H. San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Gene therapy of many genetic diseases requires permanent gene transfer into
self-renewing stem cells and restriction of transgene expression to specific
progenies. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-derived lentiviral vectors are very
effective in transducing rare, nondividing stem cell populations (e.g.,
hematopoietic stem cells) without altering their long-term repopulation and
differentiation capacities. We developed a strategy for transcriptional targeting
of lentiviral vectors based on replacing the viral long terminal repeat (LTR)
enhancer with cell lineage-specific, genomic control elements. An upstream
enhancer (HS2) of the erythroid-specific GATA-1 gene was used to replace most of 
the U3 region of the LTR, immediately upstream of the HIV type 1 (HIV-1)
promoter. The modified LTR was used to drive the expression of a reporter gene
(the green fluorescent protein [GFP] gene), while a second gene (a truncated form
of the p75 nerve growth factor receptor [DeltaLNGFR]) was placed under the
control of an internal constitutive promoter to monitor cell transduction, or to 
immunoselect transduced cells, independently from the expression of the targeted 
promoter. The transcriptionally targeted vectors were used to transduce cell
lines, human CD34+ hematopoietic stem-progenitor cells, and murine bone marrow
(BM)-repopulating stem cells. Gene expression was analyzed in the stem cell
progeny in vitro and in vivo after xenotransplantation into nonobese
diabetic-SCID mice or BM transplantation in coisogenic mice. The modified LTR
directed high levels of transgene expression specifically in mature
erythroblasts, in a TAT-independent fashion and with no alteration in titer,
infectivity, and genomic stability of the lentiviral vector. Expression from the 
modified LTR was higher, better restricted, and showed less position-effect
variegation than that obtained by the same combination of enhancer-promoter
elements placed in a conventional, internal position. Cloning of the woodchuck
hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element at a defined position in
the targeted vector allowed selective accumulation of the genomic transcripts
with respect to the internal RNA transcript, with no loss of cell-type
restriction. A critical advantage of this targeting strategy is the use of a
spliced, major viral transcript to express a therapeutic gene and that of an
internal, independently regulated promoter to express an additional gene for
either cell marking or in vivo selection purposes.

PMCID: PMC136069
PMID: 11907239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 5;99(5):2924-9. Epub 2002 Feb 26.

GATA-1 binding sites mapped in the beta-globin locus by using mammalian chIp-chip
analysis.

Horak CE(1), Mahajan MC, Luscombe NM, Gerstein M, Weissman SM, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The expression of the beta-like globin genes is intricately regulated by a series
of both general and tissue-restricted transcription factors. The hemapoietic
lineage-specific transcription factor GATA-1 is important for erythroid
differentiation and has been implicated in regulating the expression of the
erythroid-specific genes including the genes of the beta-globin locus. In the
human erythroleukemic K562 cell line, only one DNA region has been identified
previously as a putative site of GATA-1 interaction by in vivo footprinting
studies. We mapped GATA-1 binding throughout the beta-globin locus by using
chIp-chip analysis of K562 cells. We found that GATA-1 binds in a region
encompassing the HS2 core element, as was previously identified, and an
additional region of GATA-1 binding upstream of the gammaG gene. This approach
will be of general utility for mapping transcription factor binding sites within 
the beta-globin locus and throughout the genome.

PMCID: PMC122449
PMID: 11867748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Gene. 2002 Jan 23;283(1-2):185-97.

Functional and binding studies of HS3.2 of the beta-globin locus control region.

Molete JM(1), Petrykowska H, Sigg M, Miller W, Hardison R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, 206 Althouse Laboratory, University Park, PA 16802, USA

The distal locus control region (LCR) is required for high-level expression of
the complex of genes (HBBC) encoding the beta-like globins of mammals in
erythroid cells. Several major DNase hypersensitive sites (HSs 1-5) mark the LCR.
Sequence conservation and direct experimental evidence have implicated sequences 
within and between the HS cores in function of the LCR. In this report we confirm
the mapping of a minor HS between HS3 and HS4, called HS3.2, and show that
sequences including it increase the number of random integration sites at which a
drug resistance gene is expressed. We also show that nuclear proteins including
GATA1 and Oct1 bind specifically to sequences within HS3.2. However, the protein 
Pbx1, whose binding site is the best match to one highly conserved sequence, does
not bind strongly. GATA1 and Oct1 also bind in the HS cores of the LCR and to
promoters in HBBC. Their binding to this minor HS suggests that they may be used 
in assembly of a large complex containing multiple regulatory sequences.

PMID: 11867225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Endocrinology. 2002 Mar;143(3):829-36.

Gonadotropins, via cAMP, negatively regulate GATA-1 gene expression in testicular
cells.

Zhang Z(1), Wu AZ, Feng ZM, Mruk D, Cheng CY, Chen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, New York, New York 10021, USA.

We and others demonstrated that the mRNAs encoding GATA-binding proteins, GATA-1 
and GATA-4, were detected in mouse and rat testis, and in isolated rat Sertoli
cells and testicular tumor cell lines derived from Leydig and Sertoli cells. In
this study, we investigated the possible effects of gonadotropins and cAMP on the
expression of GATA-binding protein genes in testicular cells. Unexpectedly, FSH
negatively regulated GATA-1 (but not GATA-4) mRNA in a dose-dependent manner in
primary cultures of rat Sertoli cells isolated from 21-d-old animals. GATA-1 mRNA
was also negatively regulated by cAMP in a dose- and time-dependent manner in
MA-10, a mouse Leydig tumor cell line. When 0.3 mM cAMP was administered to MA-10
cell cultures for 4 h, more than 95% of the GATA-1 mRNA and protein was
abolished. The reduction of GATA-1 mRNA by cAMP can be mimicked by treatment with
forskolin, which elevates intracellular cAMP levels. The inhibitory effect of
cAMP was specific to the GATA-1 gene, given that GATA-4 and alpha-tubulin mRNA
levels were not changed by any of the cAMP treatments. Inhibin alpha-subunit
mRNA, on the other hand, was evidently increased by cAMP treatment in both MA-10 
and Sertoli cells. However, inhibin alpha-subunit mRNA levels were elevated at
60-90 min before the suppression of GATA-1 mRNA detected. The inhibitory effect
of cAMP on GATA-1 mRNA and protein was shown to be specific to testicular cells. 
The GATA-1 mRNA expressed in MEL, a mouse erythroid leukemia cell line, was not
affected by cAMP. The reduction of GATA-1 mRNA by cAMP can be prevented when a
translational inhibitor, cycloheximide, is added. In summary, we demonstrated
that gonadotropins via cAMP negatively regulate the mRNA and protein levels of
GATA-1, but not GATA-4, in testicular cells. The inhibitory effect on GATA-1 gene
expression was specific to testicular cells and was not observed in erythroid
cells.

PMID: 11861504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Development. 2002 Feb;129(3):649-59.

Non-cell autonomous requirement for the bloodless gene in primitive hematopoiesis
of zebrafish.

Liao EC(1), Trede NS, Ransom D, Zapata A, Kieran M, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Vertebrate hematopoiesis occurs in two distinct phases, primitive (embryonic) and
definitive (adult). Genes that are required specifically for the definitive
program, or for both phases of hematopoiesis, have been described. However, a
specific regulator of primitive hematopoiesis has yet to be reported. The
zebrafish bloodless (bls) mutation causes absence of embryonic erythrocytes in a 
dominant but incompletely penetrant manner. Primitive macrophages appear to
develop normally in bls mutants. Although the thymic epithelium forms normally in
bls mutants, lymphoid precursors are absent. Nonetheless, the bloodless mutants
can progress through embryogenesis, where red cells begin to accumulate after 5
days post-fertilization (dpf). Lymphocytes also begin to populate the thymic
organs by 7.5 dpf. Expression analysis of hematopoietic genes suggests that
formation of primitive hematopoietic precursors is deficient in bls mutants and
those few blood precursors that are specified fail to differentiate and undergo
apoptosis. Overexpression of scl, but not bmp4 or gata1, can lead to partial
rescue of embryonic blood cells in bls. Cell transplantation experiments show
that cells derived from bls mutant donors can differentiate into blood cells in a
wild-type host, but wild-type donor cells fail to form blood in the mutant host. 
These observations demonstrate that the bls gene product is uniquely required in 
a non-cell autonomous manner for primitive hematopoiesis, potentially acting via 
regulation of scl.

PMID: 11830566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Blood. 2002 Feb 15;99(4):1305-13.

Negative regulation of erythroblast maturation by Fas-L(+)/TRAIL(+) highly
malignant plasma cells: a major pathogenetic mechanism of anemia in multiple
myeloma.

Silvestris F(1), Cafforio P, Tucci M, Dammacco F.

Author information: 
(1)DIMO, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, Section of
Internal Medicine and Clinical Oncology, University of Bari, Italy.
f.silvestris@dimo.uniba.it

Multiple myeloma (MM) is associated with severe normochromic/normocytic anemia.
This study demonstrates that the abnormal up-regulation of apoptogenic receptors,
including both Fas ligand (L) and tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), by highly malignant myeloma cells is involved 
in the pathogenesis of the ineffective erythropoiesis and chronic exhaustion of
the erythroid matrix. By measuring Fas-L and TRAIL in plasma cells and the
content of glycophorin A (GpA) in erythroblasts from a cohort of 28 untreated,
newly diagnosed patients with MM and 7 with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
significance (MGUS), selected in relation to their peripheral hemoglobin values, 
results showed that both receptors occurred at high levels in 15 severely anemic 
MM patients. Their marrow erythropoietic component was low and included
predominantly immature GpA(+dim) erythroblasts, in contrast with the higher
relative numbers of mature GpA(+bright) erythroid cells observed in the nonanemic
patients and those with MGUS. In cocultures with autologous Fas-L(+)/TRAIL(+)
myeloma cells, the expanded GpA(+dim) erythroid population underwent prompt
apoptosis after direct exposure to malignant plasma cells, whereas erythroblasts 
from nonanemic patients were scarcely affected. The evidence that
Fas-L(+)/TRAIL(+) malignant plasma cells prime erythroblast apoptosis by direct
cytotoxicity was also supported by the increase of FLICE in fresh immature
GpA(+dim) erythroid cells, whereas ICE and caspase-10 increased in subsequent
maturative forms. In addition, GATA-1, a survival factor for erythroid
precursors, was remarkably down-regulated in fresh erythroblasts from the
severely anemic patients. These results indicate that progressive destruction of 
the erythroid matrix in aggressive MM is due to cytotoxic mechanisms based on the
up-regulation in myeloma cells of Fas-L, TRAIL, or both. It is conceivable that
the altered regulation of these receptors defines a peculiar cytotoxic phenotype 
that drives the progression of aggressive MM.

PMID: 11830480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2001 Dec;58(14):2008-17.

Regulation of the transcription factor GATA-1 at the gene and protein level.

Tang XB(1), Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.

GATA-1, an important hematopoietic transcription factor, plays a critical role in
differentiation and maturation of erythroid and megakaryocytic cell lines. GATA-1
appears to serve as a factor for virtually all characterized erythroid and
megakaryocytic-expressed genes. Thus, defining the mechanisms by which the GATA-1
gene and protein are regulated should provide important clues regarding the
establishment of erythroid and megakaryocytic programs of gene expression in
committed cells and their maintenance thereafter in maturing precursors. This
review focuses on the regulation of GATA-1 expression and elucidates the
regulation of GATA-1 at the gene and protein levels. Such research is expected to
provide insights into the mechanisms involved in hematopoietic commitment.

PMID: 11814053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Jan 15;11(2):147-52.

Different substitutions at residue D218 of the X-linked transcription factor
GATA1 lead to altered clinical severity of macrothrombocytopenia and anemia and
are associated with variable skewed X inactivation.

Freson K(1), Matthijs G, Thys C, Mariën P, Hoylaerts MF, Vermylen J, Van Geet C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.

GATA1 is the X-linked transcriptional activator required for megakaryocyte and
erythrocyte differentiation. Missense mutations in the N-terminal zinc finger
(Nf) of GATA1 result in abnormal hematopoiesis, as documented in four families:
the mutation V205M leads to both severe macrothrombocytopenia and
dyserythropoietic anemia, D218G to macrothrombocytopenia and mild
dyserythropoiesis without anemia, G208S to macrothrombocytopenia and R216Q to
macrothrombocytopenia with beta-thalassemia. The three first GATA1 mutants
display a disturbed binding to their essential transcription cofactor FOG1,
whereas the fourth mutant shows an abnormal direct DNA binding. In this study, we
describe a new family with deep macrothrombocytopenia, marked anemia and early
mortality, if untreated, due to a different GATA1 mutation (D218Y) in the same
residue 218 also implicated in the above mentioned milder phenotype. Zinc finger 
interaction studies revealed a stronger loss of affinity of D218Y-GATA1 than of
D218G-GATA1 for FOG1 and a disturbed GATA1 self-association. Comparison of the
phenotypic characteristics of patients from both families revealed that platelet 
and erythrocyte morphology as well as expression levels of the platelet
GATA1-target gene products were more profoundly disturbed for the hemizygote
D218Y mutation. The D218Y allele (as opposed to the D218G allele) was not
expressed in the platelets of a female carrier while her leukocytes showed a
skewed X-inactivation pattern. We conclude that the nature of the amino acid
substitution at position 218 of the Nf of GATA1 is of crucial importance in
determining the severity of the phenotype in X-linked macrothrombocytopenia
patients and possibly also in inducing skewed X inactivation.

PMID: 11809723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Gen Virol. 2002 Feb;83(Pt 2):273-81.

A transgenic mouse model for non-immune hydrops fetalis induced by the NS1 gene
of human parvovirus B19.

Chisaka H(1), Morita E, Murata K, Ishii N, Yaegashi N, Okamura K, Sugamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Human parvovirus B19 (B19) infection during pregnancy is associated with the
adverse foetal outcome known as non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF). Although B19
is known to infect erythroid-lineage cells in vivo as well as in vitro, the
mechanism leading to the occurrence of NIHF is not clear. To investigate the
possible involvement of the B19 non-structural protein NS1 in NIHF, three
independent lines of transgenic mice were generated that expressed NS1 under the 
control of the Cre-loxP system and the GATA1 promoter. Two of the three lines
expressed NS1 in erythroid-lineage cells. Most of the transgenic mice died at the
embryonic stage, some of which developed hydropic changes caused by severe
anaemia at embryonic day 15.5 (E15.5). Histological examination of embryos at
E15.5 showed significantly fewer erythropoietic islands in the liver parenchyma, 
whereas their hearts showed no abnormal signs, such as cardiomegaly and apoptotic
cells. The NS1-transgenic mouse lines established here provide an animal model
for human NIHF and suggest that NS1 plays a crucial role in the adverse outcome
associated with intrauterine B19 infection in humans.

PMID: 11807219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Development. 2002 Jan;129(2):539-49.

The BMP/BMPR/Smad pathway directs expression of the erythroid-specific EKLF and
GATA1 transcription factors during embryoid body differentiation in serum-free
media.

Adelman CA(1), Chattopadhyay S, Bieker JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Erythroid cell-specific gene regulation during terminal differentiation is
controlled by transcriptional regulators, such as EKLF and GATA1, that themselves
exhibit tissue-restricted expression patterns. Their early expression, already in
evidence within multipotential hematopoietic cell lines, has made it difficult to
determine what extracellular effectors and transduction mechanisms might be
directing the onset of their own transcription during embryogenesis. To
circumvent this problem, we have taken the novel approach of investigating
whether the ability of embryonic stem (ES) cells to mimic early developmental
patterns of cellular expression during embryoid body (EB) differentiation can
address this issue. We first established conditions whereby EBs could form
efficiently in the absence of serum. Surprisingly, in addition to mesoderm, these
cells expressed hemangioblast and hematopoietic markers. However, they did not
express the committed erythroid markers EKLF and GATA1, nor the terminally
differentiated beta-like globin markers. Using this system, we determined that EB
differentiation in BMP4 was necessary and sufficient to recover EKLF and GATA1
expression and could be further stimulated by the inclusion of VEGF, SCF,
erythropoietin and thyroid hormone. EBs were competent to respond to BMP4 only
until day 4 of differentiation, which coincides with the normal onset of EKLF
expression. The direct involvement of the BMP/Smad pathway in this induction
process was further verified by showing that erythroid expression of a dominant
negative BMP1B receptor or of the inhibitory Smad6 protein prevented induction of
EKLF or GATA1 even in the presence of serum. Although Smad1, Smad5 and Smad8 are 
all expressed in the EBs, BMP4 induction of EKLF and GATA1 transcription is not
immediate. These data implicate the BMP/Smad induction system as being a crucial 
pathway to direct the onset of EKLF and GATA1 expression during hematopoietic
differentiation and demonstrate that EB differentiation can be manipulated to
study induction of specific genes that are expressed early within a lineage.

PMID: 11807044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Blood. 2002 Feb 1;99(3):898-904.

Erythropoietin receptor-dependent erythroid colony-forming unit development:
capacities of Y343 and phosphotyrosine-null receptor forms.

Miller CP(1), Heilman DW, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802, USA.

Red cell development depends on the binding of erythropoietin (EPO) to receptors 
expressed by erythroid colony-forming units (CFUe) and the subsequent activation 
of receptor-bound Janus kinase (Jak2). Jak2 then mediates the phosphorylation of 
receptor tyrosine sites and the recruitment of 25 or more Src homology 2
domain-encoding proteins and associated factors. Previous studies have shown that
an EPO receptor form containing Jak2-binding domains plus a single
phosphotyrosine(343) (PY(343))-STAT5-binding site provides all signals needed for
erythroid cell development. However, roles for PY(343) and STAT5 remain
controversial, and findings regarding PY-null receptor activities and
erythropoiesis in STAT5-deficient mice are disparate. To study activities of a
PY-null EPO receptor in primary cells while avoiding compensatory mechanisms, a
form retaining domains for Jak2 binding and activation, but lacking all
cytoplasmic tyrosine sites, was expressed in transgenic mice from a GATA1
gene-derived vector as a human epidermal growth factor receptor- murine EPO
receptor chimera (EE-T-Y343F). The bio-signaling capacities of this receptor form
were investigated in CFUe from thiamphenicol-treated mice. Interestingly, this
PY-null EPO receptor form supported CFUe development (in the absence of
detectable STAT5 activation) at efficiencies within 3-fold of those levels
mediated by either an EE-T-Y343 form or the endogenous EPO receptor. However,
EE-T-Y343F-dependent Ter119(+) erythroblast maturation was attenuated. In tests
of cosignaling with c-Kit, EE-T-Y343F nonetheless retained full capacity to
synergize with c-Kit in promoting erythroid progenitor cell proliferation. Thus, 
EPO receptor PY-dependent events can assist late erythropoiesis but may be
nonessential for EPO receptor-c-Kit synergy.

PMID: 11806992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Res. 2001 Dec;11(4):301-10.

Function of GATA transcription factors in hydroxyurea-induced HEL cells.

Zhang SB(1), He QY, Zhao H, Gui CY, Jiang C, Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

HEL cells, a human erythroleukemia cell line, mainly express the fetal (gamma)
globin gene and trace amount of the embryonic (epsilon) globin gene, but not
adult (beta) globin gene. Here we show that hydroxyurea (HU) can induce HEL cells
to express adult (beta) globin gene and lead these cells to terminal
differentiation. Results showed in Gel mobility shift assays that GATA factors
could specifically bind to the regulatory elements of human beta-globin gene,
including the proximal regulatory element (the beta-promoter) and the distal
regulatory elements (the DNase I hypersensitive sites in the LCR, HS2-HS4 core
sequences). However, the DNA binding patterns of GATA factors were quite
different between HU-induced and uninduced HEL cells. Western-blot analysis of
nuclear extracts from both the uninduced and HU-induced HEL cells revealed that
the level of GATA-2 transcription factor decreased, whereas the level of GATA-1
transcription factor increased following the time of hydroxyurea induction.
Furthermore, using RT-PCR analysis the expression of human beta-globin gene in
HU-induced HEL cells could be blocked again when HEL cells were incubated in the 
presence of antisense oligonucleotides for hGATA-1, suggesting that the
upregulation of hGATA-1 transcription factor might be critical for the expression
of human beta-globin gene in HU-induced HEL cells.

PMID: 11787775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Virol. 2002 Jan;76(1):303-12.

In vivo analysis of retroviral enhancer mutations in hematopoietic cells:
SP1/EGR1 and ETS/GATA motifs contribute to long terminal repeat specificity.

Wahlers A(1), Zipfel PF, Schwieger M, Ostertag W, Baum C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Virus Genetics, Heinrich Pette Institute, D-20251
Hamburg, Germany.

The objective of this work was to identify, in the context of chromosomally
integrated DNA, the contribution of defined transcription factor binding motifs
to the function of a complex retrovirus enhancer in hematopoietic cells in vivo. 
Repopulating murine hematopoietic cells were transduced with equal gene dosages
of replication-incompetent retrovirus vectors encoding enhanced green fluorescent
protein. Enhancer sequences were derived from mouse spleen focus-forming virus.
Destruction of GC-rich sites representing overlapping targets for SP1 or EGR1
uniformly attenuated gene expression (approximately 25 to 70% of wild-type
levels) in all hematopoietic lineages, as shown by multicolor flow cytometry of
peripheral blood and bone marrow cells at various time points
posttransplantation. In contrast, a point mutation within a dual ETS/GATA motif
that abolished transactivation by ETS factors but not by GATA-1 slightly
increased activity in erythroid cells and significantly attenuated enhancer
function in T lymphocytes. This study shows that controlled gene transfer in
transplantable hematopoietic cells allows a functional analysis of distinct cis
elements within a complex retrovirus enhancer, as required for the
characterization and engineering of various cellular and viral regulatory
sequences in basic research and gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC135690
PMID: 11739695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Blood. 2001 Dec 15;98(13):3618-25.

Human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (hGM-CSF) stimulates
primitive and definitive erythropoiesis in mouse embryos expressing hGM-CSF
receptors but not erythropoietin receptors.

Hisakawa H(1), Sugiyama D, Nishijima I, Xu MJ, Wu H, Nakao K, Watanabe S, Katsuki
M, Asano S, Arai K, Nakahata T, Tsuji K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Division of DNA Biology and Embryo
Engineering, Center for Experimental Medicine, The Institute of Medical Science, 
The University of Tokyo, Japan.

Although erythropoietin (EPO) and its receptor (EPOR) are crucial for the
proliferation, survival, and terminal differentiation of erythroid progenitors,
it remains to be elucidated whether EPOR-unique signaling is required for
erythropoiesis. To address this issue, human granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (hGM-CSF) receptor (hGMR)-transgenic mice and
heterozygous EPOR mutant mice were crossed by in vitro fertilization. In
methylcellulose clonal culture of fetal liver (FL) cells of generated
hGMR-expressing EPOR(-/-) embryos at embryonic day (E) 12.5 of gestation, hGM-CSF
stimulated erythroid colony formation under serum-containing and serum-free
conditions. Analysis of globin expression in individual erythrocyte-containing
colonies formed from E12.5 FL cells showed that hGM-CSF supports primitive and
definitive erythropoiesis even in EPOR(-/-) embryos. In comparison of activities 
between hGM-CSF and EPO in hGMR-expressing EPOR(+/+) embryos, the 2 substances
supported the formation of similar numbers of erythroid colonies in clonal
culture of E12.5 FL cells; enhanced adult, but not embryonic, globin synthesis;
and induced increase of GATA-1 expression and decrease of erythroid Kruppel-like 
factor and cMyb expression in the FL cells. On the other hand, in E8.0 yolk sac
erythropoiesis, both substances had a similar effect on erythroid colony
formation, but hGM-CSF induced an increase of beta-major globin expression, while
EPO did not. All together, the results of the present study demonstrated that
hGM-CSF can stimulate the proliferation and differentiation of primitive and
definitive erythroid cells independently of EPOR signal if they express hGMR, and
the activity is comparable to that of EPO in definitive, but not primitive,
erythropoiesis.

PMID: 11739165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Genes Cells. 2001 Dec;6(12):1113-27.

Step-wise divergence of primitive and definitive haematopoietic and endothelial
cell lineages during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Fujimoto T(1), Ogawa M, Minegishi N, Yoshida H, Yokomizo T, Yamamoto M, Nishikawa
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan. tfujimot@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The developmental processes leading from the mesoderm to primitive
and definitive haematopoietic and endothelial lineages, although of great
importance, are still poorly defined. Recent studies have suggested a model in
which common precursors give rise to endothelial progenitors and haematopoietic
progenitors, the latter subsequently generating both primitive and definitive
haematopoietic lineages. However, this model is contradicted by findings that
suggest the emergence of haematopoietic cells from the endothelial lineage.
RESULTS: We found sequential steps in the differentiation of FLK1+ mesoderm into 
haematopoietic and endothelial lineages in an in vitro differentiation system of 
embryonic stem (ES) cells: (i) the GATA-1+ subset of FLK1+ mesodermal cells loses
the capacity to give rise to endothelial cells and is restricted to primitive
erythroid, macrophage and definitive erythroid progenitors; (ii) the remaining
GATA-1- cells give rise to VE-cadherin+ endothelial cells; and subsequently (iii)
multiple definitive haematopoietic progenitors and endothelial cells branch off
from a subset of VE-cadherin+ cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations strongly suggest that the divergence of primitive
and multilineage definitive haematopoietic/endothelial lineages occurs first, and
then multilineage definitive haematopoietic progenitors arise from VE-cadherin+
endothelial cells in the development of haematopoietic and endothelial cells.

PMID: 11737271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3585-92. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Defects of the heart, eye, and megakaryocytes in peroxisome proliferator
activator receptor-binding protein (PBP) null embryos implicate GATA family of
transcription factors.

Crawford SE(1), Qi C, Misra P, Stellmach V, Rao MS, Engel JD, Zhu Y, Reddy JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611-3008, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR)-binding protein (PBP) is an
important coactivator for PPARgamma and other nuclear receptors. It has been
identified as an integral component of a multiprotein thyroid hormone
receptor-associated protein/vitamin D(3) receptor-interacting
protein/activator-recruited cofactor complexes required for transcriptional
activity. Here, we show that PBP is critical for the development of placenta and 
for the normal embryonic development of the heart, eye, vascular, and
hematopoietic systems. The primary functional cause of embryonic lethality at
embryonic day11.5 observed with PBP null mutation was cardiac failure because of 
noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium and resultant ventricular dilatation.
There was a paucity of retinal pigment, defective lens formation, excessive
systemic angiogenesis, a deficiency in the number of megakaryocytes, and an
arrest in erythrocytic differentiation. Some of these defects involve PPARgamma
and retinoid-sensitive sites, whereas others have not been recognized in the
PPAR-signaling pathway. Phenotypic changes in four organ systems observed in PBP 
null mice overlapped with those in mice deficient in members of GATA, a family of
transcription factors known to regulate differentiation of megakaryocytes,
erythrocytes, and adipocytes. We demonstrate that PBP interacts with all five
GATA factors analyzed, GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3, GATA-4, and GATA-6, and show that 
the binding of GATA-1, GATA-4, and GATA-6 to PBP is not dependent on the nuclear 
receptor recognition sequence motif LXXLL (where L is leucine and X is any amino 
acid) in PBP. Coexpression of PBP with GATA-3 markedly enhanced transcriptional
activity of GATA-3 in nonhematopoietic cells. These observations identify the
GATA family of transcription factors as a new interacting partner of PBP and
demonstrate that PBP is essential for normal development of vital organ systems.

PMID: 11724781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Protein Expr Purif. 2001 Dec;23(3):426-31.

Purification of human recombinant GATA-1 from bacteria: implication for
protein-protein interaction studies.

Doubeikovskaia Z(1), Aries A, Jeannesson P, Morle F, Doubeikovski A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute Biochemistry and Physiology of Microorganisms, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Prospekt Nauki, 5, Pushchino Moscow Region, 142290, Russia.
douba@rambler.ru

GATA-1 is a key regulator of terminal erythroid differentiation in mammals and
birds. The structural and biochemical studies of human GATA-1 (hGATA-1) are
limited by the difficulty of its purification in a sufficient amount. Here we
describe the procedure for obtaining pure bacterial recombinant hGATA-1 in an
active functional state. We demonstrate that this protein may be successfully
used for preparing an affinity column, producing GATA-1-specific rabbit
polyclonal antibodies, and studying DNA-protein and protein-protein interactions.

Copyright 2001 Elsevier Science.

PMID: 11722179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Blood. 2001 Nov 1;98(9):2681-8.

X-linked thrombocytopenia caused by a novel mutation of GATA-1.

Mehaffey MG(1), Newton AL, Gandhi MJ, Crossley M, Drachman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Puget Sound Blood Center and Program, Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

A family with recessive X-linked thrombocytopenia affecting 4 males in 2
generations, characterized by macrothrombocytopenia, profound bleeding, and mild 
dyserythropoiesis, is described. Microsatellite linkage analysis identified a
region of the X chromosome including the GATA-1 gene, which encodes a critical
transcription factor involved in erythrocyte and megakaryocyte development. By
sequencing the entire coding region of GATA-1, a 2-base mutation was detected
that results in a single amino acid substitution (glycine 208 to serine) within a
highly conserved portion of the N-terminal zinc finger domain. Restriction
fragment length polymorphism confirmed that this novel mutation segregated with
the affected males and female carrier. Although not required for DNA binding,
Gly208 of GATA-1 is involved in direct interaction with Friend of GATA-1 (FOG), a
cofactor required for normal megakaryocytic and erythroid development. These
results demonstrate that the GATA-1-FOG interaction is partially disrupted by the
mutation and that the greatest effect involves contact with the FOG zinc finger
9. These findings help describe a novel mutation of GATA-1 in humans as a cause
of X-linked thrombocytopenia, and they confirm the vital role played by this
transcription factor during in vivo megakaryocyte development.

PMID: 11675338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):29-43.

The role of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in vasculogenesis,
angiogenesis, and hematopoiesis in zebrafish development.

Liang D(1), Chang JR, Chin AJ, Smith A, Kelly C, Weinberg ES, Ge R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore
119260.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF, VEGF-A), a selective mitogen for
endothelial cells is a critical factor for vascular development. Two isoforms
that differ in the presence of exons 6 and 7, Vegf(165) and Vegf(121), are the
dominant forms expressed in zebrafish embryo. Simultaneous overexpression of both
isoforms in the embryo results in increased production of flk1, tie1, scl, and
gata1 transcripts, indicating a stimulation of both endothelial and hematopoietic
lineages. We also demonstrate that vegf can stimulate hematopoiesis in zebrafish 
by promoting the formation of terminally differentiated red blood cells.
Simultaneous overexpression of both isoforms also causes ectopic vasculature and 
blood cells in many of the injected embryos as well as pericardial edema in later
stage embryos. Overexpression of vegf also resulted in earlier onset of flk1,
tie1, scl, and gata1 expression in the embryo, indicating a possible role of vegf
in stimulating the differentiation of both vascular and hematopoietic lineages.
Co-injection of RNAs for both isoforms results in increased expression of three
of these markers over and above that observed when either RNA is singly injected 
and analysis of vegf expression in the notochord mutants no tail and floating
head suggests that the notochord patterns the formation of the dorsal aorta by
stimulating adjacent somite cells to express vegf, which in turn functions as a
signal in dorsal aorta patterning. Finally, studies of vegf expression in cloche 
mutant indicate that vegf expression is generally independent of cloche function.
These results show that in the zebrafish embryo, vegf can not only stimulate
endothelial cell differentiation but also hematopoiesis. Moreover, these effects 
are most dramatic when both vegf isoforms are co-expressed, indicating a
synergistic effect of the expression of the two forms of the VEGF protein.

PMID: 11578859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Blood. 2001 Oct 1;98(7):2248-55.

GATA1-Cre mediates Piga gene inactivation in the erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage
and leads to circulating red cells with a partial deficiency in glycosyl
phosphatidylinositol-linked proteins (paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria type II
cells).

Jasinski M(1), Keller P, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH, Bessler M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.

Patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) have blood cells
deficient in glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked proteins owing to a
somatic mutation in the X-linked PIGA gene. To target Piga recombination to the
erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage in mice, the Cre/loxP system was used, and Cre
was expressed under the transcriptional regulatory sequences of GATA-1. Breeding 
of GATA1-cre (G) transgenic mice with mice carrying a floxed Piga (L) allele was 
associated with high embryonic lethality. However, double-transgenic (GL) mice
that escaped early recombination looked healthy and were observed for 16 months. 
Flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood cells showed that GL mice had up to 
100% of red cells deficient in GPI-linked proteins. The loss of GPI-linked
proteins on the cell surface occurred late in erythroid differentiation, causing 
a proportion of red cells to express low residual levels of GPI-linked proteins. 
Red cells with residual expression of GPI-linked proteins showed an intermediate 
sensitivity toward complement and thus resemble PNH type II cells in patients
with PNH. Recombination of the floxed Piga allele was also detected in cultured
megakaryocytes, mast cells, and eosinophils, but not in neutrophils, lymphocytes,
or nonhematopoietic tissues. In summary, GATA1-Cre causes high-efficiency Piga
gene inactivation in a GATA-1-specific pattern. For the first time, mice were
generated that have almost 100% of red cells deficient in GPI-linked proteins.
These animals will be valuable to further investigate the consequences of
GPI-anchor deficiency on erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.

PMID: 11568013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. EMBO J. 2001 Sep 17;20(18):5250-60.

In vivo requirements for GATA-1 functional domains during primitive and
definitive erythropoiesis.

Shimizu R(1), Takahashi S, Ohneda K, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

GATA-1 is a transcription factor essential for erythroid/megakaryocytic cell
differentiation. To investigate the contribution of individual domains of GATA-1 
to its activity, transgenic mice expressing either an N-terminus, or an N- or
C-terminal zinc finger deletion of GATA-1 (Delta NT, Delta NF or Delta CF,
respectively) were generated and crossed to GATA-1 germline mutant (GATA-1.05)
mice. Since the GATA-1 gene is located on the X-chromosome, male GATA-1 mutants
die by embryonic day 12.5. Both Delta NF and Delta CF transgenes failed to rescue
the GATA-1.05/Y pups. However, transgenic mice expressing Delta NT, but not the
Delta NF protein, were able to rescue definitive hematopoiesis. In embryos, while
neither the Delta CF protein nor a mutant missing both N-terminal domains (Delta 
NTNF) was able to support primitive erythropoiesis, the two independent Delta NT 
and Delta NF mutants could support primitive erythropoiesis. Thus,
lineage-specific transgenic rescue of the GATA-1 mutant mouse revealed novel
properties that are conferred by specific domains of GATA-1 during primitive and 
definitive erythropoiesis, and demonstrate that the NT and NF moieties lend
complementary, but distinguishable properties to the function of GATA-1.

PMCID: PMC125635
PMID: 11566888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Stem Cells. 2001;19(5):397-407.

Molecular and transcriptional regulation of megakaryocyte differentiation.

Shivdasani RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Adult Oncology and Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. ramesh_shivdasani@dfci.harvard.edu

Megakaryocytes, among the rarest of hematopoietic cells, serve the essential
function of producing numerous platelets. Genetic studies have recently provided 
rich insights into the molecular and transcriptional regulation of megakaryocyte 
differentiation and thrombopoiesis. Three transcription factors, GATA-1, FOG-1,
and NF-E2, are essential regulators of distinct stages in megakaryocyte
differentiation, extending from the birth of early committed progenitors to the
final step of platelet release; a fourth factor, Fli-1, likely also plays an
important role. The putative transcriptional targets of these regulators,
including the NF-E2-dependent hematopoietic-specific beta-tubulin isoform beta1, 
deepen our understanding of molecular mechanisms in platelet biogenesis. The
study of rare syndromes of inherited thrombocytopenia in mice and man has also
refined the emerging picture of megakaryocyte maturation. Synthesis of
platelet-specific organelles is mediated by a variety of regulators of
intracellular vesicle membrane fusion, and platelet release is coordinated
through extensive and dynamic reorganization of the actin and microtubule
cytoskeletons. As in other aspects of hematopoiesis, characterization of
recurrent chromosomal translocations in human leukemias provides an added
dimension to the molecular underpinnings of megakaryocyte differentiation. Long
regarded as a mysterious cell, the megakaryocyte is thus yielding many of its
secrets, and mechanisms of thrombopoiesis are becoming clearer. Although this
review focuses on transcriptional control mechanisms, it also discusses recent
advances in broader consideration of the birth of platelets.

PMID: 11553848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Curr Biol. 2001 Sep 4;11(17):1353-7.

Critical role of biklf in erythroid cell differentiation in zebrafish.

Kawahara A(1), Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Hematopoietic cells arise from ventral mesoderm in different vertebrates, but the
mechanisms through which various factors contribute to the hematopoietic
processes, including erythrogenesis, remain incompletely understood. The
Krüppel-like transcription factor Biklf is preferentially expressed in blood
islands throughout zebrafish embryogenesis, marking the region of future
erythropoiesis [1]. In this paper, we show that expression of biklf is
significantly suppressed in the blood-less mutants vampire and m683 in which
primitive hematopoiesis is impaired. Knockdown of biklf using morpholino-based
antisense oligonucleotides (biklf-MO) led to a potent reduction in the number of 
circulating blood cells and deficiency in hemoglobin production. Consistently, we
found that the expression of beta(e3)globin is strongly suppressed in
biklf-MO-injected embryos, while gata1 expression is partly inhibited at the
10-somite stage. In addition, analysis of reporter constructs driven by the GATA1
and beta-globin promoters showed that Biklf can positively regulate both genes.
These results indicate that Biklf is required for erythroid cell differentiation 
in zebrafish.

PMID: 11553329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43428-34. Epub 2001 Sep 5.

Thyroid hormone receptor-interacting protein 1 modulates cytokine and nuclear
hormone signaling in erythroid cells.

Ingley E(1), Chappell D, Poon SY, Sarna MK, Beaumont JG, Williams JH, Stillitano 
JP, Tsai S, Leedman PJ, Tilbrook PA, Klinken SP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cancer Medicine, Western Australian Institute for Medical
Research, Royal Perth Hospital and the Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6000, Australia.

Erythropoietin (Epo) and thyroid hormone (T(3)) are key molecules in the
development of red blood cells. We have shown previously that the tyrosine kinase
Lyn is involved in differentiation signals emanating from an activated
erythropoietin receptor. Here we demonstrate that Lyn interacts with thyroid
hormone receptor-interacting protein 1 (Trip-1), a transcriptional regulator
associated with the T(3) receptor, providing a link between the Epo and T(3)
signaling pathways. Trip-1 co-localized with Lyn and the T(3) receptor alpha in
the cytoplasm/plasma membrane of erythroid cells but translocated to discrete
nuclear foci shortly after Epo-induced differentiation. Our data reveal that T(3)
stimulated the proliferation of immature erythroid cells, and inhibited
maturation promoted by erythropoietin. Removal of T(3) reduced cell division and 
enhanced terminal differentiation. This was accompanied by large increases in the
cell cycle inhibitor p27(Kip1) and by increasing expression of erythroid
transcription factors GATA-1, EKLF, and NF-E2. Strikingly, a truncated Trip-1
inhibited both erythropoietin-induced maturation and T(3)-initiated cell
division. This mutant Trip-1 acted in a dominant negative fashion by eliminating 
endogenous Lyn, elevating p27(Kip1), and blocking T(3) response elements. These
data demonstrate that Trip-1 can simultaneously modulate responses involving both
cytokine and nuclear receptors.

PMID: 11544260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Blood. 2001 Sep 15;98(6):1949-54.

Regulation of expression of murine transferrin receptor 2.

Kawabata H(1), Germain RS, Ikezoe T, Tong X, Green EM, Gombart AF, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Burns and Allen
Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of California Los
Angeles School of Medicine, USA.

Complementary and genomic DNA for the murine transferrin receptor 2 (TfR2) were
cloned and mapped to chromosome 5. Northern blot analysis showed that high levels
of expression of murine TfR2 occurred in the liver, whereas expression of TfR1 in
the liver was relatively low. During liver development, TfR2 was up-regulated and
TfR1 was down-regulated. During erythrocytic differentiation of murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells induced by dimethylsulfoxide, expression of TfR1
increased, whereas TfR2 decreased. In MEL cells, expression of TfR1 was induced
by desferrioxamine, an iron chelator, and it was reduced by ferric nitrate. In
contrast, levels of TfR2 were not affected by the cellular iron status. Reporter 
assay showed that GATA-1, an erythroid-specific transcription factor essential
for erythrocytic differentiation at relatively early stages, enhanced TfR2
promoter activity. Interestingly, FOG-1, a cofactor of GATA-1 required for
erythrocyte maturation, repressed the enhancement of the activity by GATA-1.
Also, CCAAT-enhancer binding protein, which is abundant in liver, enhanced the
promoter activity. Thus, tissue distribution of TfR2 was consistent with the
reporter assays. Expression profiles of TfR2 were different from those of TfR1,
suggesting unique functions for TfR2, which may be involved in iron metabolism,
hepatocyte function, and erythrocytic differentiation.

PMID: 11535534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Development. 2001 Jun;128(12):2341-50.

Hematopoietic regulatory domain of gata1 gene is positively regulated by GATA1
protein in zebrafish embryos.

Kobayashi M(1), Nishikawa K, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Expression of gata1 is regulated through multiple cis-acting GATA motifs. To
elucidate regulatory mechanisms of the gata1 gene, we have used zebrafish. To
this end, we isolated and analyzed zebrafish gata1 genomic DNA, which resulted in
the discovery of a novel intron that was unknown in previous analyses. This
intron corresponds to the first intron of other vertebrate Gata1 genes. GFP
reporter analyses revealed that this intron and a distal double GATA motif in the
regulatory region are important for the regulation of zebrafish gata1 gene
expression. To examine whether GATA1 regulates its own gene expression, we
microinjected into embryos a GFP reporter gene linked successively to the gata1
gene regulatory region and to GATA1 mRNA. Surprisingly, ectopic expression of the
reporter gene was induced at the site of GATA1 overexpression and was dependent
on the distal double GATA motif. Functional domain analyses using transgenic fish
lines that harbor the gata1-GFP reporter construct revealed that both the N- and 
C-terminal zinc-finger domains of GATA1, hence intact GATA1 function, are
required for the ectopic GFP expression. These results provide the first in vivo 
evidence that gata1 gene expression undergoes positive autoregulation.

PMID: 11493553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Development. 2001 Jun;128(12):2301-8.

Primitive erythropoiesis in the Xenopus embryo: the synergistic role of LMO-2,
SCL and GATA-binding proteins.

Mead PE(1), Deconinck AE, Huber TL, Orkin SH, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells are derived from ventral mesoderm during vertebrate
development. Gene targeting experiments in the mouse have demonstrated key roles 
for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor SCL and the GATA-binding
protein GATA-1 in hematopoiesis. When overexpressed in Xenopus animal cap
explants, SCL and GATA-1 are each capable of specifying mesoderm to become blood.
Forced expression of either factor in whole embryos, however, does not lead to
ectopic blood formation. This apparent paradox between animal cap assays and
whole embryo phenotype has led to the hypothesis that additional factors are
involved in specifying hematopoietic mesoderm. SCL and GATA-1 interact in a
transcriptional complex with the LIM domain protein LMO-2. We have cloned the
Xenopus homolog of LMO-2 and show that it is expressed in a similar pattern to
SCL during development. LMO-2 can specify hematopoietic mesoderm in animal cap
assays. SCL and LMO-2 act synergistically to expand the blood island when
overexpressed in whole embryos. Furthermore, co-expression of GATA-1 with SCL and
LMO-2 leads to embryos that are ventralized and have blood throughout the
dorsal-ventral axis. The synergistic effect of SCL, LMO-2 and GATA-1, taken
together with the findings that these factors can form a complex in vitro,
suggests that this complex specifies mesoderm to become blood during
embryogenesis.

PMID: 11493549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Androl. 2001 Jul-Aug;22(4):629-39.

E2F and GATA-1 are required for the Sertoli cell-specific promoter activity of
the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene.

Kim JS(1), Griswold MD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington
State University, Pullman 99164-4660, USA.

The follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR) gene is expressed in Sertoli
cells in males and in granulosa cells in females. Cis-acting sequences and
associated binding factors responsible for the transcription of the TATA-less
FSHR gene in Sertoli cells were analyzed with dimethylsulfate (DMS) footprinting 
assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). In vivo footprints in the
core promoter using nuclear proteins from Sertoli cells identified several
protected sequences, including an inverted GATA (TATC, -88/-85), and an E2F
(TTTCGCG, -45/-39) motif. EMSA showed the presence of one or more
sequence-specific proteins interacting with these potential regulatory elements. 
Antibody-supershift assays as well as competition assays further revealed that
testis-specific GATA-1 recognized the inverted GATA element. The functional role 
of the potential cis-acting elements was analyzed by transient transfection
assays with and without mutations of the putative elements. The mutational
analysis indicated that the GATA and E2F elements were each required for optimal 
promoter activity. The effects of each of the promoter elements was examined in
transfections in which mutations were made in each of the known regulatory sites,
including the E box, GATA, and E2F sites in various combinations. All of these
sites contribute to the maximum promoter activity such that mutations of the E
box, GATA, and E2F sites eliminated nearly all promoter activity.

PMID: 11451360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 21;276(38):35794-801. Epub 2001 Jul 9.

The N-terminal zinc finger of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 binds
GATC motifs in DNA.

Newton A(1), Mackay J, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, G08, University of Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia 2006.

The mammalian transcription factor GATA-1 is required for normal erythroid and
megakaryocytic development. GATA-1 contains two zinc fingers, the C-terminal
finger, which is known to bind (A/T)GATA(A/G) motifs in DNA and the N-finger,
which is important for interacting with co-regulatory proteins such as Friend of 
GATA (FOG). We now show that, like the C-finger, the N-finger of GATA-1 is also
capable of binding DNA but recognizes distinct sequences with the core GATC. We
demonstrate that the GATA-1 N-finger can bind these sequences in vitro and that
in cellular assays, GATA-1 can activate promoters containing GATC motifs.
Experiments with mutant GATA-1 proteins confirm the importance of the N-finger,
as the C-finger is not required for transactivation from GATC sites. Recently
four naturally occurring mutations in GATA-1 have been shown to be associated
with familial blood disorders. These mutations all map to the N-finger domain. We
have investigated the effect of these mutations on the recognition of GATC sites 
by the N-finger and show that one mutation R216Q abolishes DNA binding, whereas
the others have only minor effects.

PMID: 11445591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Blood. 2001 Jul 1;98(1):85-92.

Platelet characteristics in patients with X-linked macrothrombocytopenia because 
of a novel GATA1 mutation.

Freson K(1), Devriendt K, Matthijs G, Van Hoof A, De Vos R, Thys C, Minner K,
Hoylaerts MF, Vermylen J, Van Geet C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Center for Human Genetics,
Department of Pathology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

A new mutation is described in the X-linked gene GATA1, resulting in
macrothrombocytopenia and mild dyserythropoietic features but no marked anemia in
a 4-generation family. The molecular basis for the observed phenotype is a
substitution of glycine for aspartate in the strictly conserved codon 218 (D218G)
of the amino-terminal zinc finger loop of the transcription factor GATA1. Zinc
finger interaction studies demonstrated that this mutation results in a weak loss
of affinity of GATA1 for its essential cofactor FOG1, whereas direct D218G-GATA1 
binding to DNA was normal. The phenotypic effects of this mutation in the
patients' platelets have been studied. Semiquantitative RNA analysis, normalized 
for beta-actin messenger RNA, showed extremely low transcription of the GATA1
target genes GPIbbeta and GPIX but also a significantly lower expression of the
nondirectly GATA1-regulated Gsalpha gene, suggestive of incomplete megakaryocyte 
maturation. In contrast, GPIIIa expression was close to normal in agreement with 
its early appearance during megakaryocyte differentiation. Flow cytometric
analysis of patient platelets confirmed the existence of a platelet population
with abnormal size distribution and reduced GPIb complex levels but with normal
GPIIIa expression. It also showed the presence of very immature platelets lacking
almost all membrane glycoproteins studied (GPIbalpha, GPIbbeta, GPIIIa, GPIX, and
GPV). Patients' platelets showed weak ristocetin-induced agglutination,
compatible with the disturbed GPIb complex. Accordingly, electron microscopy of
the patients' platelets revealed giant platelets with cytoplasmic clusters
consisting of smooth endoplasmic reticulum and abnormal membrane complexes. In
conclusion, GATA1 mutations can lead to isolated X-linked macrothrombocytopenia
without anemia.

PMID: 11418466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Apr 13;282(4):940-6.

Stem cell factor and interleukin-3 induce stepwise generation of erythroid
precursor cells from a basic fibroblast growth factor-dependent hematopoietic
stem cell line, A-6.

Anzai H(1), Ikawa Y, Atsumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Science, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1, Koyadai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0074, Japan.

A multipotent immature myeloid cell population was produced from a basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)-dependent hematopoietic stem cell line, A-6, when
cultured with stem cell factor (SCF) replacing bFGF. Those cells were positive
for stem cell markers, c-kit and CD34, and a myeloid cell marker, F4/80. Some
cell fractions were also positive for Mac-1, a macrophage marker or Gr-1, a
granulocytic maker, but negative for an erythroid marker TER119. They also showed
the expression of mRNA for the myeloid-specific PU.1 but did not that for the
erythroid-specific GATA-1. Among various cytokines, interleukin-3 (IL-3) induced 
erythroid precursor cells that expressed the erythroid-specific GATA-1 and
beta-major globin. The quantitative analysis showed that erythroid precursor
cells were newly produced from the immature myeloid cells by cultivation with
IL-3. SCF and IL-3 induced stepwise generation of erythroid precursor cells from 
an A-6 hematopoietic stem cell line.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11352642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Blood. 2001 May 15;97(10):3040-50.

Accentuated response to phenylhydrazine and erythropoietin in mice genetically
impaired for their GATA-1 expression (GATA-1(low) mice).

Vannucchi AM(1), Bianchi L, Cellai C, Paoletti F, Carrai V, Calzolari A,
Centurione L, Lorenzini R, Carta C, Alfani E, Sanchez M, Migliaccio G, Migliaccio
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Istituto di Oncologia and Patologia Sperimentali,
Istituto di Anatomia Patologica, University of Florence, Italy.

The response of mice genetically unable to up-regulate GATA-1 expression
(GATA-1(low) mice) to acute (phenylhydrazine [PHZ]-induced anemia) and chronic
(in vivo treatment for 5 days with 10 U erythropoietin [EPO] per mouse) erythroid
stimuli was investigated. Adult GATA-1(low) mice are profoundly thrombocytopenic 
(platelet counts [x 10(9)/L] 82.0 +/- 28.0 vs 840 +/- 170.0 of their control
littermates, P <.001) but have a normal hematocrit (Hct) (approximately.47
proportion of 1.0 [47%]). The spleens of these mutants are 2.5-fold larger than
normal and contain 5-fold more megakaryocytic (4A5(+)), erythroid (TER-119(+)),
and bipotent (erythroid/megakaryocytic, TER-119(+)/4A5(+)) precursor cells. Both 
the marrow and the spleen of these animals contain higher frequencies of
burst-forming units-erythroid (BFU-E)- and colony-forming units-erythroid
(CFU-E)-derived colonies (2-fold and 6-fold, respectively) than their normal
littermates. The GATA-1(low) mice recover 2 days faster from the PHZ-induced
anemia than their normal littermates (P <.01). In response to EPO, the Hct of the
GATA-1(low) mice raised to.68 proportion of 1.0 (68%) vs the.55 proportion of 1.0
(55%) reached by the controls (P <.01). Both the GATA-1(low) and the normal mice 
respond to PHZ and EPO with similar (2- to 3-fold) increases in size and
cellularity of the spleen (increases are limited mostly to cells, both progenitor
and precursor, of the erythroid lineage). However, in spite of the similar
relative cellular increases, the increases of all these cell populations are
significantly higher, in absolute cell numbers, in the mutant than in the
wild-type mice. In conclusion, the GATA-1(low) mutation increases the magnitude
of the response to erythroid stimuli as a consequence of the expansion of the
erythroid progenitor cells in their spleen.

PMID: 11342429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Eur J Biochem. 2001 May;268(9):2658-68.

Regulation of human and mouse procathepsin E gene expression.

Cook M(1), Caswell RC, Richards RJ, Kay J, Tatnell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Wales, UK.

Cathepsin E is an intracellular aspartic proteinase that is considered to have a 
number of physiological roles including antigen processing. Quantitation of
procathepsin E mRNA by LightCyclertrade mark technology indicated that the gene
was transcribed in lung but not in kidney of both human and mouse origin. In
contrast, the transcript was present in mouse spleen and alveolar macrophages but
not in the counterpart tissue/cells from humans. Regulation of human and mouse
procathepsin E gene expression was shown not to be influenced by the extent of
CpG methylation but depended on the recognition of potential binding motifs in
each promoter region by transcription factors such as GATA1, PU1 and YY1, as
revealed by functional analysis using a series of promoter/luciferase reporter
gene fusion constructs. Thus the extent to which the procathepsin E gene is
expressed in a particular cell type may depend on the balance between the effects
produced by positive-acting, cell-specific transcription factors such as GATA1
and PU1 and the negative influence of the ubiquitous YY1 factor. In this way, the
relative abundance and influence of general and cell-specific transcription
factors can govern the production of cathepsin E and thereby account for the
sporadic cell and tissue distribution of this enzyme in different species.

PMID: 11322887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Exp Hematol. 2001 Apr;29(4):507-14.

A role of jumonji gene in proliferation but not differentiation of megakaryocyte 
lineage cells.

Kitajima K(1), Kojima M, Kondo S, Takeuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, 11, Minamiooya, Machida, Tokyo
194-8511, Japan.

In this study, megakaryocytopoiesis was investigated in the recessive mutant
mouse, jumonji, obtained by a gene-trap strategy. We investigated the number of
megakaryocyte progenitors in the fetal liver, yolk sac, and peripheral blood of
jumonji homozygous embryos by in vitro colony forming assay and monitored colony 
formation from single megakaryocyte progenitors. We also investigated the
differentiation of jumonji-deficient megakaryocytes in terms of the expression of
megakaryocyte differentiation markers PF4, CD62P, and GATA-1, proplatelet
formation, cytoplasmic maturation, and endomitosis. We found that the population 
of megakaryocyte progenitors in the fetal liver, yolk sac, and peripheral blood
of jumonji homozygotes increased. A fraction of megakaryocyte progenitors derived
from the fetal liver of jumonji homozygotes formed larger colonies in vitro when 
compared with controls. This abnormality is caused by delayed growth arrest in
the progeny. Immature megakaryocyte progenitors showed this abnormality. The
megakaryocytes of jumonji homozygotes expressed PF4, CD62P, and GATA-1, obtained 
cytoplasmic maturation, extended proplatelet-like processes, and underwent
endomitosis. The loss of the jumonji gene causes an increase in the number of
megakaryocyte lineage cells. Our data suggest that the jumonji gene regulates
proliferation but not differentiation of megakaryocyte lineage cells.

PMID: 11301191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2000 Dec;192(4):259-73.

Expression of transcription factors during megakaryocytic differentiation of
CD34+ cells from human cord blood induced by thrombopoietin.

Terui K(1), Takahashi Y, Kitazawa J, Toki T, Yokoyama M, Ito E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Although normal megakaryocytic development has been shown to require the presence
of functional GATA-1 and NF-E2 transcription factors in vivo, the roles of other 
members of the GATA binding factors and NF-E2 family during megakaryocytic
differentiation are unclear. the present study, the expression of GATA family
members, GATA-1 and GATA-2, a GATA-binding factor, EVI-1, the large subunit of
NF-E2 factor, p45 and the related factors, Nrf1, Nrf2, Nrf3, BACH1, BACH2, and
the small subunit of NF-E2, MAFK and MAFG has been examined in human
megakaryocytic and erythroid cells by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. CD34+ cells isolated from human cord blood were induced to unilineage
megakaryocytic or erythroid differentiation in liquid suspension culture in the
presense of thrombopoietin or erythropoietin, respectively. Each lineage was
identified by monoclonal antibody against GPIIb/IIIa or glycophorin A. In
megakaryocytic culture, p45, Nrf1, Nrf2, BACH1, MAFK and MAFG mRNAs were induced 
similarly to erythroid culture. Nrf3 mRNA was barely detected in both cultures.
BACH2 was induced only in megakaryocytic culture, although the level of
expression was low. Furthermore, the profiles of transcription factors involved
in hematopoiesis, EVI-1 and Ets-1 mRNAs were induced only in megakaryocytic
culture. Megakaryocytic and erythroid differentiation pathways are closely
related to each other, and these two lineage cells share a number of
lineage-specific transcription factors. However, the results showed that the
profile of the expression of these transcription factors in megakaryocytic cells 
is distinct from that of erythroid lineage. The dynamic changes in the levels of 
different transcription factors that occur during primary megakaryocytic
differentiation suggest that the levels of these factors may influence the
progression to specific hematopoietic pathways.

PMID: 11286316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Clin Invest. 2001 Mar;107(6):753-62.

Uroporphyrinogen III synthase erythroid promoter mutations in adjacent GATA1 and 
CP2 elements cause congenital erythropoietic porphyria.

Solis C(1), Aizencang GI, Astrin KH, Bishop DF, Desnick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Fifth Avenue at 
100th Street, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria, an autosomal recessive inborn error of heme 
biosynthesis, results from the markedly deficient activity of uroporphyrinogen
III synthase. Extensive mutation analyses of 40 unrelated patients only
identified approximately 90% of mutant alleles. Sequencing the recently
discovered erythroid-specific promoter in six patients with a single undefined
allele identified four novel mutations clustered in a 20-bp region: (a) a -70T to
C transition in a putative GATA-1 consensus binding element, (b) a -76G to A
transition, (c) a -86C to A transversion in three unrelated patients, and (d) a
-90C to A transversion in a putative CP2 binding motif. Also, a -224T to C
polymorphism was present in approximately 4% of 200 unrelated Caucasian alleles. 
We inserted these mutant sequences into luciferase reporter constructs. When
transfected into K562 erythroid cells, these constructs yielded 3 +/- 1, 54 +/-
3, 43 +/- 6, and 8 +/- 1%, respectively, of the reporter activity conferred by
the wild-type promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that the 
-70C mutation altered GATA1 binding, whereas the adjacent -76A mutation did not. 
Similarly, the -90C mutation altered CP2 binding, whereas the -86A mutation did
not. Thus, these four pathogenic erythroid promoter mutations impaired
erythroid-specific transcription, caused CEP, and identified functionally
important GATA1 and CP2 transcriptional binding elements for erythroid-specific
heme biosynthesis.

PMCID: PMC208941
PMID: 11254675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Gene. 2000 Dec 31;261(2):277-87.

Levels of GATA-1/GATA-2 transcription factors modulate expression of embryonic
and fetal hemoglobins.

Ikonomi P(1), Noguchi CT, Miller W, Kassahun H, Hardison R, Schechter AN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room
9N-307, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1822, MD, Bethesda 20892-1822, USA.

GATA transcription factors bind the consensus sequence WGATAR, present in the
flanking regions of most erythroid specific genes. GATA-1 and GATA-2, coexpressed
in erythroid cells, are important for expression of erythroid genes. To elucidate
the role of specific GATA transcription factors on globin gene expression, we
examined the human alpha- and beta-globin gene clusters for all GATA sites.
Conserved GATA sites were found in each of the hypersensitive sites in both
beta-and alpha clusters and in proximal regulatory regions of the zeta-, epsilon-
and gamma-globin but not the alpha, delta or beta-globin genes. We then tested
the effect of increasing levels of GATA-1 and GATA-2 on the expression of
endogenous globin genes in human erythroid cells. Increasing GATA-1 levels in
K562 cells decreased the levels of epsilon-globin mRNA but had no effect on the
levels of expression of gamma, zeta or alpha-globin genes. Increasing GATA-2
levels increased epsilon-globin and gamma-globin transcripts. Increasing levels
of GATA-1 also caused a decrease in the expression of endogenous GATA-2, while
increased levels of GATA-2 had no effect on GATA-1 mRNA. Our results indicate a
differential role of GATA-1 and -2 transcription factors on globin transcripts
and suggest a correlation between the conservation of GATA sites in the
regulatory regions and the ability of endogenous globin genes to respond to GATA 
transcription factors. They also suggest that quantitative changes in the levels 
of GATA-1 or GATA-2 can result in alterations of globin target gene expression
and may participate in the ontogenic control of the globin genes.

PMID: 11167015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Blood. 2000 Apr 15;95(8):2543-51.

GATA-1 interacts with the myeloid PU.1 transcription factor and represses
PU.1-dependent transcription.

Nerlov C(1), Querfurth E, Kulessa H, Graf T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Therapy Research, Copenhagen University Hospital
Copenhagen, Denmark. nerlovv@rh.dk

The GATA-1 transcription factor is capable of suppressing the myeloid gene
expression program when ectopically expressed in myeloid cells. We examined the
ability of GATA-1 to repress the expression and function of the PU.1
transcription factor, a central regulator of myeloid differentiation. We found
that GATA-1 is capable of suppressing the myeloid phenotype without interfering
with PU.1 gene expression, but instead was capable of inhibiting the activity of 
the PU.1 protein in a dose-dependent manner. This inhibition was independent of
the ability of GATA-1 to bind DNA, suggesting that it is mediated by
protein-protein interaction. We examined the ability of PU.1 to interact with
GATA-1 and found a direct interaction between the PU.1 ETS domain and the
C-terminal finger region of GATA-1. Replacing the PU.1 ETS domain with the GAL4
DNA-binding domain removed the ability of GATA-1 to inhibit PU.1 activity,
indicating that the PU.1 DNA-binding domain, rather than the transactivation
domain, is the target for GATA-1-mediated repression. We therefore propose that
GATA-1 represses myeloid gene expression, at least in part, through its ability
to directly interact with the PU.1 ETS domain and thereby interfere with PU.1
function. (Blood. 2000;95:2543-2551)

PMID: 10753833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Gene. 2000 Dec 30;260(1-2):103-12.

Genomic organization, 5'flanking region and tissue-specific expression of mouse
phosphofructokinase C gene.

Gunasekera D(1), Kemp RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School, 3333
Green Bay Road, North Chicago, IL 60064, USA.

Using a combination of mouse bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) genomic
library screening, long-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification,
genomic walking and DNA sequencing, we have characterized the intron/exon
boundaries, the sizes of each intron and 5' flanking region of the mouse PFK-C
gene. The gene spans approximately 55 kb and comprises 22 exons separated by 21
introns. All intron/exon splice junctions conform to the GT/AG rule. The mouse
PFK-C gene organization is similar to that of the human and rabbit PFK-A and
human and mouse PFK-B genes. However, PFK-C has much larger intronic sequences
throughout the gene. Anchored PCR was performed to amplify about 1.0 kb of
genomic DNA upstream of the translational start site. Sequence analysis of the
PFK-C 5' flanking region revealed that it is devoid of TATA and CAAT boxes at the
usual positions, but it contained several putative binding sites for
transcription factors AP1, GATA1, NKX2.5 and STAT. The 5' flanking region was not
enriched in GC dinucleotides and lacked CpG islands and putative binding sites
for SP1. Four transcription initiation sites have been identified by full-length 
RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RLM-RACE) between -61 and
-32 bp from the translation initiation codon. Reverse transcription-PCR analysis 
revealed that PFK-A, PFK-B and PFK-C genes were expressed, in all mouse tissues
tested, at varying levels. PFK-A mRNA was more abundantly expressed in all
tissues than were the PFK-B and PFK-C genes. Based on the mouse PFK-C signal
normalized to 18S rRNA, the PFK-C mRNA was expressed at the highest levels in the
brain, heart, thymus and testicles, whereas low levels were observed in the
kidney, liver, muscle, and lung.

PMID: 11137296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(2):476-87.

Stimulation of CREB binding protein nucleosomal histone acetyltransferase
activity by a class of transcriptional activators.

Chen CJ(1), Deng Z, Kim AY, Blobel GA, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA.

The transcriptional coactivator CREB binding protein (CBP) possesses intrinsic
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity that is important for gene regulation.
CBP binds to and cooperates with numerous nuclear factors to stimulate
transcription, but it is unclear if these factors modulate CBP HAT activity. Our 
previous work showed that CBP interacts with the Epstein-Barr virus-encoded basic
region zipper (b-zip) protein, Zta, and augments its transcriptional activity.
Here we report that Zta strongly enhances CBP-mediated acetylation of nucleosomal
histones. Zta stimulated the HAT activity of CBP that had been partially purified
or immunoprecipitated from mammalian cells as well as from affinity-purified,
baculovirus expressed CBP. Stimulation of nucleosome acetylation required the CBP
HAT domain, the Zta DNA binding and transcription activation domain, and
nucleosomal DNA. In addition to Zta, we found that two other b-zip proteins,
NF-E2 and C/EBPalpha, strongly stimulated nucleosomal HAT activity. In contrast, 
several CBP-binding proteins, including phospho-CREB, JUN/FOS, GATA-1, Pit-1, and
EKLF, failed to stimulate HAT activity. These results demonstrate that a subset
of transcriptional activators enhance the nucleosome-directed HAT activity of CBP
and suggest that nuclear factors may regulate transcription by altering substrate
recognition and/or the enzymatic activity of chromatin modifying coactivators.

PMCID: PMC86604
PMID: 11134336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mamm Genome. 2000 Dec;11(12):1053-7.

Genomic organization and mapping of mouse CDV (carnitine deficiency-associated
gene expressed in ventricle)-1 and its related CDV-1R gene.

Higashi M(1), Kobayashi K, Iijima M, Wakana S, Horiuchi M, Yasuda T, Yoshida G,
Kanmura Y, Saheki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Kagoshima University,
Sakuragaoka, Japan.

We have previously reported that CDV (carnitine deficiency-associated gene
expressed in ventricle)-1 was a downregulated gene in the hypertrophied ventricle
of carnitine-deficient juvenile visceral steatosis mice and that the related gene
(CDV-1R) showed no tissue specificity and no sensitivity to carnitine deficiency.
In the present paper, the CDV-1/1R gene was isolated from a mouse genomic BAC
library, and the genomic structure was characterized. We found that the CDV-1/1R 
gene consisted of at least 19 exons and encompassed approximately 48 kb. The
splice sites conformed to the GT-AG rule, and the CDV-1R mRNA containing 19 exons
was processed. CDV-1 mRNA containing 5 exons was constructed from the 3' half of 
CDV-1R. The first exon of CDV-1 consisted of the 3' side (116 bp) of intron 14
and exon 15 (87 bp) of CDV-1R. The presumed promoter sequence for CDV-1 located
in the intron 14 of CDV-1R contained the common TATA box and consensus binding
sites for various transcription factors (Nkx-2.5, Spl, C/EBP, SRF, YY1, and
CREB), which seem to play roles in the heart-specific expression and carnitine
deficiency-associated suppression of CDV-1. In the upstream region of the CDV-1
promoter, we found two VNTRs, 13 repeats of GATA1, and 16 copies of STRE involved
in yeast stress response. The CDV-1/1R gene was located close to DSMIT68 on mouse
Chromosome (Chr) 5, corresponding to human Chr 12q24. All these data revealed
that two mRNA species, CDV-1 and CDV-1R, are expressed tissue-specifically by
using promoters peculiar to each transcript in a single gene.

PMID: 11130971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2000 Dec;26(6):587-97.

GATA and NF-Y participate in transcriptional regulation of FcgammaRIIA in
megakaryocytic cells.

Cassel DL(1), Subudhi SK, Surrey S, McKenzie SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Human FcgammaRIIA, expressed on platelets, neutrophils, and macrophages, plays a 
major role in platelet activation and immune clearance. Clinical observations
indicate that regulation of expression of this receptor is an important factor
influencing the course of immune thrombocytopenia. We used both transient
transfection with FcgammaRIIA promoter constructs and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) to study the regulation of FcgammaRIIA transcription. In HEL 
(erythromegakaryocytic) cells, the 200 bp immediately 5' of the ATG start codon
accounted for the majority of the activity of a 3.6-kb promoter fragment.
Putative GATA (-161) and NF-Y (-119) sites are present. EMSA analyses demonstrate
specific binding of both GATA-1 and GATA-2 to labeled oligonucleotides containing
the putative GATA site with HEL but not U937 (myelomonocytic) nuclear extracts.
Antibodies to NF-Y supershift the specific -119 NF-Y complex with HEL, U937,
Jurkat (T-lymphocytic), and HeLa (nonhematopoietic) nuclear extracts. Comparison 
of the activity of GATA and NF-Y mutant constructs in HEL and U937 demonstrates
that while either GATA or NF-Y mutation results in a large decrease in the
promoter activity (2.2- and 2.3-fold, respectively) in HEL cells, neither
mutation is effective in reducing activity in U937 cells. This is the first
example of a promoter active in the megakaryocyte lineage in which NF-Y
cooperates additively with GATA factors to regulate transcription. Identification
of other factors that must be operational for FcgammaRIIA transcription in
myelomonocytic cells which lack GATA factors will bolster our ongoing efforts to 
dissect the function of these Fc receptors in megakaryocytic and myelomonocytic
cells in vivo.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11112392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Genomics. 2000 Dec 1;70(2):223-31.

Human uroporphyrinogen-III synthase: genomic organization, alternative promoters,
and erythroid-specific expression.

Aizencang G(1), Solis C, Bishop DF, Warner C, Desnick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10029, USA.

Uroporphyrinogen-III (URO) synthase is the heme biosynthetic enzyme defective in 
congenital erythropoietic porphyria. The approximately 34-kb human URO-synthase
gene (UROS) was isolated, and its organization and tissue-specific expression
were determined. The gene had two promoters that generated housekeeping and
erythroid-specific transcripts with unique 5'-untranslated sequences (exons 1 and
2A) followed by nine common coding exons (2B to 10). Expression arrays revealed
that the housekeeping transcript was present in all tissues, while the erythroid 
transcript was only in erythropoietic tissues. The housekeeping promoter lacked
TATA and SP1 sites, consistent with the observed low level expression in most
cells, whereas the erythroid promoter contained GATA1 and NF-E2 sites for
erythroid specificity. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that the
housekeeping promoter was active in both erythroid K562 and HeLa cells, while the
erythroid promoter was active only in erythroid cells and its activity was
increased during hemin-induced erythroid differentiation. Thus, human
URO-synthase expression is regulated during erythropoiesis by an
erythroid-specific alternative promoter.

PMID: 11112350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Blood. 2000 Dec 15;96(13):4178-84.

Zebrafish homolog of the leukemia gene CBFB: its expression during embryogenesis 
and its relationship to scl and gata-1 in hematopoiesis.

Blake T(1), Adya N, Kim CH, Oates AC, Zon L, Chitnis A, Weinstein BM, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mammalian CBFB encodes a transcription factor (CBF beta) that in combination with
CBF alpha 2 binds to specific DNA sequences and regulates expression of a number 
of hematopoietic genes. CBFB is associated with human leukemias through a
chromosome 16 inversion and is essential for definitive hematopoiesis during
mouse embryo development. We have isolated a zebrafish cbfb complementary DNA
(cDNA) clone from a zebrafish kidney cDNA library. This cbfb is highly homologous
to human and mouse CBFB/Cbfb genes at both the DNA and protein level. In
biochemical analyses, cbfbeta binds to human CBF alpha 2 and enhances its DNA
binding. During zebrafish development, cbfb is expressed in the lateral plate
mesoderm at tail bud stage and in the intermediate cell mass (ICM, the location
of embryonic hematopoiesis) between the 21- to 26-somite stages. The cbfb is also
expressed in Rohon-Beard cells, cranial nerve ganglia, hindbrain, retina,
branchial arches, jaw, and fin buds. Expression of cbfb is decreased or absent in
the ICM and Rohon-Beard cells in some hematopoietic mutants and is unaffected in 
others. We have also analyzed the expression of scl and gata-1 in the same
hematopoietic mutants to ascertain the relative order of these transcription
factors to cbfb in zebrafish hematopoiesis. Our results indicate that cbfb is
expressed in early hematopoietic progenitors and that its expression pattern in
the hematopoietic mutants is similar to that of scl. (Blood. 2000;96:4178-4184)

PMID: 11110689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Dec 5;97(25):13696-701.

Inositol polyphosphate 4-phosphatase type I regulates cell growth downstream of
transcription factor GATA-1.

Vyas P(1), Norris FA, Joseph R, Majerus PW, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9AE,
United Kingdom.

Megakaryocytes lacking transcription factor GATA-1 fail to complete maturation in
vivo and hyperproliferate. To define how GATA-1 regulates megakaryocyte cell
growth we searched for mRNA transcripts expressed in primary wild-type, but not
GATA-1(-), megakaryocytes. One differentially expressed transcript encodes
inositol polyphosphate 4-phosphatase type I (4-Ptase I). This enzyme hydrolyses
phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate and also has lesser activity against
soluble analogues of this lipid, inositol 3, 4-bisphosphate and inositol
1,3,4-triphosphate. Reintroduction of 4-Ptase I into both primary GATA-1(-) and
wild-type megakaryocytes significantly retards cell growth, suggesting that
absence of 4-Ptase I may contribute to the hyperproliferative phenotype of
GATA-1(-) megakaryocytes. Overexpression of 4-Ptase I also markedly reduces
growth of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Taken together, these data indicate that 4-Ptase I
is a regulator of cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC17638
PMID: 11087841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Structure. 2000 Nov 15;8(11):1157-66.

Solution structures of two CCHC zinc fingers from the FOG family protein U-shaped
that mediate protein-protein interactions.

Liew CK(1), Kowalski K, Fox AH, Newton A, Sharpe BK, Crossley M, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Sydney NSW 2006, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Zinc finger domains have traditionally been regarded as
sequence-specific DNA binding motifs. However, recent evidence indicates that
many zinc fingers mediate specific protein-protein interactions. For instance,
several zinc fingers from FOG family proteins have been shown to interact with
the N-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1.
RESULTS: We have used NMR spectroscopy to determine the first structures of two
FOG family zinc fingers that are involved in protein-protein interactions:
fingers 1 and 9 from U-shaped. These fingers resemble classical TFIIIA-like zinc 
fingers, with the exception of an unusual extended portion of the polypeptide
backbone prior to the fourth zinc ligand. [15N,(1)H]-HSQC titrations have been
used to define the GATA binding surface of USH-F1, and comparison with other FOG 
family proteins indicates that the recognition mechanism is conserved across
species. The surface of FOG-type fingers that interacts with GATA-1 overlaps
substantially with the surface through which classical fingers typically
recognize DNA. This suggests that these fingers could not contact both GATA and
DNA simultaneously. In addition, results from NMR, gel filtration, and
sedimentation equilibrium experiments suggest that the interactions are of
moderate affinity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate unequivocally that zinc fingers comprising
the classical betabetaalpha fold are capable of mediating specific contacts
between proteins. The existence of this alternative function has implications for
the prediction of protein function from sequence data and for the evolution of
protein function.

PMID: 11080638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Nov;14(11):1820-35.

GATA-1 and GATA-4 transactivate inhibin/activin beta-B-subunit gene transcription
in testicular cells.

Feng ZM(1), Wu AZ, Zhang Z, Chen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, New York, New York 10021, USA.

We have recently demonstrated that a testicular GATA-binding protein, GATA-1,
up-regulates the transcription of inhibin alpha-subunit gene through interaction 
with GATA motifs in the promoter region in MA-10, a mouse Leydig tumor cell line.
In this study, we showed that both GATA-1 and GATA-4 also transactivated the
transcription from the promoter for the 4.8-kb inhibin/activin beta-B-subunit
gene transcripts, beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter, in two testicular cell lines,
MA-10 and MSC-1, which is a mouse Sertoli cell line. The abilities of GATA-1 and 
GATA-4 interacting with GATA and/or GATA-like sequences to transactivate the
beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter were next examined by mutation analysis. Mutations
of GATA or GATA-like sequences caused no apparent effect or only a small decrease
in the basal transcriptional activity of this promoter. However, mutation of the 
GATA motif at -65 markedly decreased 60-70% of the effect of GATA-1 on the
transactivation of beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter in both MA-10 and MSC-1 cells. In
addition, mutation of the GATA motif in MSC-1 cells also reduced 40-50% of the
effect of GATA-4 to transactivate this promoter. Interestingly, mutation of GATT 
at -42 caused a 70-90% increase in the transactivation of beta-B(4.8)-subunit
promoter by GATA-1 or GATA-4. No significant change in the promoter activity was 
observed when GATT at -177 or GATC at -201 was mutated. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay confirmed the above observations that these GATA-binding proteins
interacted with the GATA motif at -65 and GATT at -42, but not with GATC at -201 
or GATT at -177. Serial deletion from the 5'-end of the basal promoter, from -226
to -90, markedly decreased the basal transcription, but increased the effect of
GATA-1 on transactivation of the beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter. In summary, our
observations suggest that the two GATA-binding proteins transactivate the
beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter in testicular cells via complicated mechanisms. Both
GATA-1 and GATA-4 factors act through the GATA motif at -65 and GATT at -42 to
positively and negatively regulate the transcription from this promoter,
respectively. Furthermore, GATA-1 may also interact directly or indirectly with
DNA sequences at -180 to -90 to regulate the beta-B(4.8)-subunit promoter.

PMID: 11075815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 2;276(5):3674-82. Epub 2000 Nov 9.

Increased affinity of c-Myb for CREB-binding protein (CBP) after CBP-induced
acetylation.

Sano Y(1), Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laborartory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute and the CREST (Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology) Research Project of JST (Japan
Science and Technology Corporation), 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074,
Japan.

The c-myb proto-oncogene product (c-Myb) is a sequence-specific DNA-binding
protein that functions as a transcriptional activator. The transcriptional
coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) binds via its KIX domain to the activation
domain of c-Myb and mediates c-Myb-dependent transcriptional activation. CBP
possesses intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity, and can acetylate not
only histones but also certain transcriptional factors such as GATA1 and p53.
Here we demonstrate that the C/H2 domain of CBP, which is critical for the
acetyltransferase activity, also directly interacts with the negative regulatory 
domain (NRD) of c-Myb. Consistent with this observation, CBP acetylated c-Myb in 
vitro at Lys(438) and Lys(441) within the NRD. In addition, CBP acetylated c-Myb 
in vivo not only at the sites found in this study but also at the p300-induced
acetylation sites reported recently. Replacement of lysine by arginine at all of 
these sites dramatically decreased the trans-activating capacity of c-Myb. The
results of transcriptional activation assays with c-Myb acetylation site mutants 
suggested that acetylation of c-Myb at each of these five sites synergistically
enhances c-Myb activity. Mutations of these acetylation sites reduced the
strength of the interaction between c-Myb and CBP. Thus, acetylation of c-Myb by 
CBP increases the trans-activating capacity of c-Myb by enhancing its association
with CBP. These results demonstrate a novel molecular mechanism of regulation of 
c-Myb activity.

PMID: 11073948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. EMBO J. 2000 Nov 1;19(21):5856-63.

Erythroid overexpression of C/EBPgamma in transgenic mice affects gamma-globin
expression and fetal liver erythropoiesis.

Zafarana G(1), Rottier R, Grosveld F, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus University Rotterdam, MGC-Department of Cell Biology, PO Box 1738,
3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The CCAAT boxes of the beta-like globin genes interact with three proteins: NF-Y,
GATA-1 and NFE-6. We demonstrate that NFE-6 contains C/EBPgamma, and address its 
role in globin gene regulation by erythroid overexpression of C/EBPgamma, and a
dominant-negative form C/EBPgammaDeltaB, in mice. Elevated levels of C/EBPgamma, 
but not C/EBPgammaDeltaB, increase expression of the (fetal) gamma-globin
relative to the (adult) beta-globin gene. Interestingly, fetal liver
erythropoiesis is ablated when the C/EBPgamma and C/EBPgammaDeltaB levels are
further increased in homozygous transgenics. We suggest that targeted expression 
of dominant-negative leucine zipper proteins is a generally applicable approach
to ablate specific tissues in mice.

PMCID: PMC305797
PMID: 11060036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Br J Haematol. 2000 Sep;110(4):993-7.

A new PKLR gene mutation in the R-type promoter region affects the gene
transcription causing pyruvate kinase deficiency.

Manco L(1), Ribeiro ML, Máximo V, Almeida H, Costa A, Freitas O, Barbot J, Abade 
A, Tamagnini G.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Hematologia Molecular, Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, Portugal.
lmanco@ci.uc.pt

Comment in
    Br J Haematol. 2002 Sep;118(3):927-8.

Mutations in the PKLR gene responsible for pyruvate kinase (PK)-deficient anaemia
are mainly located in the coding regions: 11 are in the splicing sites and,
recently, three mutations have been described in the promoter region. We now
report a novel point mutation A-->G on nucleotide 72, upstream from the
initiation codon of the PKLR gene, in four Portuguese PK-deficient patients. This
new regulatory mutation occurs within the most proximal of the four GATA motifs
(GATA-A element) in the R-type promoter region. In two patients who were
homozygous for this mutation, a semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) procedure was used to evaluate the amount of R-PK mRNA
transcript in the reticulocytes. The mRNA level was about five times lower than
in normal controls, demonstrating that the PKLR gene transcription is severely
affected, most probably because the -72A-->G point mutation disables the binding 
of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 to the GATA-A element. Supporting
these data, the two patients homozygous for the -72A-->G mutation had severe
haemolytic anaemia and were transfusion dependent until splenectomy. Two other
patients who were compound heterozygous for this mutation and the previously
described missense mutation 1456C-->T had a mild condition.

PMID: 11054094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):1099-106.

A novel mechanism of cooperation between c-Kit and erythropoietin receptor. Stem 
cell factor induces the expression of Stat5 and erythropoietin receptor,
resulting in efficient proliferation and survival by erythropoietin.

Kapur R(1), Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics, James 
Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. rkapur@iupui.edu

Optimal production of red cells in vivo requires collaboration between c-Kit,
erythropoietin receptor (Epo-R), and GATA-1. However, the mechanism(s) of
collaboration remain unclear. Utilizing an embryonic stem cell-derived erythroid 
progenitor cell line from mice deficient in GATA-1, we have examined the role of 
c-Kit and Epo-R in erythroid cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation.
In the absence of GATA-1, we demonstrate an essential role for c-Kit in survival 
and proliferation of erythroid progenitors via the regulation of Bcl-2
expression. In addition, we demonstrate that Epo-R and Stat5 are regulated by a
second, novel mechanism. We demonstrate that c-Kit stimulation by stem cell
factor is essential for the maintenance of Epo-R and Stat5 protein expression,
which results in significantly enhanced Bcl-x(L) induction and survival of
erythroid progenitors in response to Epo stimulation. Restoration of GATA-1
function results in terminal erythroid maturation and up-regulation of Epo-R and 
Bcl-x(L) expression, leading also to significantly enhanced survival of
terminally differentiating erythroid progenitors in the presence of only Epo.
These results demonstrate that c-Kit and Epo-R have unique role(s) during
distinct phases of erythroid maturation, and both stem cell factor and Epo
contribute to the regulation of the Epo-R-Stat5-Bcl-x(L) pathway to ensure
optimal survival, proliferation, and differentiation of erythroid progenitors.

PMID: 11042182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Shi Yan Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 1997 Dec;30(4):375-82.

[The role of hydroxyurea in globin gene expression and cell differentiation of
human erythroleukemia cell line].

[Article in Chinese]

Gui CY(1), Jiang C, Qian RL.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, Academia Sinica.

The HEL cells, a human erythroleukemia cell line, express mainly the fetal globin
gene and small amount of the embryonic (epsilon) globin gene, but not the adult
(beta) globin gene. Hydroxyurea, a small organic compound, has been successfully 
used to treat sickle cell anemia and beta-thalessaemia. Our data demonstrated
that the growth rate of HEL cell proliferation was inhibited by different doses
of hydroxyurea (from 50 mumol/L to 200 mumol/L). Using both routine RT-PCR and
quantitative PCR analyses, we revealed that the expression of beta-globin gene
was sharply activated and alpha-globin gene was almost completely silenced when
HEL cells were induced for 3 or 5 days. Meanwhile, gamma-globin gene was
expressed with no much difference between induced and uninduced HEL cells. We
also demonstrated that the expression of GATA-1 and NF-E 2, which were two of the
most important transcription factors in erythrocyte development, was activated
about 3 folds in the induced cells. We suggested that the induction of GATA-1 and
NF-E 2 expression by hydroxyurea might lead to activation of the adult
beta-globin gene through some pathways of signal transduction, therefore,
hydroxyurea might play a role to induce HEL cells to terminal differentiation.

PMID: 11039014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Blood. 2000 Oct 15;96(8):2641-8.

PU.1 inhibits GATA-1 function and erythroid differentiation by blocking GATA-1
DNA binding.

Zhang P(1), Zhang X, Iwama A, Yu C, Smith KA, Mueller BU, Narravula S, Torbett
BE, Orkin SH, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Harvard Institute of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The lineage-specific transcription factors GATA-1 and PU.1 can physically
interact to inhibit each other's function, but the mechanism of repression of
GATA-1 function by PU.1 has not been elucidated. Both the N terminus and the C
terminus of PU.1 can physically interact with the C-terminal zinc finger of
GATA-1. It is demonstrated that the PU.1 N terminus, but not the C terminus, is
required for inhibiting GATA-1 function. Induced overexpression of PU.1 in K562
erythroleukemia cells blocks hemin-induced erythroid differentiation. In this
system, PU.1 does not affect the expression of GATA-1 messenger RNA, protein, or 
nuclear localization. However, GATA-1 DNA binding decreases dramatically. By
means of electrophoretic mobility shift assays with purified proteins, it is
demonstrated that the N-terminal 70 amino acids of PU.1 can specifically block
GATA-1 DNA binding. In addition, PU.1 had a similar effect in the G1ER cell line,
in which the GATA-1 null erythroid cell line G1E has been transduced with a
GATA-1-estrogen receptor fusion gene, which is directly dependent on induction of
the GATA-1 fusion protein to effect erythroid maturation. Consistent with in
vitro binding assays, overexpression of PU.1 blocked DNA binding of the GATA-1
fusion protein as well as GATA-1-mediated erythroid differentiation of these G1ER
cells. These results demonstrate a novel mechanism by which function of a
lineage-specific transcription factor is inhibited by another lineage-restricted 
factor through direct protein-protein interactions. These findings contribute to 
understanding how protein-protein interactions participate in hematopoietic
differentiation and leukemogenesis. (Blood. 2000;96:2641-2648)

PMID: 11023493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):522-8.

A potential role for protein kinase C-epsilon in regulating megakaryocytic
lineage commitment.

Racke FK(1), Wang D, Zaidi Z, Kelley J, Visvader J, Soh JW, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Multiple studies have shown that intracellular signal transduction by the protein
kinase C (PKC) family participates in the initiation of megakaryocyte
differentiation. In this study, multiple approaches addressed the functional
contributions by specific PKC isozymes to megakaryocytic lineage commitment of
two independent cell lines, K562 and human erythroleukemia (HEL). Pharmacologic
profiles of induction and inhibition of megakaryocytic differentiation in both
cell lines suggested a role for the calcium-independent novel PKCs, in particular
PKC-epsilon. In transfection studies, the isolated variable domain of PKC-epsilon
selectively blocked exogenous activation of the megakaryocyte-specific alpha IIb 
promoter. Constitutively active mutants of PKC-epsilon, but not of other PKC
isozymes, cooperated with the transcription factor GATA-1 in the activation of
the alpha IIb promoter. The functional cooperation between GATA-1 and PKC-epsilon
displayed dependence on cellular milieu, as well as on the promoter context of
GATA binding sites. In aggregate, the data suggest that PKC-epsilon specifically 
participates in megakaryocytic lineage commitment through functional cooperation 
with GATA-1 in the activation of megakaryocytic promoters.

PMID: 11016926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Stem Cells. 1998;16 Suppl 2:91-5.

Cellular and molecular biology of megakaryocyte differentiation in the absence of
lineage-restricted transcription factors.

Lecine P(1), Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Targeted gene disruption of two distinct lineage-restricted hematopoietic
transcription factors has provided useful insights into the transcriptional
control of platelet production. Absence of either the basic leucine-zipper
protein NF-E2 or of the zinc-finger protein GATA-1 in vivo results in severe
thrombocytopenia secondary to distinct patterns of arrested megakaryocyte
cytoplasmic maturation; in addition, megakaryocyte-selective loss of GATA-1
expression leads to dysregulated proliferation of progenitor cells. The
ultrastructure of the defective megakaryocytes suggests that absence of the
respective transcription factors impairs biogenesis of platelet-specific granules
and proper development and organization of demarcation membranes. In particular, 
transcriptional targets of NF-E2 may be implicated in the very final stages of
megakaryocyte differentiation, which involve the organization and release of
platelets. Preliminary characterization of genes that are downregulated in
NF-E2-/- megakaryocytes is in progress and is likely to lead to mechanistic
insights into thrombocytopoiesis.

PMID: 11012181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Stem Cells. 1998;16 Suppl 2:79-83.

Transcription factor GATA-1 in megakaryocyte development.

Orkin SH(1), Shivdasani RA, Fujiwara Y, McDevitt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital and the Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is specifically expressed in hematopoietic
lineages. Prior gene knockout experiments established an essential role for
GATA-1 in red blood cell production, but could not provide direct evidence with
respect to a requirement in megakaryopoiesis. We summarize here recent
lineage-selective gene targeting in mice that establishes critical functions for 
GATA-1 in controlling megakaryocyte growth and maturation, and platelet
production. GATA-1 megakaryocytes are delayed in their cellular maturation,
exhibit marked hyperproliferation and generate fewer than normal, yet enlarged,
platelets in vivo. Thus GATA-1 is a central regulator in both the erythroid and
megakaryocytic lineages.

PMID: 11012179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4303-13.

Hhex and scl function in parallel to regulate early endothelial and blood
differentiation in zebrafish.

Liao W(1), Ho CY, Yan YL, Postlethwait J, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA.

During embryogenesis, endothelial and blood precursors are hypothesized to arise 
from a common progenitor, the hemangioblast. Several genes that affect the
differentiation of, or are expressed early in, both the endothelial and blood
lineages may in fact function at the level of the hemangioblast. For example, the
zebrafish cloche mutation disrupts the differentiation of both endothelial and
blood cells. The transcription factor gene scl is expressed in both endothelial
and blood lineages from an early stage and can regulate their differentiation.
Here we report that in zebrafish the homeobox gene hhex (previously called hex)
is also expressed in endothelial and blood lineages from an early stage. We find 
that hhex expression in these lineages is significantly reduced in cloche mutant 
embryos, indicating that hhex functions downstream of cloche to regulate
endothelial and blood differentiation. Ectopic expression of hhex through
injection of a DNA construct leads to the premature and ectopic expression of
early endothelial and blood differentiation genes such as fli1, flk1 and gata1,
indicating that Hhex can positively regulate endothelial and blood
differentiation. However, analysis of a hhex deficiency allele shows that hhex is
not essential for early endothelial and blood differentiation, suggesting that
another gene, perhaps scl, compensates for the absence of Hhex function.
Furthermore, we find that hhex and scl can induce each other's expression,
suggesting that these two genes cross-regulate each other during early
endothelial and blood differentiation. Together, these data provide the initial
framework of a pathway that can be used to further integrate the molecular events
regulating hemangioblast differentiation.

PMID: 11003831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Blood. 2000 Oct 1;96(7):2440-50.

Biologic significance of GATA-1 activities in Ras-mediated megakaryocytic
differentiation of hematopoietic cell lines.

Matsumura I(1), Kawasaki A, Tanaka H, Sonoyama J, Ezoe S, Minegishi N, Nakajima
K, Yamamoto M, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Osaka University Medical School, Osaka,
Japan. matsumura@bldon.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Lineage-specific transcription factors play crucial roles in the development of
hematopoietic cells. In a previous study, it was demonstrated that Ras activation
was involved in thrombopoietin-induced megakaryocytic differentiation. In this
study, constitutive Ras activation by H-ras(G12V) evoked megakaryocytic
maturation of erythroleukemia cell lines F-36P and K562, but not of myeloid cell 
line 32D cl3 that lacks GATA-1. However, the introduction of GATA-1 led to
reprogramming of 32D cl3 toward erythrocytic/megakaryocytic lineage and enabled
it to undergo megakaryocytic differentiation in response to H-ras(G12V). In
contrast, the overexpression of PU.1 and c-Myb changed the phenotype of K562 from
erythroid to myeloid/monocytic lineage and rendered K562 to differentiate into
granulocytes and macrophages in response to H-ras(G12V), respectively. In
GATA-1-transfected 32D cl3, the endogenous expression of PU.1 and c-Myb was
easily detectable, but their activities were reduced severely. Endogenous GATA-1 
activities were markedly suppressed in PU.1-transfected and c-myb-transfected
K562. As for the mechanisms of these reciprocal inhibitions, GATA-1 and PU.1 were
found to associate through their DNA-binding domains and to inhibit the
respective DNA-binding activities of each other. In addition, c-Myb bound to
GATA-1 and inhibited its DNA-binding activities. Mutant GATA-1 and PU.1 that
retained their own transcriptional activities but could not inhibit the
reciprocal partner were less effective in changing the lineage phenotype of 32D
cl3 and K562. These results suggested that GATA-1 activities may be crucial for
Ras-mediated megakaryocytic differentiation and that its activities may be
regulated by the direct interaction with other lineage-specific transcription
factors such as PU.1 and c-Myb.

PMID: 11001896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39754-61.

Erythropoietin stimulates proliferation and interferes with differentiation of
myoblasts.

Ogilvie M(1), Yu X, Nicolas-Metral V, Pulido SM, Liu C, Ruegg UT, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1822, USA.

Erythropoietin (Epo) is required for the production of mature red blood cells.
The requirement for Epo and its receptor (EpoR) for normal heart development and 
the response of vascular endothelium and cells of neural origin to Epo provide
evidence that the function of Epo as a growth factor or cytokine to protect cells
from apoptosis extends beyond the hematopoietic lineage. We now report that the
EpoR is expressed on myoblasts and can mediate a biological response of these
cells to treatment with Epo. Primary murine satellite cells and myoblast C2C12
cells, both of which express endogenous EpoR, exhibit a proliferative response to
Epo and a marked decrease in terminal differentiation to form myotubes. We also
observed that Epo stimulation activates Jak2/Stat5 signal transduction and
increases cytoplasmic calcium, which is dependent on tyrosine phosphorylation. In
erythroid progenitor cells, Epo stimulates induction of transcription factor
GATA-1 and EpoR; in C2C12 cells, GATA-3 and EpoR expression are induced. The
decrease in differentiation of C2C12 cells is concomitant with an increase in
Myf-5 and MyoD expression and inhibition of myogenin induction during
differentiation, altering the pattern of expression of the MyoD family of
transcription factors during muscle differentiation. These data suggest that,
rather than acting in an instructive or specific mode for differentiation, Epo
can stimulate proliferation of myoblasts to expand the progenitor population
during differentiation and may have a potential role in muscle development or
repair.

PMID: 10995753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Leukemia. 2000 Sep;14(9):1589-97.

GTP-mediated differentiation of the human K562 cell line: transient
overexpression of GATA-1 and stabilization of the gamma-globin mRNA.

Morceau F(1), Dupont C, Palissot V, Borde-Chiché P, Trentesaux C, Dicato M,
Diederich M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche sur le Cancer et les Maladies du Sang, Centre
Universitaire de Luxembourg, France.

Induction of specific gene expression may provide an alternative or a support to 
conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy of cancer, as well as to therapy for sickle
cell diseases. In this respect, pharmacological induction of expression of the
endogenous gamma-globin gene is a realistic approach to therapy of beta-globin
disorders. Erythroid differentiation and inhibition of proliferation of the human
CML K562 cell line was induced by guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP). The hemoglobin
production in cells was correlated to an increase in alpha- and gamma-globin mRNA
expression. At the transcriptional level, we showed that both the expression of
the major erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 (protein and mRNA) and its
binding capacity to the gamma-globin gene promoter was transiently increased.
Moreover, GTP moderately stimulated the gamma-globin gene promoter after 48 h of 
treatment. At the post-transcriptional level, GTP treatment led to a drastic
increase of the gamma-globin mRNA half-life. This stabilizing effect of GTP was
mediated via the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the gamma-globin mRNA. In
conclusion, mechanism of GTP-mediated differentiation of K562 cells is linked to 
an early activation of gamma-globin gene transcription followed by a
stabilization of its mRNA.

PMID: 10995005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Nature. 2000 Aug 3;406(6795):519-24.

An intrinsic but cell-nonautonomous defect in GATA-1-overexpressing mouse
erythroid cells.

Whyatt D(1), Lindeboom F, Karis A, Ferreira R, Milot E, Hendriks R, de Bruijn M, 
Langeveld A, Gribnau J, Grosveld F, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam.

GATA-1 is a tissue-specific transcription factor that is essential for the
production of red blood cells. Here we show that overexpression of GATA-1 in
erythroid cells inhibits their differentiation, leading to a lethal anaemia.
Using chromosome-X-inactivation of a GATA-1 transgene and chimaeric animals, we
show that this defect is intrinsic to erythroid cells, but nevertheless cell
nonautonomous. Usually, cell nonautonomy is thought to reflect aberrant gene
function in cells other than those that exhibit the phenotype. On the basis of
our data, we propose an alternative mechanism in which a signal originating from 
wild-type erythroid cells restores normal differentiation to cells overexpressing
GATA-1 in vivo. The existence of such a signalling mechanism indicates that
previous interpretations of cell-nonautonomous defects may be erroneous in some
cases and may in fact assign gene function to incorrect cell types.

PMID: 10952313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Blood. 2000 Aug 15;96(4):1348-57.

Identification of a GATA-overlapping sequence within the enhancer of the murine
GPIIb promoter that induces transcriptional deregulation in human K562 cells.

Albanese P(1), Leboeuf M, Rosa JP, Uzan G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.506 and INSERM U.268, Hôpital Paul Brousse, Villejuif, France.

The human and the murine glycoprotein platelet IIb (GPIIb) promoters are
megakaryocyte specific in human and murine cell systems, respectively. Here we
show that the murine promoter is, however, highly active when transfected in K562
human cells in which the human promoter is almost inactive. A murine promoter, in
which the enhancer element was replaced by the human, retrieves its
megakaryocytic specificity in human cell lines. The human and murine GATA-binding
sites located in the enhancer region display slight sequence divergence next to
the consensus GATA core sequence. Gel shift experiments show that, although the
murine and the human GATA sequences both bind GATA-1, the murine sequence alone
forms an additional complex (B) not detected with the human sequence. When the
murine GATA-containing region is replaced by the human in the context of the
murine GPIIb promoter, megakaryocyte specificity is restored in the human cell
lines. A G nucleotide 3 to GATA appears crucial because its substitution
abrogates B but not GATA-1 binding and restores megakaryocyte specificity to the 
murine promoter. Conversely, substitution of the human GATA-1 binding sequence by
its murine homologue that binds both GATA-1 and complex B induces an abnormal
activity for the human promoter in K562 cells. Altogether, our data suggest that 
limited changes in the GATA-containing enhancer of the GPIIb promoter can induce 
the recruitment of accessory proteins that could be involved in alteration of a
megakaryocyte-restricted gene activation program. (Blood. 2000;96:1348-1357)

PMID: 10942377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Am J Hematol. 2000 Sep;65(1):14-24.

A (GATA)(7) motif located in the 5' boundary area of the human beta-globin locus 
control region exhibits silencer activity in erythroid cells.

Ramchandran R(1), Bengra C, Whitney B, Lanclos K, Tuan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Medical 
College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

A 40-bp DNA, consisting of seven tandem GATA repeats, is located near the HS5
site in the 5' boundary area of the locus control region (LCR) of human
beta-globin gene. This (GATA)(7) motif, named 5a, exhibits silencer activity in
erythroid cells. In transfected, recombinant plasmids containing the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene, 5a repressed the activity 
of the cis-linked housekeeping phosphoglycerate kinase (pgk) promoter; 5a also
repressed the activity of the cis-linked HS2 enhancer regardless of whether the
CAT gene was driven by the pgk or the epsilon-globin promoter. Repression by 5a
was most severe when 5a was spliced upstream of HS2 at a distance of less than
200 bases from the HS2 enhancer core. The silencer activity of 5a was independent
of whether the component GATA motifs were in head to tail orientation as in the
wild type 5a or in head to head or tail to tail orientation as in a mutant 5a.
Band shift experiments show that the GATA-1 protein binds to both 5a and the
mutant 5a and forms a large protein complex. Together, the results suggest that
GATA-1 bound at 5a is a strong, proximal repressor of HS2 enhancer activity.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10936858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Blood. 2000 Aug 1;96(3):910-6.

GATA factor transgenes under GATA-1 locus control rescue germline GATA-1 mutant
deficiencies.

Takahashi S(1), Shimizu R, Suwabe N, Kuroha T, Yoh K, Ohta J, Nishimura S, Lim
KC, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Japan.

GATA-1 germline mutation in mice results in embryonic lethality due to defective 
erythroid cell maturation, and thus other hematopoietic GATA factors do not
compensate for the loss of GATA-1. To determine whether the obligate presence of 
GATA-1 in erythroid cells is due to its distinct biochemical properties or
spatiotemporal patterning, we attempted to rescue GATA-1 mutant mice with
hematopoietic GATA factor complementary DNAs (cDNAs) placed under the
transcriptional control of the GATA-1 gene. We found that transgenic expression
of a GATA-1 cDNA fully abrogated the GATA-1-deficient phenotype. Surprisingly,
GATA-2 and GATA-3 factors expressed from the same regulatory cassette also
rescued the embryonic lethal phenotype of the GATA-1 mutation. However, adult
mice rescued with the latter transgenes developed anemia, while GATA-1 transgenic
mice did not. These results demonstrate that the transcriptional control
dictating proper GATA-1 accumulation is the most critical determinant of GATA-1
activity during erythropoiesis. The results also show that there are biochemical 
distinctions among the hematopoietic GATA proteins and that during adult
hematopoiesis the hematopoietic GATA factors are not functionally equivalent.

PMID: 10910904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Exp Hematol. 2000 Jul;28(7):833-40.

Sequential requirements for SCL/tal-1, GATA-2, macrophage colony-stimulating
factor, and osteoclast differentiation factor/osteoprotegerin ligand in
osteoclast development.

Yamane T(1), Kunisada T, Yamazaki H, Nakano T, Orkin SH, Hayashi SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori
University, Yonago, Japan. yamanet@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Osteoclasts are of hematopoietic origin. The mechanism by which
hematopoietic stem cells are specified to the osteoclast lineage is unclear. To
understand the process of generation and differentiation of this lineage of
cells, we performed in vitro studies on the differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined the potential of mutant embryonic stem cell
lines harboring targeted deletions of the GATA-1, FOG, SCL/tal-1, or GATA-2 genes
to differentiate into osteoclasts and determined when these molecules function in
osteoclast development.
RESULTS: The lack of GATA-1 or FOG did not affect osteoclastogenesis. In
contrast, SCL/tal-1-null embryonic stem cells generated no osteoclasts. In the
case of the loss of GATA-2, a small number of osteoclasts were generated.
GATA-2-null osteoclasts were morphologically normal and the terminal maturation
was not disturbed, but a defect was observed in the generation of osteoclast
progenitors. Experiments using specific inhibitors that block the signaling
through macrophage colony-stimulating factor and osteoclast differentiation
factor/osteoprotegerin ligand suggested that GATA-2 seems to act earlier in
osteoclastogenesis than these cytokines. Interestingly, macrophage colony-forming
units were not severely reduced by the loss of GATA-2 compared to osteoclast
progenitors.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that osteocalsts need SCL/tal-1 at an early
point in development, and that GATA-2 is required for generation of osteoclast
progenitors but not for the later stages when macrophage colony-stimulating
factor and osteoclast differentiation factor/ osteoprotegerin ligand are needed. 
We also demonstrated that osteoclast progenitors behave as a different population
than macrophage colony-forming units.

PMID: 10907645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Dev Biol. 2000 Aug 1;224(1):20-8.

Too much interference: injection of double-stranded RNA has nonspecific effects
in the zebrafish embryo.

Oates AC(1), Bruce AE, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

We have investigated the ability of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) to inhibit gene
expression in a vertebrate, the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Injection of dsRNA
corresponding to the T-box gene tbx16/spadetail (spt) into early wild-type
embryos caused a rapid and dramatic loss of tbx16/spt mRNA in the blastula. mRNAs
from the papc, tbx6, and gata1 genes, which depend on tbx16/spt function for
their expression, were reduced, apparently mimicking the spt mutant phenotype.
However, mRNAs from a number of genes that are unaffected by the spt mutation,
such as beta catenin, stat3, and no tail, were also lost, indicating that the
"interference" effect of tbx16/spt dsRNA was not restricted to the endogenous
tbx16/spt mRNA. We compared the effects of injecting dsRNA from the zebrafish
tbx16/spadetail, nieuwkoid/bozozok, and Brachyury/no tail genes with dsRNA from
the bacterial lacZ gene. In each case the embryos displayed a variable syndrome
of abnormalities at 12 and 24 h postfertilization. In blind studies, we could not
distinguish between the effects of the various dsRNAs. Consistent with a common
effect of dsRNA, regardless of sequence, injection of dsRNA from the lacZ gene
was likewise effective in strongly reducing tbx16/spt and beta catenin mRNA in
the blastula. These findings indicate that, despite published reports, the
current methodology of double-stranded RNA interference is not a practical
technique for investigating zygotic gene function during early zebrafish
development.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10898958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 8;275(36):28152-6.

GATA-1 bends DNA in a site-independent fashion.

Ghirlando R(1), Trainor CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDKD, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The DNA binding domain of GATA-1 consists of two adjacent homologous zinc
fingers, of which only the C-terminal finger binds DNA independently. Solution
structure studies have shown that the DNA is bent by about 15 degrees in the
complex formed with the single C-terminal finger of GATA-1. The N-terminal finger
stabilizes DNA binding at some sites. To determine whether it contributes to DNA 
bending, we have performed circular permutation DNA bending experiments with a
variety of DNA-binding sites recognized by GATA-1. By using a series of
full-length GATA-1, double zinc finger, and single C-terminal finger constructs, 
we show that GATA-1 bends DNA by about 24 degrees, irrespective of the
DNA-binding site. We propose that the N- and C-terminal fingers of GATA-1 adopt
different orientations when bound to different cognate DNA sites. Furthermore, we
characterize circular permutation bending artifacts arising from the reduced gel 
mobility of the protein-DNA complexes.

PMID: 10862761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 8;275(36):28157-66.

GATA zinc finger interactions modulate DNA binding and transactivation.

Trainor CD(1), Ghirlando R, Simpson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDKD, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

GATA-1 and other vertebrate GATA factors contain a DNA binding domain composed of
two adjacent homologous zinc fingers. Whereas only the C-terminal finger of
GATA-1 is capable of independent binding to the GATA recognition sequence, double
GATA sites that require both fingers for high affinity interaction are found in
several genes. We propose a mechanism whereby adjacent zinc fingers interact to
influence the binding and transactivation properties of GATA-1 at a subset of
DNA-binding sites. By using two such double GATA sites we demonstrate that the
N-terminal finger and adjacent linker region can alter the binding specificity of
the C-terminal finger sufficiently to prevent it from recognizing some consensus 
GATA sequences. Therefore, the two zinc fingers form a composite binding domain
having a different DNA binding specificity from that shown by the constituent
single C-terminal finger. Furthermore, we compare two of these double sites and
show that high affinity binding of GATA-1 to a reporter gene does not necessarily
induce transactivation, namely the sequence of the DNA-binding site can alter the
ability of GATA-1 to stimulate transcription.

PMID: 10862757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. EMBO J. 2000 Jun 1;19(11):2492-502.

ABC-me: a novel mitochondrial transporter induced by GATA-1 during erythroid
differentiation.

Shirihai OS(1), Gregory T, Yu C, Orkin SH, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for normal erythropoiesis. GATA-binding 
sites are consistently found in promoters or enhancers of genes expressed
selectively in erythroid cells. To discover novel GATA-1-regulated genes, we
searched for GATA-1-activated transcripts in G1E cells, an erythroid line derived
from GATA-1(-) embryonic stem cells. By subtractive analysis, we identified a new
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter that is strongly and rapidly induced by
GATA-1. This protein, named ABC-me (for ABC-mitochondrial erythroid), localizes
to the mitochondrial inner membrane and is expressed at particularly high levels 
in erythroid tissues of embryos and adults. ABC-me is induced during erythroid
maturation in cell lines and primary hematopoietic cells, and its overexpression 
enhances hemoglobin synthesis in erythroleukemia cells. The ABC proteins
participate in diverse physiological processes by coupling ATP hydrolysis to the 
transport of a variety of substrates across cell membranes. We speculate that
ABC-me, a newly identified erythroid-expressed ABC superfamily member, may
mediate critical mitochondrial transport functions related to heme biosynthesis.

PMCID: PMC212759
PMID: 10835348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Reprod Dev. 2000 Jun;56(2):124-38.

GATA-1 is a potential repressor of anti-Müllerian hormone expression during the
establishment of puberty in the mouse.

Beau C(1), Rauch M, Joulin V, Jégou B, Guerrier D.

Author information: 
(1)GERM/INSERM U. 435, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, Bretagne, France.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), also known as Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS),
is one of the earliest and best-known markers of Sertoli cell differentiation and
is expressed until around puberty. The present study is aimed at the better
understanding of the molecular pathways involved in testicular development and
establishment of adult functions with regards to AMH regulation. We found, within
the mouse AMH promoter, putative GATA motifs (A/T)GATA(A/G), known to be
specifically bound by members of the GATA transcription factor family. We then
carried out RNase protection assays and immunohistochemical techniques aimed at
comparing precisely the chronological expression patterns of AMH and GATA-1, this
latter being expressed in the testis after birth. Using both approaches we found 
an inverse and close relationship between AMH and GATA-1 mRNA and protein
expression during the pre-pubertal period. These results allowed us to define a
transitory 4-5-day period, starting from 3 dpp when both proteins are
heterogeneously expressed in Sertoli cells and showed that the appearance of
GATA-1 is associated with the decrease of AMH expression in these cells.
Furthermore DNA-protein interaction in in vitro studies showed first that GATA-1 
binds with various affinities on sites found in the AMH promoter and second that 
the proximity of the two strongest affinity sites leads to a synergistic binding 
effect. Altogether, the present study suggests that GATA-1 participates in AMH
gene repression during the pre-pubertal period.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10813843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 28;275(30):22969-77.

Intron 1 elements promote erythroid-specific GATA-1 gene expression.

Seshasayee D(1), Geiger JN, Gaines P, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Genetics and Department of Veterinary Science, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The zinc finger protein GATA-1 functions in a concentration-dependent fashion to 
activate the transcription of erythroid and megakaryocytic genes. Less is
understood, however, regarding factors that regulate the GATA-1 gene. Presently
elements within intron 1 are shown to markedly affect its erythroid-restricted
transcription. Within a full-length 6. 8-kilobase GATA-1 gene construct
(G6.8-Luc) the deletion of a central subdomain of intron 1 inhibited
transcription >/=10-fold in transiently transfected erythroid SKT6 cells, and
likewise inhibited high-level transcription in erythroid FDCW2ER-GATA1 cells. In 
parental myeloid FDCER cells, however, low-level transcription was largely
unaffected by intron 1 deletions. Within intron 1, repeated GATA and Ap1
consensus elements in a central region are described which when linked directly
to reporter cassettes promote transcription in erythroid SKT6 and FDCER-GATA1
cells at high rates. Moreover, GATA-1 activated transcription from this subdomain
in 293 cells, and in SKT6 cells this subdomain footprinted in vivo. For stably
integrated GFP reporter constructs in erythroid SKT6 cells, corroborating results
were obtained. Deletion of intronic GATA and Ap1 motifs abrogated the activity of
G6.8-pEGFP; activity was decreased by 43 and 56%, respectively, by the deletion
of either motif; and the above 1800-base pair region of intron 1 per se was
transcribed at rates uniformly greater than G6.8-pEGFP. Also described is the
differential utilization of exons 1a and 1b among primary erythromegakaryocytic
and myeloid cells.

PMID: 10811657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 7;275(27):20762-9.

A functionally conserved N-terminal domain of the friend of GATA-2 (FOG-2)
protein represses GATA4-dependent transcription.

Svensson EC(1), Huggins GS, Dardik FB, Polk CE, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

GATA4 is a transcriptional activator of cardiac-restricted promoters and is
required for normal cardiac morphogenesis. Friend of GATA-2 (FOG-2) is a
multizinc finger protein that associates with GATA4 and represses GATA4-dependent
transcription. To better understand the transcriptional repressor activity of
FOG-2 we performed a functional analysis of the FOG-2 protein. The results
demonstrated that 1) zinc fingers 1 and 6 of FOG-2 are each capable of
interacting with evolutionarily conserved motifs within the N-terminal zinc
finger of mammalian GATA proteins, 2) a nuclear localization signal (RKRRK)
(amino acids 736-740) is required to program nuclear targeting of FOG-2, and 3)
FOG-2 can interact with the transcriptional co-repressor, C-terminal-binding
protein-2 via a conserved sequence motif in FOG-2 (PIDLS). Surprisingly, however,
this interaction with C-terminal-binding protein-2 is not required for
FOG-2-mediated repression of GATA4-dependent transcription. Instead, we have
identified a novel N-terminal domain of FOG-2 (amino acids 1-247) that is both
necessary and sufficient to repress GATA4-dependent transcription. This
N-terminal repressor domain is functionally conserved in the related protein,
Friend of GATA1. Taken together, these results define a set of evolutionarily
conserved mechanisms by which FOG proteins repress GATA-dependent transcription
and thereby form the foundation for genetic studies designed to elucidate the
role of FOG-2 in cardiac development.

PMID: 10801815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):19676-84.

Suppression of erythroid but not megakaryocytic differentiation of human K562
erythroleukemic cells by notch-1.

Lam LT(1), Ronchini C, Norton J, Capobianco AJ, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Pharmacology, Molecular 
and Cellular Pharmacology Program, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The Notch signal transduction pathway is a highly conserved regulatory system
that controls multiple developmental processes. We have established an
erythroleukemia cell model to study how Notch regulates cell fate and
erythroleukemic cell differentiation. K562 and HEL cells expressed the Notch-1
receptor and the Notch ligand Jagged-1. The stable expression of the
constitutively active intracellular domain of Notch-1 (NIC-1) in K562 cells
inhibited erythroid without affecting megakaryocytic maturation. Expression of
antisense Notch-1 induced spontaneous erythroid maturation. Suppression of
erythroid maturation by NIC-1 did not result from down-regulation of GATA-1 and
TAL-1, transcription factors necessary for erythroid differentiation. Microarray 
gene expression analysis identified genes activated during erythroid maturation, 
and NIC-1 disrupted the maturation-dependent changes in the expression of these
genes. These results show that NIC-1 alters the pattern of gene expression in
K562 cells leading to a block in erythroid maturation and therefore suggest that 
Notch signaling may control the developmental potential of normal and malignant
erythroid progenitor cells.

PMID: 10783395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Development. 2000 May;127(10):2031-40.

FOG acts as a repressor of red blood cell development in Xenopus.

Deconinck AE(1), Mead PE, Tevosian SG, Crispino JD, Katz SG, Zon LI, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Members of the GATA family of zinc-finger transcription factors have critical
roles in a variety of cell types. GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 are required for
proliferation and differentiation of several hematopoietic lineages, whereas
GATA-4, GATA-5 and GATA-6 activate cardiac and endoderm gene expression programs.
Two GATA cofactors have recently been identified. Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1)
interacts with GATA-1 and is expressed principally in hematopoietic lineages,
whereas FOG-2 is expressed predominantly in heart and brain. Although gene
targeting experiments are consistent with an essential role for FOG-1 as an
activator of GATA-1 function, reporter assays in transfected cells indicate that 
FOG-1 and FOG-2 can act as repressors. We have cloned a Xenopus laevis homologue 
of FOG that is structurally most similar to FOG-1, but is expressed predominantly
in heart and brain, as well as the ventral blood island and adult spleen. Ectopic
expression and explant assays demonstrate that FOG proteins can act as repressors
in vivo, in part through interaction with the transcriptional co-repressor,
C-terminal Binding Protein (CtBP). FOG may regulate the differentiation of red
blood cells by modulating expression and activity of GATA-1 and GATA-2. We
propose that the FOG proteins participate in the switch from progenitor
proliferation to red blood cell maturation and differentiation.

PMID: 10769228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 7;275(14):10567-76.

Regulation of mouse p45 NF-E2 transcription by an erythroid-specific
GATA-dependent intronic alternative promoter.

Moroni E(1), Mastrangelo T, Razzini R, Cairns L, Moi P, Ottolenghi S, Giglioni B.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Studio sulla Patologia Cellulare, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Istituto di Patologia Generale, Università di Milano, Via Mangiagalli, 
31, 20133 Milano, Italy.

The erythroid-enriched transcription factor NF-E2 is composed of two subunits,
p45 and p18, the former of which is mainly expressed in the hematopoietic system.
We have isolated and characterized the mouse p45 NF-E2 gene; we show here that,
similar to the human gene, the mouse gene has two alternative promoters, which
are differentially active during development and in different hematopoietic
cells. Transcripts from the distal promoter are present in both erythroid and
myeloid cells; however, transcripts from an alternative proximal 1b promoter,
lying in the first intron, are abundant in erythroid cells, but barely detectable
in myeloid cells. During development, both transcripts are detectable in yolk
sac, fetal liver, and bone marrow. Transfection experiments show that proximal
promoter 1b has a strong activity in erythroid cells, which is completely
dependent on the integrity of a palindromic GATA-1 binding site. In contrast, the
distal promoter 1a is not active in this assay. When the promoter 1b is placed 3'
to the promoter 1a and reporter gene, in an arrangement that resembles the
natural one, it acts as an enhancer to stimulate the activity of the upstream
promoter la.

PMID: 10744751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 31;275(13):9425-32.

Eosinophil-specific regulation of gp91(phox) gene expression by transcription
factors GATA-1 and GATA-2.

Yang D(1), Suzuki S, Hao LJ, Fujii Y, Yamauchi A, Yamamoto M, Nakamura M,
Kumatori A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host-defense Biochemistry, Institute of Tropical Medicine,
Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

The glycoprotein gp91(phox) is an essential component of the phagocyte NADPH
oxidase and is expressed in eosinophils, neutrophils, monocytes, and
B-lymphocytes. We previously suggested an eosinophil-specific mechanism of
gp91(phox) gene expression. To elucidate the mechanism, we performed functional
assays on deletion mutants of the gp91(phox) promoter in various types of
gp91(phox)-expressing cells. A 10-base pair (bp) region from bp -105 to -96 of
the promoter activated transcription of the gene in eosinophilic cells, but not
in neutrophilic, monocytic, or B-lymphocytic cells. A 2-bp mutation introduced
into the GATA site spanning bp -101 to -96 (-98GATA site) of the fragment
abolished its activity. Gel shift assays using a GATA competitor and specific
antibodies demonstrated that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 specifically bound to the
-98GATA site with similar affinities. Individual transfection of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 into Jurkat cells, which have neither endogenous GATA-1 nor GATA-2,
activated the -105/+12 construct in a -98GATA site-dependent manner. Combined
transfection of GATA-1 and GATA-2 activated the promoter less than transfection
of GATA-1 alone. These results suggest that GATA-1 is an activator and that
GATA-2 is a relative competitive inhibitor of GATA-1 in the expression of the
gp91(phox) gene in human eosinophils.

PMID: 10734088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Leukemia. 2000 Mar;14(3):439-45.

FLI-1 is a suppressor of erythroid differentiation in human hematopoietic cells.

Athanasiou M(1), Mavrothalassitis G, Sun-Hoffman L, Blair DG.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, MD, USA.

The FLI-1 oncogene, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, is
associated with both normal and abnormal hematopoietic cell growth and
lineage-specific differentiation. We have previously shown that overexpression of
FLI-1 in pluripotent human hematopoietic cells leads to the induction of a
megakaryocytic phenotype. In this report we show that FLI-1 also acts as an
inhibitor of erythroid differentiation. Following the induction of erythroid
differentiation, pluripotent cells express reduced levels of FLI-1. In contrast, 
when FLI-1 is overexpressed in these cells, the levels of erythroid markers are
reduced. The ability of FLI-1 overexpressing cells to respond to
erythroid-specific inducers such as hemin and Ara-C is also inhibited, and the
uninduced cells show a reduced level of the erythroid-associated GATA-1
transcription factor mRNA. Furthermore, expression of a GATA-1 promoter-driven
reporter construct in K562 cells is inhibited by co-transfection with a construct
expressing FLI-1. Our results support the hypothesis that FLI-1 can act both
positively and negatively in the regulation of hematopoietic cell
differentiation, and that inhibition of GATA-1 expression may contribute to
FLI-1-mediated inhibition of erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 10720139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):266-70.

Familial dyserythropoietic anaemia and thrombocytopenia due to an inherited
mutation in GATA1.

Nichols KE(1), Crispino JD, Poncz M, White JG, Orkin SH, Maris JM, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.

Haematopoietic development is regulated by nuclear protein complexes that
coordinate lineage-specific patterns of gene expression. Targeted mutagenesis in 
embryonic stem cells and mice has revealed roles for the X-linked gene Gata1 in
erythrocyte and megakaryocyte differentiation. GATA-1 is the founding member of a
family of DNA-binding proteins that recognize the motif WGATAR through a
conserved multifunctional domain consisting of two C4-type zinc fingers. Here we 
describe a family with X-linked dyserythropoietic anaemia and thrombocytopenia
due to a substitution of methionine for valine at amino acid 205 of GATA-1. This 
highly conserved valine is necessary for interaction of the amino-terminal zinc
finger of GATA-1 with its essential cofactor, FOG-1 (for friend of GATA-1; refs
9-12). We show that the V205M mutation abrogates the interaction between Gata-1
and Fog-1, inhibiting the ability of Gata-1 to rescue erythroid differentiation
in an erythroid cell line deficient for Gata-1 (G1E). Our findings underscore the
importance of FOG-1:Gata-1 associations in both megakaryocyte and erythroid
development, and suggest that other X-linked anaemias or thrombocytopenias may be
caused by defects in GATA1.

PMID: 10700180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Blood. 2000 Mar 1;95(5):1652-5.

The GATA-E box-GATA motif in the EKLF promoter is required for in vivo
expression.

Anderson KP(1), Crable SC, Lingrel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. kathleen.anderson@uc.edu

The erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) is a key regulatory protein in globin
gene expression. This zinc finger transcription factor is required for expression
of the adult beta globin gene, and it has been suggested that it plays an
important role in the developmental switch from fetal gamma to adult beta globin 
gene expression. We have previously described a sequence element in the distal
promoter region of the mouse EKLF gene that is critical for the expression of
this transcription factor. The element consists of an E box motif flanked by 2
GATA-1 binding sites. Here we demonstrate that mutation of the E box or the
GATA-1 consensus sequences eliminates expression from the EKLF promoter in
transgenic mice. These results confirm the importance of this activator element
for in vivo expression of the EKLF gene. (Blood. 2000;95:1652-1655)

PMID: 10688820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Blood. 2000 Feb 15;95(4):1264-73.

GATA-1 blocks IL-6-induced macrophage differentiation and apoptosis through the
sustained expression of cyclin D1 and bcl-2 in a murine myeloid cell line M1.

Tanaka H(1), Matsumura I, Nakajima K, Daino H, Sonoyama J, Yoshida H, Oritani K, 
Machii T, Yamamoto M, Hirano T, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology/Oncology, Internal Medicine II, Molecular Oncology, 
Biomedical Research Center, Osaka University Medical School, Osaka, Japan.

Cytokines exert pleiotropic effects on target cells in a manner dependent on the 
cell type or stage of differentiation. To determine how instinctive cell
properties affect biological effects of cytokine, we introduced an
erythroid/megakaryocyte lineage-specific transcription factor, GATA-1, into a
murine myeloid cell line M1, which is known to undergo macrophage differentiation
in response to interleukin 6 (IL-6). Overexpression of GATA-1 changed the
phenotype of M1 cells from myeloid to megakaryocytic lineage. Furthermore, GATA-1
blocked both IL-6-induced macrophage differentiation and apoptosis of M1 cells.
Although STAT3 is essential for IL-6-induced macrophage differentiation of M1
cells, GATA-1 had little or no effect on tyrosine phosphorylation, DNA binding,
and transcriptional activities of STAT3 in Western blot analysis, electropholic
mobility shift assay (EMSA), and luciferase assays. During IL-6-induced
macrophage differentiation of M1 cells, IL-6 down-regulated cyclin D1 expression 
and induced p19(INK4D) expression, leading to reduction in cdk4 activities. In
contrast, sustained expression of cyclin D1 and a significantly lesser amount of 
p19(INK4D) induction were observed in IL-6-treated M1 cells overexpressing
GATA-1. Furthermore, although bcl-2 expression was severely reduced by IL-6 in M1
cells, it was sustained in GATA-1-introduced M1 cells during the culture with
IL-6. Both IL-6-induced macrophage differentiation and apoptosis were
significantly abrogated by coexpression of cyclin D1 and bcl-2, whereas
overexpressions of cyclin D1 or bcl-2 inhibited only differentiation or
apoptosis, respectively. These results suggested that GATA-1 may not only
reprogram the lineage phenotype of M1 cells but also disrupt the biologic effects
of IL-6 through the sustained expression of cyclin D1 and bcl-2. (Blood.
2000;95:1264-1273)

PMID: 10666199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Antiviral Res. 1999 Dec 31;44(3):167-77.

Inhibition of beta-globin gene expression by 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine in human 
erythroid progenitor cells.

Spiga MG(1), Weidner DA, Trentesaux C, LeBoeuf RD, Sommadossi JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine,
University of Miami, FL 33136, USA.

3'-Azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) treatment in HIV-infected patients is limited by
bone marrow suppression including neutropenia and anemia. Previous studies had
shown a direct effect of high concentrations of this drug on globin gene
expression in K-562 erythroleukemia cells. To better define the mechanism(s) of
AZT-induced bone marrow toxicity, the present study evaluates these effects in
more relevant human erythroid progenitor liquid cultures, because AZT is 100
times more toxic to human bone marrow cells than K-562 cells. At a clinically
relevant concentration of 1 microM, AZT inhibited specifically erythroid cell
growth by approximately 58% as compared with untreated cells. The percentage of
cells synthesizing hemoglobin was decreased also by 47% in AZT-treated cells with
beta-globin mRNA levels accounting for 0.27 pmol in treated cells as compared
with 1.44 under control conditions while beta-actin levels remained unchanged.
Under the same conditions, AZT inhibited the beta-globin chain synthesis by
approximately 60% as compared with the control. Consistent with the data
described above was the finding that a concentration as low as 0.1 microM of AZT 
decreased by almost 40% the binding level of the erythroid-specific transcription
factor GATA-1. These findings demonstrate that AZT, at clinical relevant
concentrations, specifically inhibits beta-globin gene expression in human
erythroid progenitor liquid cell culture.

PMID: 10651068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2295-304.

Uroporphyrinogen III synthase. An alternative promoter controls
erythroid-specific expression in the murine gene.

Aizencang GI(1), Bishop DF, Forrest D, Astrin KH, Desnick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10029, USA.

Uroporphyrinogen III synthase (URO-synthase, EC 4.2.1.75) is the fourth enzyme of
the heme biosynthetic pathway and is the defective enzyme in congenital
erythropoietic porphyria. To investigate the erythroid-specific expression of
murine URO-synthase, the cDNA and approximately 24-kilobase genomic sequences
were isolated and characterized. Three alternative transcripts were identified
containing different 5'-untranslated regions (5'-UTRs), but identical coding
exons 2B through 10. Transcripts with 5'-UTR exon 1A alone or fused to exon 1B
were ubiquitously expressed (housekeeping), whereas transcripts with 5'-UTR exon 
2A were only present in erythroid cells (erythroid-specific). Analysis of the
TATA-less housekeeping promoter upstream of exon 1A revealed binding sites for
ubiquitously expressed transcription factors Sp1, NF1, AP1, Oct1, and NRF2. The
TATA-less erythroid-specific promoter upstream of exon 2A had nine putative GATA1
erythroid enhancer binding sites. Luciferase promoter/reporter constructs
transfected into NIH 3T3 and mouse erythroleukemia cells indicated that the
housekeeping promoter was active in both cell lines, while the erythroid promoter
was active only in erythroid cells. Site-specific mutagenesis of the first GATA1 
binding site markedly reduced luciferase activity in K562 cells (<5% of wild
type). Thus, housekeeping and erythroid-specific transcripts are expressed from
alternative promoters of a single mouse URO-synthase gene.

PMID: 10644678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Oncogene. 2000 Jan 6;19(1):134-40.

Inhibitory interaction of c-Myb and GATA-1 via transcriptional co-activator CBP.

Takahashi T(1), Suwabe N, Dai P, Yamamoto M, Ishii S, Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Gene targeting experiments have revealed that transcription factors such as c-Myb
and GATA-1 play crucial roles during hematopoietic differentiation. c-Myb is
necessary in the immature cells of almost every hematopoietic lineage and GATA-1 
is essential for the development of the erythroid lineage. In addition,
CREB-binding protein (CBP) acts as a transcriptional adapter for various
transcription factors, including c-Myb and GATA-1. In this paper, we show that
the transcription factors c-Myb and GATA-1 each inhibit the transcriptional
activity of the other and that any possible bipartite complexes c-Myb, GATA-1,
and CBP could be formed, but the tripartite complex was hardly formed. The
exclusive binding of GATA-1 and c-Myb to CBP is probably the molecular basis for 
the mutual inhibition of their transcriptional activity. Our data suggest that
cross-talk between these three factors might be important for hematopoietic
differentiation and that CBP functions as a key molecule during the process.

PMID: 10644988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):713-23.

A GATA box in the GATA-1 gene hematopoietic enhancer is a critical element in the
network of GATA factors and sites that regulate this gene.

Nishimura S(1), Takahashi S, Kuroha T, Suwabe N, Nagasawa T, Trainor C, Yamamoto 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 
305-8577, Japan.

A region located at kbp -3.9 to -2.6 5' to the first hematopoietic exon of the
GATA-1 gene is necessary to recapitulate gene expression in both the primitive
and definitive erythroid lineages. In transfection analyses, this region
activated reporter gene expression from an artificial promoter in a position- and
orientation-independent manner, indicating that the region functions as the
GATA-1 gene hematopoietic enhancer (G1HE). However, when analyzed in transgenic
embryos in vivo, G1HE activity was orientation dependent and also required the
presence of the endogenous GATA-1 gene hematopoietic promoter. To define the
boundaries of G1HE, a series of deletion constructs were prepared and tested in
transfection and transgenic mice analyses. We show that G1HE contains a 149-bp
core region which is critical for GATA-1 gene expression in both primitive and
definitive erythroid cells but that expression in megakaryocytes requires the
core plus additional sequences from G1HE. This core region contains one GATA, one
GAT, and two E boxes. Mutational analyses revealed that only the GATA box is
critical for gene-regulatory activity. Importantly, G1HE was active in SCL(-/-)
embryos. These results thus demonstrate the presence of a critical network of
GATA factors and GATA binding sites that controls the expression of this gene.

PMCID: PMC85182
PMID: 10611250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Seikagaku. 1999 Oct;71(10):1247-50.

[Function and transcriptional regulation of GATA-1].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Tsukuba.

PMID: 10572484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biofizika. 1999 Jul-Aug;44(4):649-54.

[Averaging results of site recognition can increase the accuracy of annotating
the human genome].

[Article in Russian]

Ponomarenko MP(1), Ponomarenko IuV, Podkolodnaia OA, Frolov AS, Vorob'ev DV,
Kolchanov NA, Overton GC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Division, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.

A systemic approach is proposed, which makes it possible to increase the accuracy
of recognition of functional sites in arbitrary DNA sequences. The approach is
based on the Central limit theorem and consists in the averaging of a large
number of recognitions of a particular site. To obtain a rather large number of
recognitions within the framework of conventional methods of recognition,
consensus, and frequency matrix, 20 novel oligonucleotide alphabets were used.
The approach was used to study the binding sites of GATA-1 and C/EBP
transcription factors. It was found that the averaged recognition of these sites 
is more precise than each of specific recognitions, which just follows from the
Central limit theorem.

PMID: 10544815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Genomics. 1999 Oct 15;61(2):183-93.

Structural analysis and mapping of DNase I hypersensitivity of HS5 of the
beta-globin locus control region.

Li Q(1), Zhang M, Duan Z, Stamatoyannopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195, USA.

The beta-globin locus control region (LCR) is a cis regulatory element that is
located in the 5' part of the locus and confers high-level erythroid
lineage-specific and position-independent expression of the globin genes. The LCR
is composed of five DNase I hypersensitive sites (HSs), four of which are formed 
in erythroid cells. The function of the 5'-most site, HS5, remains unknown. To
gain insights into its function, mouse HS5 was cloned and sequenced. Comparison
of the HS5 sequences of mouse, human, and galago revealed two extensively
conserved regions, designated HS5A and HS5B. DNase I hypersensitivity mapping
revealed that two hypersensitive sites are located within the HS5A region
(designated HS5A(major) and HS5A(minor)), and two are located within the HS5B
region (HS5B(major), HS5B(minor)). The positions of each of these HSs colocalize 
with either GATA-1 or Ap1/NF-E2 motifs, suggesting that these protein binding
sites are implicated in the formation of HS5. Gel retardation assays indicated
that the Ap1/NF-E2 motifs identified in murine HS5A and HS5B interact with NF-E2 
or similar proteins. Studies of primary murine cells showed that HS5 is formed in
all hemopoietic tissues tested (fetal liver, adult thymus, and spleen),
indicating that this HS is not erythroid lineage specific. HS5 was detected in
murine brain but not in murine kidney or adult liver, suggesting that this site
is not ubiquitous. The presence of GATA-1 and NF-E2 motifs (which are common
features of the DNase I hypersensitive sites of the LCR) suggests that the HS5 is
organized in a manner similar to that of the other HSs. Taken together, our
results suggest that HS5 is an inherent component of the beta-globin locus
control region.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10534403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5535-45.

The GATA-1 and Spi-1 transcriptional factors bind to a GATA/EBS dual element in
the Fli-1 exon 1.

Barbeau B(1), Barat C, Bergeron D, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de biologie moléculaire, Département des Sciences Biologiques,
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Fli-1 is a proto-oncogene which is rearranged in tumors induced by three
different retroviruses, Cas-Br-E, F-MuLV, and 10A1. This gene is a member of the 
Ets gene family, a class of transcription factors that recognize and bind to a
DNA motif known as the Ets binding site (EBS). Our laboratory has previously
cloned and characterized the promoter region of both human and mouse Fli-1 genes.
We had then identified several regulatory elements conserved between the two
species. Two of them, an exon 1 GATA/EBS dual element and an EBS element located 
in the 5' end of intron 1, were analysed in the present study. EMSA analysis
performed with nuclear extracts from different cell lines showed that the EBS
element in intron 1 (EBSi) was bound by one potential Ets-related ubiquitous
factor. The GATA/EBS element was bound by several factors that seemed
Ets-related, one of which was found to be specifically expressed in hematopoietic
cells. the GATA/EBS dual element was thus chosen for further analysis. A human
Fli-1-derived genomic fragment containing the GATA/EBS led to enhanced
transcription when positioned upstream of the SV40 promoter in the
erythroleukemic HEL cell line. In addition, an increasing number of GATA/EBS
oligonucleotides upstream of this same promoter resulted in a copy
number-dependent increase in luciferase activity which was greatly reduced when
the EBS consensus sequence was mutated. One of the factors binding to the
GATA/EBS region was identified to be Spi-1 by supershift analysis and was also
shown to bind to the EBS element of the human Ets-2 gene. Supershift analysis
also demonstrated the binding of the GATA-1 factor to the GATA/EBS dual element. 
Our results suggest that Spi-1 and GATA-1 might play a key role in the regulation
of Fli-1.

PMID: 10523830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;19(11):7600-9.

Structural and functional cross-talk between a distant enhancer and the
epsilon-globin gene promoter shows interdependence of the two elements in
chromatin.

McDowell JC(1), Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-2715, USA.

We investigated the requirements for enhancer-promoter communication by using the
human beta-globin locus control region (LCR) DNase I-hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) 
enhancer and the epsilon-globin gene in chromatinized minichromosomes in
erythroid cells. Activation of globin genes during development is accompanied by 
localized alterations of chromatin structure, and CACCC binding factors and
GATA-1, which interact with both globin promoters and the LCR, are believed to be
critical for globin gene transcription activation. We found that an HS2 element
mutated in its GATA motif failed to remodel the epsilon-globin promoter or
activate transcription yet HS2 nuclease accessibility did not change.
Accessibility and transcription were reduced at promoters with mutated GATA-1 or 
CACCC sites. Strikingly, these mutations also resulted in reduced accessibility
at HS2. In the absence of a globin gene, HS2 is similarly resistant to nuclease
digestion. In contrast to observations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, HS2-dependent
promoter remodeling was diminished when we mutated the TATA box, crippling
transcription. This mutation also reduced HS2 accessibility. The results indicate
that the epsilon-globin promoter and HS2 interact both structurally and
functionally and that both upstream activators and the basal transcription
apparatus contribute to the interaction. Further, at least in this instance,
transcription activation and promoter remodeling by a distant enhancer are not
separable.

PMCID: PMC84785
PMID: 10523648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nature. 1999 Sep 30;401(6752):489-93.

Negative regulation of erythropoiesis by caspase-mediated cleavage of GATA-1.

De Maria R(1), Zeuner A, Eramo A, Domenichelli C, Bonci D, Grignani F,
Srinivasula SM, Alnemri ES, Testa U, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19107-5541, USA. rdemaria@lac.jci.tju.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 1999 Sep 30;401(6752):433, 435-6.

The production of red blood cells follows the sequential formation of
proerythroblasts and basophilic, polychromatophilic and orthochromatic
erythroblasts, and is promoted by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) in response to
tissue hypoxia. However, little is known about the negative regulation of this
process. Death receptors are a family of surface molecules that trigger caspase
activation and apoptosis in a variety of cell types. Here we show that immature
erythroid cells express several death receptors whose ligands are produced by
mature erythroblasts. Exposure of erythroid progenitors to mature erythroblasts
or death-receptor ligands resulted in caspase-mediated degradation of the
transcription factor GATA-1, which is associated with impaired erythroblast
development. Expression of a caspase-resistant GATA-1 mutant, but not of the
wild-type gene, completely restored erythroid expansion and differentiation
following the triggering of death receptors, indicating that there is regulatory 
feedback between mature and immature erythroblasts through caspase-mediated
cleavage of GATA-1. Similarly, erythropoiesis blockade following Epo deprivation 
was largely prevented by the expression of caspase-inhibitory proteins or
caspase-resistant GATA-1 in erythroid progenitors. Caspase-mediated cleavage of
GATA-1 may therefore represent an important negative control mechanism in
erythropoiesis.

PMID: 10519553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Blood. 1999 Aug 15;94(4):1429-39.

C/EBPbeta and GATA-1 synergistically regulate activity of the eosinophil granule 
major basic protein promoter: implication for C/EBPbeta activity in eosinophil
gene expression.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Nishio H, Kishi K, Ackerman SJ, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Kumamoto, Japan.
yujiya@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Eosinophil granule major basic protein (MBP) is expressed exclusively in
eosinophils and basophils in hematopoietic cells. In our previous study, we
demonstrated a major positive regulatory role for GATA-1 and a negative
regulatory role for GATA-2 in MBP gene transcription. Further analysis of the MBP
promoter region identified a C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein) consensus
binding site 6 bp upstream of the functional GATA-binding site in the MBP gene.
In the cell line HT93A, which is capable of differentiating towards both the
eosinophil and neutrophil lineages in response to retinoic acid (RA), C/EBPalpha 
mRNA expression decreased significantly concomitant with eosinophilic and
neutrophilic differentiation, whereas C/EBPbeta expression was markedly
increased. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) showed that recombinant 
C/EBPbeta protein could bind to the potential C/EBP-binding site (bp -90 to -82) 
in the MBP promoter. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that both C/EBPbeta and
GATA-1 can bind simultaneously to the C/EBP- and GATA-binding sites in the MBP
promoter. To determine the functionality of both the C/EBP- and GATA-binding
sites, we analyzed whether C/EBPbeta and GATA-1 can stimulate the MBP promoter in
the C/EBPbeta and GATA-1 negative Jurkat T-cell line. Cotransfection with
C/EBPbeta and GATA-1 expression vectors produced a 5-fold increase compared with 
cotransfection with the C/EBPbeta or GATA-1 expression vectors individually. In
addition, GST pull-down experiments demonstrated a physical interaction between
human GATA-1 and C/EBPbeta. Expression of FOG (riend ATA), which binds to GATA-1 
and acts as a cofactor for GATA-binding proteins, decreased transactivation
activity of GATA-1 for the MBP promoter in a dose-dependent manner. Our results
provide the first evidence that both GATA-1 and C/EBPbeta synergistically
transactivate the promoter of an eosinophil-specific granule protein gene and
that FOG may act as a negative cofactor for the eosinophil lineage, unlike its
positively regulatory function for the erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages.

PMID: 10438731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 13;274(33):23491-8.

hFOG-2, a novel zinc finger protein, binds the co-repressor mCtBP2 and modulates 
GATA-mediated activation.

Holmes M(1), Turner J, Fox A, Chisholm O, Crossley M, Chong B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, School of Pathology, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

We have identified a novel human zinc finger protein, hFOG-2, which is related to
but distinct from the murine transcription factor Friend-of-GATA-1 (mFOG-1). The 
hFOG-2 gene was initially detected in K562 cells using a polymerase chain
reaction approach with degenerate primers corresponding to zinc finger regions of
mFOG-1. A murine homologue of hFOG-2 was also identified in the mouse expressed
sequence tag data banks, indicating that a family of FOG genes exists in mammals.
hFOG-2 appears to be widely expressed, while mFOG-1 is expressed primarily in
erythroid and megakaryocytic cells and plays a fundamental role in the
development of these lineages. Sequencing of the full-length hFOG-2 cDNA
indicates that the interaction domains for transcription factors GATA-1 and
mCtBP2 are both conserved and we have shown that this new FOG protein also
physically interacts with these factors. We have demonstrated that hFOG-2, like
mFOG-1, can act in concert with GATA-1 to activate gene expression from the p45
NF-E2 promoter region, but that it can also act to repress GATA-mediated
activation of additional reporter constructs. Finally, we have identified a
repression domain in hFOG-2 and show that repression is dependent upon the
integrity of the mCtBP2 interaction motif Pro-Ile-Asp-Leu-Ser.

PMID: 10438528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Cell Physiol. 1999 Sep;180(3):390-401.

Increased expression of the distal, but not of the proximal, Gata1 transcripts
during differentiation of primary erythroid cells.

Vannucchi AM(1), Linari S, Lin CS, Koury MJ, Bondurant MC, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Florence and Azienda Ospedale Careggi,
Italy.

Gata1 is expressed from either one of two alternative promoters, the erythroid
(proximal to the AUG) and the testis (distal to the AUG) promoter, both used by
hemopoietic cells. To clarify the role of the distal and proximal Gata1
transcripts in erythroid differentiation, we determined by specific reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reactions their relative levels of expression
during the differentiation of erythroid precursors purified from the spleen of
mice treated with phenylhydrazine (PHZ) or infected with the anemia-inducing
strain of the Friend virus (FVA cells). PHZ cells are erythroid precursors that
progress in vivo to erythroblasts in 3 days. Both PHZ and FVA cells synchronously
proliferate and differentiate in vitro in the presence of erythropoietin (EPO).
The levels of total and of distal, but not of proximal, Gata1 transcripts
increased by five- to eightfold during in vivo and in vitro differentiation of
FVA and PHZ cells. The increase in expression was temporally associated with an
increase in the expression of Eklf, Scl, and Nfe2, three genes required for
erythroid differentiation, and preceded by 24 h the repression of Gata2 and Myb
expression. The day 1 PHZ cells that survived 18 h in the absence of EPO do not
express globin genes and express detectable levels of distal but not of proximal 
Gata1 transcripts. These cells activate the expression of the globin genes within
2 h when exposed to EPO. Therefore, during erythroid differentiation of primary
cells, increased expression of distal Gata1 transcripts underlies the increase in
the expression of total Gata1 associated with the establishment of the erythroid 
differentiation program.

PMID: 10430179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Genes Dev. 1999 Jul 15;13(14):1847-60.

A GATA-2/estrogen receptor chimera functions as a ligand-dependent negative
regulator of self-renewal.

Heyworth C(1), Gale K, Dexter M, May G, Enver T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign (CRC) Section of Hematopoietic Cell and Gene
Therapeutics, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital National 
Health Service Trust, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

The transcription factor GATA-2 is expressed in hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells and is functionally implicated in their survival and proliferation. We have
used estrogen and tamoxifen-inducible forms of GATA-2 to modulate the levels of
GATA-2 in the IL-3-dependent multipotential hematopoietic progenitor cell model
FDCP mix. Ligand-dependent induction of exogenous GATA-2 activity did not rescue 
cells deprived of IL-3 from apoptosis. However, induction of GATA-2 activity in
cells cultured in IL-3 blocked factor-dependent self-renewal but not
factor-dependent survival: Cells undergo cell cycle arrest and cease
proliferating but do not apoptose. This was accompanied by differentiation down
the monocytic and granulocytic pathways. Differentiation occurred in the presence
of IL-3 and did not require addition of exogenous differentiation growth factors 
such as G-CSF or GM-CSF normally required to induce granulomonocytic
differentiation of FDCP-mix cells. Conversely, EPO-dependent erythroid
differentiation was inhibited by GATA-2 activation. These biological effects were
obtained with levels of exogenous GATA-2 representing less than twofold increases
over endogenous GATA-2 levels and were not observed in cells overexpressing
GATA-1/ER. Similar effects on proliferation and differentiation were also
observed in primary progenitor cells, freshly isolated from murine bone marrow
and transduced with a GATA-2/ER-containing retrovirus. Taken together, these data
suggest that threshold activities of GATA-2 in hematopoietic progenitor cells are
a critical determinant in influencing self-renewal versus differentiation
outcomes.

PMCID: PMC316885
PMID: 10421636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jul 20;96(15):8705-10.

Negative cross-talk between hematopoietic regulators: GATA proteins repress PU.1.

Zhang P(1), Behre G, Pan J, Iwama A, Wara-Aswapati N, Radomska HS, Auron PE,
Tenen DG, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The process through which multipotential hematopoietic cells commit to distinct
lineages involves the induction of specific transcription factors. PU.1 (also
known as Spi-1) and GATA-1 are transcription factors essential for the
development of myeloid and erythroid lineages, respectively. Overexpression of
PU.1 and GATA-1 can block differentiation in lineages in which they normally are 
down-regulated, indicating that not only positive but negative regulation of
these factors plays a role in normal hematopoietic lineage development. Here we
demonstrate that a region of the PU.1 Ets domain (the winged helix-turn-helix
wing) interacts with the conserved carboxyl-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 and
GATA-2 and that GATA proteins inhibit PU.1 transactivation of critical myeloid
target genes. We demonstrate further that GATA inhibits binding of PU.1 to c-Jun,
a critical coactivator of PU.1 transactivation of myeloid promoters. Finally,
PU.1 protein can inhibit both GATA-1 and GATA-2 transactivation function. Our
results suggest that interactions between PU.1 and GATA proteins play a critical 
role in the decision of stem cells to commit to erythroid vs. myeloid lineages.

PMCID: PMC17580
PMID: 10411939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Genomics. 1999 Jul 1;59(1):6-17.

Induction of erythrocyte protein 4.2 gene expression during differentiation of
murine erythroleukemia cells.

Karacay B(1), Chang LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital and The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43205-2696, USA.

Protein 4.2 (P4.2) is an important component in the erythrocyte membrane skeletal
network that regulates the stability and flexibility of erythrocytes. Recently,
we provided the evidence for specific P4.2 expression in erythroid cells during
development (L. Zhu et al., 1998, Blood 91, 695-705). Using dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO)-induced differentiation of murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells as a model, 
transcription of the P4.2 gene was found to be induced during erythroid
differentiation. To examine the mechanism for this induction, we isolated the
mouse P4.2 genomic DNA containing the 5' flanking sequence and defined the
location of the P4.2 promoter. Transcription of the mouse P4.2 gene initiates at 
multiple sites, with the major initiation site mapped at 174 nucleotides upstream
of the ATG start codon. The mouse P4.2 promoter is TATA-less and contains
multiple potential binding sites for erythroid transcription factors GATA-1,
NF-E2, EKLF, and tal-1/SCL. Transient transfection experiments demonstrated that 
a 1.7-kb mouse P4.2 promoter fused with the luciferase coding regions was induced
in DMSO-treated MEL cells. Deletion analysis showed that a 259-bp P4.2 promoter
DNA (nucleotide position -88 to +171 relative to the major transcription
initiation site designated +1), containing a GATA-binding site at position -29 to
-24, could still respond to the induction in differentiated MEL cells.
Importantly, mutations in the -29/-24 GATA motif rendered the promoter
unresponsive to DMSO induction. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed
that GATA-1 could bind to the -29/-24 GATA motif and this was confirmed by the
observation that the nuclear protein bound to the motif was supershifted by an
anti-GATA-1 monoclonal antibody. Taken together, these results suggest that the
erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 plays an important role in the induction of
P4.2 gene expression during erythroid cell differentiation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10395794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Immunol. 1999 Jul 15;163(2):623-30.

The transcription factors Elf-1 and GATA-1 bind to cell-specific enhancer
elements of human high-affinity IgE receptor alpha-chain gene.

Nishiyama C(1), Yokota T, Okumura K, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Research and Development Laboratory, Asahi Breweries, Ibaraki,
Japan.

Key regulatory regions necessary for the expression of the gene encoding
FcepsilonRI alpha-chain, a component of the high-affinity IgE receptor primarily 
responsible for IgE-dependent allergic response, were investigated. Two regions, 
-74/-69 and -55/-47, which contained binding motifs for proteins belonging to the
Ets family and the GATA family, respectively, were shown to be necessary for the 
activation of the alpha-chain promoter. Both the regulatory elements enhanced the
promoter activity only in alpha-chain-producing cells PT18 and RBL-2H3 (mast cell
lines), indicating that the elements required specific trans-acting proteins
present in the alpha-chain-producing cells. EMSA using nuclear extracts and in
vitro-translated proteins revealed that Elf-1 and GATA-1 bound to the enhancer
elements. This is the first report describing the regulation in the expression of
the FcepsilonRI alpha-chain.

PMID: 10395650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Blood. 1999 Jul 1;94(1):87-96.

GATA-1 and erythropoietin cooperate to promote erythroid cell survival by
regulating bcl-xL expression.

Gregory T(1), Yu C, Ma A, Orkin SH, Blobel GA, Weiss MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny, Inc, Cambridge, MA 02138-1118, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for normal erythropoiesis. By
examining in vitro-differentiated embryonic stem cells, we showed previously that
in the absence of GATA-1, committed erythroid precursors fail to complete
maturation and instead undergo apoptosis. The mechanisms by which GATA-1 controls
cell survival are unknown. Here we report that in erythroid cells, GATA-1
strongly induces the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein bcl-xL, but not the
related proteins bcl-2 and mcl-1. Consistent with a role for bcl-xL in mediating 
GATA-1-induced erythroid cell survival, in vitro-differentiated bcl-xL-/-
embryonic stem cells fail to generate viable mature definitive erythroid cells, a
phenotype resembling that of GATA-1 gene disruption. In addition, we show that
erythropoietin, which is also required for erythroid cell survival, cooperates
with GATA-1 to stimulate bcl-xL gene expression and to maintain erythroid cell
viability during terminal maturation. Together, our data show that bcl-xL is
essential for normal erythroid development and suggest a regulatory hierarchy in 
which bcl-xL is a critical downstream effector of GATA-1 and
erythropoietin-mediated signals.

PMID: 10381501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1999 Apr;47(4):358-63.

[Transcription factors and angiogenesis].

[Article in French]

Soncin F(1), Fafeur V, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)EP 560 CNRS, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

Various strategies led to the identification of transcription factors that take
part to the control of different steps during the formation of new blood vessels:
the description of the expression pattern of genes encoding these factors during 
embryonic development for ETS-1, ERG and FLI, SCL/TAL, GATA1 and 2, the
description of the phenotype of embryos obtained after gene inactivation by
homologous recombination for ARNT or LKLF, and the study of transcriptional
regulation in cultured endothelial cells for EGR1 or HOX-D3. Altogether, these
results showed that there is no transcription factor specific for endothelial
cells or for one step in the formation of blood vessels. Rather, factors
controlling gene expression induced by hypoxia, shear-stress or growth factors
take part in the morphogenesis of the vascular tree. The study of these factors
may allow to identify potential therapeutic targets for treatments aimed at
inhibiting or stimulating the development of new blood vessels.

PMID: 10372405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Methods Enzymol. 1999;304:572-84.

Guanine-adenine ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction in vivo footprinting.

Strauss EC(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston
02114, USA.

The analysis of functional DNA regulatory sequences involved in transcriptional
control is critical to establishing which proteins mediate cell-specific gene
expression. The organization of erythroid LCRs is complex, consisting of
multiple, interdigested cis elements. As in situ binding to these sites is
determined by the accessibility of these regulatory regions in native chromatin
and the availability of relevent cell-specific and ubiquitous factors, in vivo
footprinting was used to define protein DNA interactions in human globin LCRs. To
further enhance the detection of protein contacts with this technique, we have
modified the dimethyl sulfate-based ligation-mediated PCR in vivo footprinting
procedure to permit the assessment of protein binding at guanine and adenine
resides, rather than exclusively at guanines. This modification, termed GA-LMPCR 
in vivo footprinting, was essential for the analysis of GATA-1 motifs in the
alpha-LCR and HS-3 of the beta-LCR. Moreover, GA-LMPCR in vivo footprinting
provided high-resolution analysis of AP-1/NF-E2 elements and revealed protein
contacts at sequences that are not coincident with previously described
regulatory motifs. A comprehensive discussion of this modification and sample
illustrations from our studies have been presented to demonstrate the enhanced
detection and resolution obtained with this procedure.

PMID: 10372382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Genes Dev. 1999 Jun 1;13(11):1398-411.

Direct interaction of hematopoietic transcription factors PU.1 and GATA-1:
functional antagonism in erythroid cells.

Rekhtman N(1), Radparvar F, Evans T, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

Malignant transformation usually inhibits terminal cell differentiation but the
precise mechanisms involved are not understood. PU.1 is a hematopoietic-specific 
Ets family transcription factor that is required for development of some lymphoid
and myeloid lineages. PU.1 can also act as an oncoprotein as activation of its
expression in erythroid precursors by proviral insertion or transgenesis causes
erythroleukemias in mice. Restoration of terminal differentiation in the mouse
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells requires a decline in the level of PU.1, indicating
that PU.1 can block erythroid differentiation. Here we investigate the mechanism 
by which PU.1 interferes with erythroid differentiation. We find that PU.1
interacts directly with GATA-1, a zinc finger transcription factor required for
erythroid differentiation. Interaction between PU.1 and GATA-1 requires intact
DNA-binding domains in both proteins. PU.1 represses GATA-1-mediated
transcriptional activation. Both the DNA binding and transactivation domains of
PU.1 are required for repression and both domains are also needed to block
terminal differentiation in MEL cells. We also show that ectopic expression of
PU.1 in Xenopus embryos is sufficient to block erythropoiesis during normal
development. Furthermore, introduction of exogenous GATA-1 in both MEL cells and 
Xenopus embryos and explants relieves the block to erythroid differentiation
imposed by PU.1. Our results indicate that the stoichiometry of directly
interacting but opposing transcription factors may be a crucial determinant
governing processes of normal differentiation and malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC316770
PMID: 10364157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Leukemia. 1999 Jun;13(6):891-900.

WT1 and GATA1 expression in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute leukemia.

Patmasiriwat P(1), Fraizer G, Kantarjian H, Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The Wilms' tumor protein, WT1, represses transcription from several growth factor
genes. WT1 transcription is regulated in erythroid and myeloid lineages by the
transcription factor GATA-1. Using a sensitive, isotopic duplex RT-PCR procedure 
amplifying WT1 or GATA-1 together with beta-actin as the internal control in a
single reaction mix, we quantitated the expression of WT1 and GATA-1 mRNA of 16
patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 56 with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) and 22 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). K562 was used as reference 
positive control for this cell line expresses both WT1 and GATA-1. Among MDS
patients, increased WT1 expression was found in refractory anemia with excess
blast (RAEB) and RAEB in transformation (RAEB-T) subtypes compared to the normal 
controls, whereas WT1 expression in refractory anemia (RA) was not different from
the normal control level. All of AML cases of subtypes M0, M1, M2 and M3
expressed WT1 more than three times the normal WT1 level. Subtypes M4 to M7
showed significantly lower WT1 levels than M1 to M3 and AML cases with CD14+
expressed less WT1 than CD14-. Higher than normal WT1 levels were also expressed 
in cases of ALL.

PMID: 10360378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1999 Feb;25(1):47-60.

Targeted remodeling of human beta-globin promoter chromatin structure produces
increased expression and decreased silencing.

Iler N(1), Goodwin AJ, McInerney J, Nemeth MJ, Pomerantz O, Layon ME, Lowrey CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

The chromatin structure of the human beta-globin gene locus assumes a
transcriptionally-active conformation in erythroid cells. One feature of this
chromatin reorganization is the formation of DNase 1 hypersensitive sites in the 
regions of active globin gene promoters. This reorganization requires the globin 
locus control region and is associated with normal expression of the beta-like
globin genes. To determine whether it is possible to artificially enhance the
opening of the chromatin structure of a minimal beta-globin promoter, we placed a
101bp, erythroid-specific DNase 1 hypersensitive site-forming element (HSFE)
immediately upstream of the beta-globin promoter and gene. This element includes 
binding sites for NF-E2, AP-1, GATA-1 and Sp-1. Constructs were stably
transfected into murine erythroleukemia cells and promoter chromatin structure
and gene expression were analyzed. The HSFE induced an area of enhanced DNase 1
hypersensitivity extending from the transcriptional start site to -300bp of the
artificial promoter and significantly increased the proportion of beta-globin
promoters in an open chromatin configuration. This remodeling of promoter
chromatin structure resulted in 3-fold increases in beta-globin gene
transcription and induction, and inhibited long-term beta-globin gene silencing. 
These results indicate that a relatively small cis-acting element is able to
enhance remodeling of promoter chromatin structure resulting in increased
beta-globin gene expression.

PMID: 10349513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2799-811.

Different sequence requirements for expression in erythroid and megakaryocytic
cells within a regulatory element upstream of the GATA-1 gene.

Vyas P(1), McDevitt MA, Cantor AB, Katz SG, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital
and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The lineage-restricted transcription factor GATA-1 is required for
differentiation of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells. We have localized a 317
base pair cis-acting regulatory element, HS I, associated with a
hematopoietic-specific DNase I hypersensitive site, which lies approx. 3.7
kilobases upstream of the murine hematopoietic-specific GATA-1 IE promoter. HS I 
directs high-level expression of reporter GATA-1/lacZ genes to primitive and
definitive erythroid cells and megakaryocytes in transgenic mice. Comparative
sequence analysis of HS I between human and mouse shows approx. 63% nucleotide
identity with a more conserved core of 169 base pairs (86% identity). This core
contains a GATA site separated by 10 base pairs from an E-box motif. The
composite motif binds a multi-protein hematopoietic-specific transcription factor
complex which includes GATA-1, SCL/tal-1, E2A, Lmo2 and Ldb-1. Point mutations of
the GATA site abolishes HS I function, whereas mutation of the E-box motif still 
allows reporter gene expression in both lineages. Strict dependence of HS I
activity on a GATA site implies that assembly of a protein complex containing a
GATA-factor, presumably GATA-1 or GATA-2, is critical to activating or
maintaining its function. Further dissection of the 317 base pair region
demonstrates that, whereas all 317 base pairs are required for expression in
megakaryocytes, only the 5' 62 base pairs are needed for erythroid-specific
reporter expression. These findings demonstrate differential lineage requirements
for expression within the HS I element.

PMID: 10331989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2643-51.

Cell-autonomous and non-autonomous requirements for the zebrafish gene cloche in 
hematopoiesis.

Parker L(1), Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology
and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143-0448 USA.

Vertebrate embryonic hematopoiesis is a complex process that involves a number of
cellular interactions, notably those occurring between endothelial and blood
cells. The zebrafish cloche mutation affects both the hematopoietic and
endothelial lineages from an early stage (Stainier, D. Y. R., Weinstein, B. M.,
Detrich, H. W. R., Zon, L. I. and Fishman, M. C. (1995) Development 121,
3141-3150). cloche mutants lack endocardium, as well as head and trunk
endothelium, and nearly all blood cells. Cell transplantation studies have
revealed that the endocardial defect in cloche is cell-autonomous: wild-type
cells can form endocardium in mutant hosts, but mutant cells never contribute to 
the endocardium in wild-type or mutant hosts. In this paper, we analyze the
cell-autonomy of the blood defect in cloche. The blood cell deficiency in cloche 
mutants could be an indirect effect of the endothelial defects. Alternatively,
cloche could be required cell-autonomously in the blood cells themselves. To
distinguish between these possibilities, we cotransplanted wild-type and mutant
cells into a single wild-type host in order to compare their respective
hematopoietic capacity. We found that transplanted wild-type cells were much more
likely than mutant cells to contribute to circulating blood in a wild-type host. 
Furthermore, in the few cases where both wild-type and mutant donors contributed 
to blood in a wild-type host, the number of blood cells derived from the
wild-type donor was always much greater than the number of blood cells derived
from the mutant donor. These data indicate that cloche is required
cell-autonomously in blood cells for their differentiation and/or proliferation. 
When we assessed early expression of the erythropoietic gene gata-1 in transplant
recipients, we found that mutant blastomeres were as likely as wild-type
blastomeres to give rise to gata-1-expressing cells in a wild-type host.
Together, these two sets of data argue that cloche is not required
cell-autonomously for the differentiation of red blood cells, as assayed by
gata-1 expression, but rather for their proliferation and/or survival, as assayed
by their contribution to circulating blood. In addition, we found that
transplanted wild-type cells were less likely to express gata-1 in a mutant
environment than in a wild-type one, suggesting that cloche also acts
non-autonomously in red blood cell differentiation. This non-autonomous function 
of cloche in red blood cell differentiation may reflect its cell-autonomous
requirement in the endothelial lineage. Thus, cloche appears to be required in
erythropoiesis cell non-autonomously at a step prior to gata-1 expression, and
cell-autonomously subsequently.

PMID: 10331976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. EMBO J. 1999 May 17;18(10):2812-22.

Transcriptional cofactors of the FOG family interact with GATA proteins by means 
of multiple zinc fingers.

Fox AH(1), Liew C, Holmes M, Kowalski K, Mackay J, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, G08, University of Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.

Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1) is a zinc finger protein that has been shown to interact
physically with the erythroid DNA-binding protein GATA-1 and modulate its
transcriptional activity. Recently, two new members of the FOG family have been
identified: a mammalian protein, FOG-2, that also associates with GATA-1 and
other mammalian GATA factors; and U-shaped, a Drosophila protein that interacts
with the Drosophila GATA protein Pannier. FOG proteins contain multiple zinc
fingers and it has been shown previously that the sixth finger of FOG-1 interacts
specifically with the N-finger but not the C-finger of GATA-1. Here we show that 
fingers 1, 5 and 9 of FOG-1 also interact with the N-finger of GATA-1 and that
FOG-2 and U-shaped also contain multiple GATA-interacting fingers. We define the 
key contact residues and show that these residues are highly conserved in
GATA-interacting fingers. We examine the effect of selectively mutating the four 
interacting fingers of FOG-1 and show that each contributes to FOG-1's ability to
modulate GATA-1 activity. Finally, we show that FOG-1 can repress GATA-1-mediated
activation and present evidence that this ability involves the recently described
CtBP co-repressor proteins that recognize all known FOG proteins.

PMCID: PMC1171362
PMID: 10329627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3276-85.

Transcriptional targeting of retroviral vectors to the erythroblastic progeny of 
transduced hematopoietic stem cells.

Grande A(1), Piovani B, Aiuti A, Ottolenghi S, Mavilio F, Ferrari G.

Author information: 
(1)TIGET, Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, Milano, Italy.

Targeted expression to specific tissues or cell lineages is a necessary feature
of a gene therapy vector for many clinical applications, such as correction of
hemoglobinopathies or thalassemias by transplantation of genetically modified
hematopoietic stem cells. We developed retroviral vectors in which the
constitutive viral enhancer in the U3 region of the 3' LTR is replaced by an
autoregulatory enhancer of the erythroid-specific GATA-1 transcription factor
gene. The replaced enhancer is propagated to the 5' LTR upon integration into the
target cell genome. The modified vectors were used to transduce human
hematopoietic cell lines, cord blood-derived CD34(+) stem/progenitor cells, and
murine bone marrow repopulating stem cells. The expression of appropriate
reporter genes (triangle upLNGFR, EGFP) was analyzed in the differentiated
progeny of transduced stem cells in vitro, in liquid culture as well as in
clonogenic assay, and in vivo, after bone marrow transplantation in lethally
irradiated mice. The GATA-1 autoregulatory enhancer effectively restricts the
expression of the LTR-driven proviral transcription unit to the erythroblastic
progeny of both human progenitors and mouse-repopulating stem cells. Packaging of
viral particles, integration into the target genome, and stability of the
integrated provirus are not affected by the LTR modification. Enhancer
replacement is therefore an effective strategy to target expression of a
retroviral transgene to a specific progeny of transduced hematopoietic stem
cells.

PMID: 10233879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Blood. 1999 May 1;93(9):2867-75.

Consequences of GATA-1 deficiency in megakaryocytes and platelets.

Vyas P(1), Ault K, Jackson CW, Orkin SH, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. vyas@rascal.med.harvard.edu

In the absence of the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1, mice develop
thrombocytopenia and an increased number of megakaryocytes characterized by
marked ultrastructural abnormalities. These observations establish a critical
role for GATA-1 in megakaryopoiesis and raise the question as to how GATA-1
influences megakaryocyte maturation and platelet production. To begin to address 
this, we have performed a more detailed examination of the megakaryocytes and
platelets produced in mice that lack GATA-1 in this lineage. Our analysis
demonstrates that compared with their normal counterparts, GATA-1-deficient
primary megakaryocytes exhibit significant hyperproliferation in liquid culture, 
suggesting that the megakaryocytosis seen in animals is nonreactive.
Morphologically, these mutant megakaryocytes are small and show evidence of
retarded nuclear and cytoplasmic development. A significant proportion of these
cells do not undergo endomitosis and express markedly lower levels of mRNA of all
megakaryocyte-associated genes tested, including GPIbalpha, GPIbbeta, platelet
factor 4 (PF4), c-mpl, and p45 NF-E2. These results are consistent with
regulation of a program of megakaryocytic differentiation by GATA-1. Bleeding
times are significantly prolonged in mutant animals. GATA-1-deficient platelets
show abnormal ultrastructure, reminiscent of the megakaryocytes from which they
are derived, and exhibit modest but selective defects in platelet activation in
response to thrombin or to the combination of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and
epinephrine. Our findings indicate that GATA-1 serves multiple functions in
megakaryocyte development, influencing both cellular growth and maturation.

PMID: 10216081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biomol NMR. 1999 Mar;13(3):249-62.

The solution structure of the N-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 reveals a specific
binding face for the transcriptional co-factor FOG.

Kowalski K(1), Czolij R, King GF, Crossley M, Mackay JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Zinc fingers (ZnFs) are generally regarded as DNA-binding motifs. However, a
number of recent reports have implicated particular ZnFs in the mediation of
protein-protein interactions. The N-terminal ZnF of GATA-1 (NF) is one such
finger, having been shown to interact with a number of other proteins, including 
the recently discovered transcriptional co-factor FOG. Here we solve the
three-dimensional structure of the NF in solution using multidimensional 1H/15N
NMR spectroscopy, and we use 1H/15N spin relaxation measurements to investigate
its backbone dynamics. The structure consists of two distorted beta-hairpins and 
a single alpha-helix, and is similar to that of the C-terminal ZnF of chicken
GATA-1. Comparisons of the NF structure with those of other C4-type zinc binding 
motifs, including hormone receptor and LIM domains, also reveal substantial
structural homology. Finally, we use the structure to map the spatial locations
of NF residues shown by mutagenesis to be essential for FOG binding, and
demonstrate that these residues all lie on a single face of the NF. Notably, this
face is well removed from the putative DNA-binding face of the NF, an observation
which is suggestive of simultaneous roles for the NF; that is, stabilisation of
GATA-1 DNA complexes and recruitment of FOG to GATA-1-controlled promoter
regions.

PMID: 10212985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Cell. 1999 Feb;3(2):219-28.

Use of altered specificity mutants to probe a specific protein-protein
interaction in differentiation: the GATA-1:FOG complex.

Crispino JD(1), Lodish MB, MacKay JP, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

GATA-1 and FOG (Friend of GATA-1) are each essential for erythroid and
megakaryocyte development. FOG, a zinc finger protein, interacts with the amino
(N) finger of GATA-1 and cooperates with GATA-1 to promote differentiation. To
determine whether this interaction is critical for GATA-1 action, we selected
GATA-1 mutants in yeast that fail to interact with FOG but retain normal DNA
binding, as well a compensatory FOG mutant that restores interaction. These novel
GATA-1 mutants do not promote erythroid differentiation of GATA-1- erythroid
cells. Differentiation is rescued by the second-site FOG mutant. Thus,
interaction of FOG with GATA-1 is essential for the function of GATA-1 in
erythroid differentiation. These findings provide a paradigm for dissecting
protein-protein associations involved in mammalian development.

PMID: 10078204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Blood. 1999 Feb 15;93(4):1433-5.

GATA-1 transcription factor transactivates the promoter for CCR5, a coreceptor
for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 entry.

Moriuchi M, Moriuchi H, Fauci AS.

PMID: 10075456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Feb 15;27(4):1168-75.

Phosphorylation of GATA-1 increases its DNA-binding affinity and is correlated
with induction of human K562 erythroleukaemia cells.

Partington GA(1), Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, School of Biomedical Sciences, The
Randall Institute, King's College London, 26-29 Drury Lane, London WC2B 5RL, UK.

We have investigated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) the level of 
GATA-1 DNA-binding activity in nuclear extracts prepared from the human
erythroleukaemic cell line, K562, after erythroid induction by hemin, sodium
butyrate (NaB) or Trichostatin A or treatment with N -acetylcysteine (NAC).
Relative to extract from untreated cells, GATA-1 binding activity increased
markedly in all cases. However, immunoblot analysis revealed unchanged levels of 
GATA-1 protein after induction. Incubation of induced but not uninduced K562
extracts with phosphatase prior to EMSA weakened the binding activity, suggesting
that the increase in GATA-1 binding following induction of K562 cells was a
consequence of phosphorylation. When the mouse erythroleukaemic cell line MEL was
induced with dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO), NaB or NAC, GATA-1 binding activity fell 
with DMSO, rose significantly with NaB and remained at about the same level in
NAC-induced cells. In this case immunoblotting revealed that GATA-1 protein
levels were in accord with the EMSA data. The DNA-binding activities of induced
and uninduced MEL cell nuclear extracts were decreased by incubation with
phosphatase, showing that phosphoryl-ation and DNA binding of GATA-1 are already 
optimalin these cells. The DNA-binding activity of affinity-purified GATA-1 from 
MEL cells was also reduced by phosphatase treatment, showing that
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation is directly affecting the factor. Furthermore, 
when a comparison was made by EMSA of nuclear extracts prepared from K562 and MEL
cells untreated or incubated with okadaic acid, a phosphatase inhibitor, GATA-1
binding was seen to increase with K562 cells, whereas with MEL cells there was no
change in GATA-1 binding. Overall the results suggest that the level of GATA-1
phosphorylation increases after the induction of K562, but not MEL cells, where
GATA-1 is already highly phosphorylated. Furthermore, phosphorylation increases
the binding affinity of GATA-1 for a canonical binding site.

PMCID: PMC148299
PMID: 9927752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Dec 30;253(3):883-6.

Requirement of GATA-1 and p45 NF-E2 expression in butyric acid-induced erythroid 
differentiation.

Chénais B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, EA2063, Université de
Reims-Champagne Ardenne, Faculté de Pharmacie, Reims, France.
benoit.chenais@univ-reims.fr

Butyric acid (BA) is known to induce overexpression of fetal hemoglobin and then 
erythroid differentiation. Therefore, BA is currently under clinical
investigation as a potential therapy for the treatment of sickle cell disease and
cancer. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms involved in BA-induced
differentiation remain largely unknown. Previous reports have shown that
BA-induced overexpression of erythroid genes occurred at the transcriptional
level, suggesting the involvement of erythroid transcription factors. Here, we
intend to demonstrate the requirement of GATA-1 and NF-E2 transcription factors
in the BA-induced erythroid differentiation of human leukemic K562 cells.
Time-course experiments showed that nuclear levels of GATA-1 and p45 NF-E2
proteins increased during BA treatment. Moreover, antisense oligodeoxynucleotides
targeting either GATA-1 or p45 NF-E2 proteins inhibited both protein expression
and BA-induced differentiation. In contrast, BA-induced cell growth inhibition
was not affected. These results provide the first direct evidence for the
requirement of GATA-1 and NF-E2 in BA-induced differentiation process.

PMID: 9918824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Blood. 1999 Jan 15;93(2):500-8.

Positive and negative cis-acting elements are required for hematopoietic
expression of zebrafish GATA-1.

Meng A(1), Tang H, Yuan B, Ong BA, Long Q, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics & Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

GATA-1 is a transcription factor required for development of erythroid cells. The
expression of GATA-1 is tightly restricted to the hematopoietic lineage. Using
transgene constructs containing zebrafish GATA-1 genomic sequences and the green 
fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter gene, we previously showed that a 5.6-kb
enhancer/promoter fragment is sufficient to direct erythroid-specific expression 
of the GFP. In this study, we used enhancer/promoter fragments containing various
deletion and point mutations to further characterize the cis-acting elements
controlling tissue-specific GATA-1 expression. We report here the identification 
of distinct cis-acting elements that cooperate to confer on GATA-1 its
hematopoietic expression pattern. A CACCC box, located 142 bp upstream of the
translation start codon, is critical for the initiation of GATA-1 expression. A
distal double GATA element is required for maintaining and enhancing the
hematopoietic expression of GATA-1. The erythroid-specific activity of the GATA-1
promoter is also enhanced by a 49-bp sequence element located 218 bp upstream of 
the CACCC element and a CCAAT box adjacent to the double GATA motif. Finally, the
hematopoietic specificity of the GATA-1 promoter is secured by a negative
cis-acting element that inhibits expression in the notochord.

PMID: 9885211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Dec 1;258(2):879-89.

Both Ets-1 and GATA-1 are essential for positive regulation of platelet factor 4 
gene expression.

Minami T(1), Tachibana K, Imanishi T, Doi T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

In the rat platelet factor 4 (PF4) promoter, Ets motifs and GATA motifs are
located at positions -880, -75 and -135, -30, respectively, and their motifs are 
found in the promoter region of most megakaryocyte protein genes. In order to
investigate how the Ets and GATA motifs affect PF4 promoter activity, we
constructed Ets and/or GATA motif mutant genes. A single disruption of either
-75Ets, -135GATA, or -30GATA significantly reduced PF4 promoter activity, and
double disruptions involving these motifs completely abolished it. Furthermore,
gel-retardation assays revealed that Ets-1 and GATA-1 proteins from HEL and
MEG-01 cells bound to the Ets motifs and GATA motifs, respectively.
Co-transfection experiments showed that the overexpression of Ets-1 and/or GATA-1
enhanced the expression of the PF4 promoter reporter gene. These effects of Ets-1
and GATA-1 on PF4 promoter activity are additive. When HEL cells were treated
with dimethylsulfoxide in order to induce differentiation into megakaryocytes,
the mRNA level of ets-1 increased 10-fold, which might be directly correlated
with the significant increase in PF4 mRNA level induced by dimethylsulfoxide. All
these results strongly suggest that both Ets-1 and GATA-1 play key roles in the
positive regulation of PF4 gene expression.

PMID: 9874259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Plant Cell Physiol. 1998 Oct;39(10):1054-64.

Characterization and expression of a new class of zinc finger protein that binds 
to silencer region of ascorbate oxidase gene.

Kisu Y(1), Ono T, Shimofurutani N, Suzuki M, Esaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Applied Biological Science, Hiroshima University,
Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan.

A unique A/T-rich sequence (5'-AAAAAGTAAAAA-GTAAAAAAGTAAAAAG-3), referred to as
the AGTA repeat, is found in the silencer region of the pumpkin ascorbate oxidase
gene. A cDNA for protein (AOBP) that binds to the AGTA repeat was isolated from
pumpkin by the southwestern method. The AOBP protein has a new class of
zinc/DNA-binding domain named Dof/MOA domain that is highly conserved in many
plant proteins and is significantly related to those of steroid hormone receptors
and GATA1. Gel retardation analysis indicated that AOBP bound to the AGTA repeat 
through the Dof/MOA domain. Metal chelators, 1,10-phenanthroline and EDTA,
specifically inhibited the DNA binding of AOBP, indicating that metal
coordination plays an important role in DNA binding of AOBP. Thus, the Dof/MOA
domain acts as a zinc/DNA-binding domain in AOBP. Gel retardation analysis with
mutated oligonucleotides suggested that the Dof/MOA domain recognized the AGTA
core sequence. AOBP mRNA was expressed in mature tissues of pumpkin, but was
expressed only in small amounts or was not expressed in growing tissues.
Furthermore, the expression was auxin-independent. The expression pattern of AOBP
and that of ascorbate oxidase did not show a positive correlation.

PMID: 9871365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Nature. 1998 Dec 10;396(6711):594-8.

Regulation of activity of the transcription factor GATA-1 by acetylation.

Boyes J(1), Byfield P, Nakatani Y, Ogryzko V.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Chester Beatty Laboratories at The
Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. jboyes@icr.ac.uk

Modification of histones, DNA-binding proteins found in chromatin, by addition of
acetyl groups occurs to a greater degree when the histones are associated with
transcriptionally active DNA. A breakthrough in understanding how this
acetylation is mediated was the discovery that various transcriptional
co-activator proteins have intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity (for
example, Gcn5p, PCAF, TAF(II)250 and p300/CBP. These acetyltransferases also
modify certain transcription factors (TFIIEbeta, TFIIF, EKLF and p53). GATA-1 is 
an important transcription factor in the haematopoietic lineage and is essential 
for terminal differentiation of erythrocytes and megakaryocytes. It is associated
in vivo with the acetyltransferase p300/CBP. Here we report that GATA-1 is
acetylated in vitro by p300. This significantly increases the amount of GATA-1
bound to DNA and alters the mobility of GATA-1-DNA complexes, suggestive of a
conformational change in GATA-1. GATA-1 is also acetylated in vivo and
acetylation directly stimulates GATA-1-dependent transcription. Mutagenesis of
important acetylated residues shows that there is a relationship between the
acetylation and in vivo function of GATA-1. We propose that acetylation of
transcription factors can alter interactions between these factors and DNA and
among different transcription factors, and is an integral part of transcription
and differentiation processes.

PMID: 9859997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Transgenic Res. 1998 Jul;7(4):229-38.

Loss of LKLF function results in embryonic lethality in mice.

Wani MA(1), Means RT Jr, Lingrel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, College of
Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, USA.

Lung Kruppel-like factor (LKLF) is a member of the Kruppel-like family of zinc
finger transcription factors and is closely related to erythroid kruppel-like
factor (EKLF), which is necessary for beta-globin gene expression. While EKLF is 
expressed exclusively in erythroid cells, LKLF is expressed temporally during
early embryonic development and predominantly in the adult mouse lung. To
understand the role this novel transcription factor plays in development as well 
as tissue differentiation and function, animals lacking LKLF were produced using 
gene targeting technology. Mice lacking LKLF die in utero between day 11.5 and
13.5 of embryonic life and exhibit retarded growth, craniofacial abnormalities,
abdominal bleeding and signs of anaemia. Although the yolk sac erythropoiesis is 
normal in mutant embryos, in vitro fetal liver cultures of these embryos fail to 
give rise to erythroid cells. Expression of other erythroid specific genes such
as EKLF, GATA1 and GATA3 is unaltered in these animals. These findings
demonstrate the LKLF function is indispensable during normal embryonic
development, and although both LKLF and EKLF recognize common DNA motifs, they do
not substitute for each other.

PMID: 9859212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Int J Dev Biol. 1998;42(7):927-34.

Embryonic stem cells and transgenic mice in the study of hematopoiesis.

Orkin SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital and the Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Orkin@rascal.med.harvard.edu

Blood formation (hematopoiesis) entails the generation of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) within the embryo and subsequent commitment of multipotential
progenitors to differentiation along single lineages. These processes are
controlled in large part by cell-restricted transcription factors which cooperate
with more widely expressed factors to direct lineage-specific gene expression.
Candidate hematopoietic transcriptional regulators have been identified by
characterizing factors mediating cell-specific gene transcription and by defining
genes involved in chromosomal rearrangements in leukemia. The application of
transgenic and embryonic stem cell methods have provided insights into their in
vivo functions and suggested mechanisms by which lineage selection may be
achieved. One of the first, and best, characterized hematopoietic transcription
factors is GATA-1. Herein studies of GATA-1 are reviewed to illustrate how
manipulations of its locus in the mouse have contributed to current understanding
in unique and unexpected ways.

PMID: 9853823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 11;273(50):33595-603.

Key residues characteristic of GATA N-fingers are recognized by FOG.

Fox AH(1), Kowalski K, King GF, Mackay JP, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Sydney, New South Wales, 2006
Australia.

Protein-protein interactions play significant roles in the control of gene
expression. These interactions often occur between small, discrete domains within
different transcription factors. In particular, zinc fingers, usually regarded as
DNA-binding domains, are now also known to be involved in mediating contacts
between proteins. We have investigated the interaction between the erythroid
transcription factor GATA-1 and its partner, the 9 zinc finger protein, FOG
(Friend Of GATA). We demonstrate that this interaction represents a genuine
finger-finger contact, which is dependent on zinc-coordinating residues within
each protein. We map the contact domains to the core of the N-terminal zinc
finger of GATA-1 and the 6th zinc finger of FOG. Using a scanning substitution
strategy we identify key residues within the GATA-1 N-finger which are required
for FOG binding. These residues are conserved in the N-fingers of all GATA
proteins known to bind FOG, but are not found in the respective C-fingers. This
observation may, therefore, account for the particular specificity of FOG for
N-fingers. Interestingly, the key N-finger residues are seen to form a contiguous
surface, when mapped onto the structure of the N-finger of GATA-1.

PMID: 9837943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Blood. 1998 Dec 1;92(11):4108-18.

GATA-1 regulates growth and differentiation of definitive erythroid lineage cells
during in vitro ES cell differentiation.

Suwabe N(1), Takahashi S, Nakano T, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Although the importance of GATA-1 in both primitive and definitive hematopoietic 
lineages has been shown in vivo, the precise roles played by GATA-1 during
definitive hematopoiesis have not yet been clarified. In vitro differentiation of
embryonic stem (ES) cells using OP9 stroma cells can generate primitive and
definitive hematopoietic cells separately, and we have introduced a method that
separates hematopoietic progenitors and differentiated cells produced in this
system. Closer examination showed that the expression of erythroid transcription 
factors in this system is regulated in a differentiation stage-specific manner.
Therefore, we examined differentiation of GATA-1 promoter-disrupted (GATA-1.05)
ES cells using this system. Because the GATA-1.05 mice die by 12.5 embryonic days
due to the lack of primitive hematopoiesis, the in vitro analysis is an important
approach to elucidate the roles of GATA-1 in definitive hematopoiesis. Consistent
with the in vivo observation, differentiation of GATA-1.05 mutant ES cells along 
both primitive and definitive lineages was arrested in this ES cell culture
system. Although the maturation-arrested primitive lineage cells did not express 
detectable amounts of epsilony-globin mRNA, the blastlike cells accumulated in
the definitive stage showed beta-globin mRNA expression at approximately 70% of
the wild type. Importantly, the TER119 antigen was expressed and porphyrin was
accumulated in the definitive cells, although the levels of both were reduced to 
approximately 10%, indicating that maturation of definitive erythroid cells is
arrested by the lack of GATA-1 with different timing from that of the primitive
erythroid cells. We also found that the hematopoietic progenitor fraction of
GATA-1.05 cells contains more colony-forming activity, termed CFU-OP9. These
results suggest that the GATA-1.05 mutation resulted in proliferation of
proerythroblasts in the definitive lineage.

PMID: 9834216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Nov 25;245(1):186-94.

Reduction of DNA binding activity of the GATA-1 transcription factor in the
apoptotic process induced by overexpression of PU.1 in murine erythroleukemia
cells.

Yamada T(1), Kihara-Negishi F, Yamamoto H, Yamamoto M, Hashimoto Y, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Previously we have shown that overexpression of PU.1, an Ets family transcription
factor, in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells results in apoptotic cell death in 
the presence of the differentiation-inducing reagent dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
In this study, we examined the dynamics of GATA-1 and NF-E2 hematopoietic
transcription factors during the induction of apoptosis, because GATA-1 has been 
shown to be implicated in survival of erythroid cells. Formation of the
GATA-1-DNA complex as judged by EMSA was markedly reduced when apoptosis was
induced, although subcellular localization of the GATA-1 protein and expression
levels of the GATA-1 mRNA and protein were not changed during the apoptotic
process. Complex formation was not reduced when apoptosis was avoided by adding
30% serum in culture medium and when mutant PU.1 proteins with the deletion of
the DNA-binding (Ets) or transactivation domain were expressed. Complex formation
in nuclear extracts of parental MEL cells was reduced when they were mixed with
those of apoptotic cells, suggesting that apoptotic cells may contain a factor(s)
preventing GATA-1 from binding to DNA. In contrast to GATA-1, formation of the
NF-E2-DNA complex was not changed during the process of apoptosis, although the
expression level of the NF-E2 p45 gene was reduced in the process. These results 
suggest that reduction of the DNA-binding activity of GATA-1 may partly account
for PU.1-mediated apoptosis in MEL cells.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9828115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biochem J. 1998 Dec 1;336 ( Pt 2):437-42.

Genomic organization, 5'-flanking region and chromosomal localization of the
human glutathione transferase A4 gene.

Desmots F(1), Rauch C, Henry C, Guillouzo A, Morel F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U456, Détoxication et Réparation Tissulaire, Faculté de Pharmacie, 2
Avenue du Pr. Léon Bernard, 35043 Rennes, France.

We have isolated and characterized a human glutathione transferase A4 (hGSTA4)
subunit gene from a yeast artificial chromosome containing several other
glutathione transferase alpha genes and pseudogenes. The homodimeric protein
hGSTA4-4, is involved in the detoxification of 4-hydroxynonenal and other
reactive electrophiles produced by oxidative metabolism, and may have a
significant role in protecting intracellular components from oxidative damage.
The hGSTA4 gene spans nearly 18 kb, contains seven exons, maps onto chromosome
6p12, and lies in close proximity to the 7SK small nuclear RNA gene in a
head-to-tail orientation. The intron/exon borders conform to the standard rules, 
an open reading frame is present beginning at position 154 in exon 2, and the
stop codon is at position 822 in exon 7. The transcription initiation site has
been determined by primer extension analysis and is located 135 bp upstream of
intron 1. Isolation and sequencing of the hGSTA4 gene 5'-flanking region revealed
it to be devoid of TATA or CCAAT boxes but it does contain an initiator element
overlapping the transcription start site, a GC box and putative binding sites for
transcription factors AP1, STAT, GATA1 and NF-kappaB. Reverse transcription-PCR
analysis revealed that hGSTA4 mRNA was present in all the tissues tested,
although in low amounts, suggesting that this subunit may be ubiquitously
expressed.

PMCID: PMC1219889
PMID: 9820822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Exp Hematol. 1998 Nov;26(12):1148-54.

GATA-1 and erythropoietin receptor genes are highly expressed in erythroleukemia.

Komatsu N(1), Kirito K, Izumi T, Eguchi M, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

We examined expression of the erythroid-associated genes GATA-1 and
erythropoietin receptor (EPOR) in primary leukemia using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). GATA-1 and EPOR mRNAs were
detectable in all cases of erythroleukemia (French-American-British
classification: M6) or early erythroblastic leukemia. In all other leukemia
cases, including M2 through M5, stem cell leukemia, and adult T-cell leukemia,
these gene transcripts were undetectable. GATA-2 was detectable in all the cases 
of primary leukemias examined in this study, except one case of M5. In one case, 
the phenotype switched from myeloid (M2) to erythroid (M6) and then back to
myeloid. Northern blotting and RT-PCR revealed that GATA-1 and EPOR mRNAs were
significantly upregulated at the M6 stage compared with the M2 stage. GATA-1 may 
be involved in the expression of an erythroid phenotype in acute leukemia. We
generated HL-60 transfectants exogenously expressing GATA-1. The majority of
HL-60 cells expressing GATA-1 lacked azurophilic granules, and electron
microscopic analysis revealed that myeloperoxidase activity was negative.
Platelet peroxidase activity, which was detectable in both megakaryoblasts and
erythroid progenitors, was positive. However, EPOR and glycophorin A mRNAs were
undetectable by RT-PCR. These findings suggest that besides GATA-1, a third
factor may be required for the expression of mature erythroid phenotypes. In
addition, our results indicate that GATA-1 is involved in inactivation of
myeloperoxidase and activation of the platelet peroxidase.

PMID: 9808054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 13;273(46):30560-7.

Involvement of the N-finger in the self-association of GATA-1.

Mackay JP(1), Kowalski K, Fox AH, Czolij R, King GF, Crossley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales
2006, Australia.

Zinc fingers are recognized as small protein domains that bind to specific DNA
sequences. Recently however, zinc fingers from a number of proteins, in
particular the GATA family of transcription factors, have also been implicated in
specific protein-protein interactions. The erythroid protein GATA-1 contains two 
zinc fingers: the C-finger, which is sufficient for sequence-specific
DNA-binding, and the N-finger, which appears both to modulate DNA-binding and to 
interact with other transcription factors. We have expressed and purified the
N-finger domain and investigated its involvement in the self-association of
GATA-1. We demonstrate that this domain does not homodimerize but instead makes
intermolecular contacts with the C-finger, suggesting that GATA dimers are
maintained by reciprocal N-finger-C-finger contacts. Deletion analysis identifies
a 25-residue region, C-terminal to the core N-finger domain, that is sufficient
for interaction with intact GATA-1. A similar subdomain exists C-terminal to the 
C-finger, and we show that self-association is substantially reduced when both
subdomains are disrupted by mutation. Moreover, mutations that impair GATA-1
self-association also interfere with its ability to activate transcription in
transfection studies.

PMID: 9804826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 1;17(17):5151-60.

Chromatin immunoselection defines a TAL-1 target gene.

Cohen-Kaminsky S(1), Maouche-Chrétien L, Vitelli L, Vinit MA, Blanchard I,
Yamamoto M, Peschle C, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U474, Hématologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Henri Mondor, 51 avenue du
Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny, 94010 Créteil, France.

Despite the major functions of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
TAL-1 in hematopoiesis and T-cell leukemogenesis, no TAL-1 target gene has been
identified. Using immunoprecipitation of genomic fragments bound to TAL-1 in the 
chromatin of murine erythro-leukemia (MEL) cells, we found that 10% of the
immunoselected fragments contained a CAGATG or a CAGGTG E-box, followed by a GATA
site. We studied one of these fragments containing two E-boxes, CAGATG and
CAGGTC, followed by a GATA motif, and showed that TAL-1 binds to the CAGGTG E-box
with an affinity modulated by the CAGATG or the GATA site, and that the
CAGGTG-GATA motif exhibits positive transcriptional activity in MEL but not in
HeLa cells. This immunoselected sequence is located within an intron of a new
gene co-expressed with TAL-1 in endothelial and erythroid cells, but not
expressed in fibroblasts or adult liver where no TAL-1 mRNA was detected.
Finally, in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem cells towards the
erythro/megakaryocytic pathways showed that the TAL-1 target gene expression
followed TAL-1 and GATA-1 expression. These results establish that TAL-1 is
likely to activate its target genes through a complex that binds an E-box-GATA
motif and define the first gene regulated by TAL-1.

PMCID: PMC1170843
PMID: 9724651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Blood. 1998 Sep 1;92(5):1608-16.

Mice lacking transcription factor NF-E2 provide in vivo validation of the
proplatelet model of thrombocytopoiesis and show a platelet production defect
that is intrinsic to megakaryocytes.

Lecine P(1), Villeval JL, Vyas P, Swencki B, Xu Y, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; the
Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Mechanisms of platelet production and release by mammalian megakaryocytes are
poorly understood. We used thrombocytopenic knockout mice to better understand
these processes. Proplatelets are filamentous extensions of terminally
differentiated megakaryocytes that are thought to represent one mechanism of
platelet release; however, these structures have largely been recognized in
cultured cells and there has been no correlation between thrombocytopoiesis in
vivo and proplatelet formation. Mice lacking transcription factor NF-E2 have a
late arrest in megakaryocyte maturation, resulting in profound thrombocytopenia. 
In contrast to normal megakaryocytes, which generate abundant proplatelets, cells
from these mice never produce proplatelets, even after prolonged stimulation with
c-Mpl ligand. Similarly, megakaryocytes from thrombocytopenic mice with
lineage-selective loss of transcription factor GATA-1 produce proplatelets very
rarely. These findings establish a significant correlation between
thrombocytopoiesis and proplatelet formation and suggest that the latter
represents a physiologic mechanism of platelet release. We further show that
proplatelet formation by normal megakaryocytes and its absence in cells lacking
NF-E2 are independent of interactions with adherent (stromal) cells. Similarly,
thrombocytopenia in NF-E2(-/-) mice reflects intrinsic defects in the
megakaryocyte lineage. These observations improve our understanding of platelet
production and validate the study of proplatelets in probing the underlying
mechanisms.

Copyright 1998 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 9716588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Gene. 1998 Jul 30;215(2):319-28.

Molecular cloning of gaf1, a Schizosaccharomyces pombe GATA factor, which can
function as a transcriptional activator.

Hoe KL(1), Won MS, Chung KS, Park SK, Kim DU, Jang YJ, Yoo OJ, Yoo HS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle, Signal Transduction Research Unit, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience, Biotechnology, Taejon 305-606, South Korea.

As a first step to elucidate the functions of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (S.
pombe) GATA factors, we have isolated the gaf1+ gene (GATA-factor like gene) in
S. pombe. The predicted amino acid (aa) sequence of Gaf1 reveals a single zinc
finger domain typical of fungal GATA factors, and the zinc finger exhibits 60% aa
identity to that of human GATA-1. The open reading frame of Gaf1 predicts a
protein of Mr 32 kDa consisting of 290 intronless amino acids. Disruption of this
gene has no effect on cell viability and growth rate. The GST-Gaf1 fusion protein
binds specifically to GATA motifs of its own promoter as well as DAL7 UAS, a
canonical GATA motif of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae) The specific
DNA-binding activity resides within the N-terminal half of Gaf1 (Gaf1N; aa 1-120)
containing the zinc finger, whereas the C-terminal half (Gaf1C; aa 121-290)
contains transactivation sequences that induce the expression of the lacZ
reporter when fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain. These results demonstrate
that Gaf1 may function as a transcriptional activator consisting of DNA-binding
and transactivation domains.

PMID: 9714831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5320-31.

GATA-Dependent expression of the interleukin-1 receptor-related T1 gene in mast
cells.

Gächter T(1), Moritz DR, Gheyselinck J, Klemenz R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, University Hospital,
CH-8091 Zürich, Switzerland.

The murine delayed-early serum-responsive gene T1 encodes glycoproteins of the
interleukin-1 receptor family. Transcriptional initiation in fibroblasts is
regulated by c-Fos and gives rise to a rare 5-kb mRNA and an abundant 2.7-kb
mRNA. These transcripts are translated into a receptor-like membrane-anchored
protein and a secreted protein consisting only of the ectodomain. In mast cells, 
T1 gene transcription is initiated 10.5 kb further upstream than in fibroblasts
and gives rise predominantly to the 5-kb transcript under normal growth
conditions. Here we demonstrate that calcium ionophore stimulation of mast cells 
resulted in an upregulation of T1 gene expression and a switch from the long to
the short T1 transcript. This was paralleled by the disappearance of the
receptor-type T1 protein on the mast cell surface and the secretion of large
amounts of the truncated T1 protein. c-Fos and a T1 enhancer, which have
previously been identified to be essential for T1 expression in fibroblasts, were
not required for calcium ionophore-mediated T1 gene upregulation. Overexpression 
of the transcription factor GATA-1 in mast cells caused elevated T1 synthesis.
Three GATA elements were identified in the minimal GATA-responsive mast cell
promoter. Mutational analysis revealed that all three GATA elements are involved 
in T1 gene expression. Point mutations within the middle GATA element eliminated 
promoter activity completely, while mutations of the distal and proximal GATA
binding sites reduced promoter strength by factors of 2 and 5, respectively.
Exogenous expression of GATA-1 was not sufficient to activate the mast
cell-specific promoter in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC109117
PMID: 9710616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Endocrine. 1998 Apr;8(2):123-34.

The genomic structure and chromosomal location of the human TR2 orphan receptor, 
a member of the steroid receptor superfamily.

Lin DL(1), Wu SQ, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, NY 14642, USA.

Human TR2 orphan receptor, isolated from the testis and prostate, is a member of 
the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. With the screening of a human
genomic library and the combination of primer walking and PCR sequencing, we
found that the entire TR2 orphan receptor gene coding region and 5'-untranslated 
region feature 13 introns and 14 exons, and that the consensus splice sequences
(GT-AG) are present in all intron-exon boundaries. Within the region that codes
for the DNA binding domain, TR2 orphan receptor gene has a distinct intron-exon
junction. Whereas all other known steroid receptors have one splice site that
separates their first and second zinc fingers in the DNA binding domain, TR2
orphan receptor has a rare splice site located in the middle of its first zinc
finger. The identification of specific junction sequences for potential
alternative splicing sites helps to explain the existence of multiple forms of
TR2 orphan receptor cDNA (TR2-5, 7, 9, 11). The S1 nuclease protection assay for 
TR2 message revealed that there are multiple transcription initiations, and that 
the major cap site surrounded by an initiator-like sequence is located at the
104th nucleotide upstream from the translation start codon. Sequence analysis of 
a 2.7-kb DNA fragment upstream of the TR2 orphan receptor translation start codon
unveiled several potential cis-acting elements, such as AP-1, HNF-5, GATA1
binding sites, and GC boxes. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization combined
with a high-resolution G-banding technique, we found that the TR2 orphan receptor
gene was mapped to human chromosome 12 at band q22, whereas the structurally
closely related TR4 orphan receptor gene was mapped to human chromosome 3 at band
q24.3.

PMID: 9704569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Br J Haematol. 1998 Jul;102(2):449-57.

TAL1 expression does not occur in the majority of T-ALL blasts.

Delabesse E(1), Bernard M, Meyer V, Smit L, Pulford K, Cayuela JM, Ritz J,
Bourquelot P, Strominger JL, Valensi F, Macintyre EA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1461 and Department of Haematology, CHU Necker-Enfants Malades and
Université Paris V, France.

The TAL1 gene is disrupted by translocation or deletion (tal(d)) in up to 30% of 
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL), leading to aberrant transcriptional
activation, as a SIL-TAL1 fused transcript in tal(d). It has been suggested that 
TAL1 transcription occurs in approximately 50% of a T-ALLs without apparent
rearrangement. SIL-TAL1 was positive in 15/60 (25%) of T-ALL, whereas wild-type
TAL1 transcripts were detected in all 13 SIL-TAL1 and in 19/43 (44%) T-ALL
without SIL-TAL1. To investigate the cellular origin of TAL1 we exploited the
fact that GATA1 and TAL1 are co-ordinately expressed in non-lymphoid haemopoietic
cells, whereas only the latter is found in T-ALL. GATA1 was detected in 10/23
(43%) TAL1-negative T-ALLs but in 17/19 (89%) 'unexplained' TAL1-positive cases, 
suggesting a common non-lymphoid cellular origin. Immunocytochemical analysis
with a TAL1-specific monoclonal antibody showed nuclear expression in the blasts 
of 10/34 (29%) cases, including 8/10 SIL-TAL1+ and two RT-PCR TAL1+, SIL-TAL1-
cases. In the remaining cases TAL1 expression was restricted to a minor
population (< 5%) of larger, strongly TAL1-positive cells which comprised
erythroid cells, CD34+ CD3- precursors and an unidentified TAL1+ CD45- population
which morphologically resembled monocytes/macrophages. We therefore suggest that 
appropriate diagnostic evaluation of T-ALL should include molecular detection of 
SIL-TAL1 transcripts and in situ immunocytochemical detection of TAL1 protein
expression by leukaemic blasts. This approach will enable accurate analysis of
the prognostic significance of TAL1 deregulation in T-ALL.

PMID: 9695959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Genes Dev. 1998 Aug 1;12(15):2403-12.

PU.1 induces myeloid lineage commitment in multipotent hematopoietic progenitors.

Nerlov C(1), Graf T.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), D69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Little is known about the transcription factors that mediate lineage commitment
of multipotent hematopoietic precursors. One candidate is the Ets family
transcription factor PU.1, which is expressed in myeloid and B cells and is
required for the development of both these lineages. We show here that the factor
specifically instructs transformed multipotent hematopoietic progenitors to
differentiate along the myeloid lineage. This involves not only the up-regulation
of myeloid-specific cell surface antigens and the acquisition of myeloid
growth-factor dependence but also the down-regulation of
progenitor/thrombocyte-specific cell-surface markers and GATA-1. Both effects
require an intact PU.1 transactivation domain. Whereas sustained activation of an
inducible form of the factor leads to myeloid lineage commitment, short-term
activation leads to the formation of immature eosinophils, indicating the
existence of a bilineage intermediate. Our results suggest that PU.1 induces
myeloid lineage commitment by the suppression of a master regulator of nonmyeloid
genes (such as GATA-1) and the concomitant activation of multiple myeloid genes.

PMCID: PMC317050
PMID: 9694804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. FEBS Lett. 1998 Jul 3;430(3):251-6.

Functional analyses of the Dof domain, a zinc finger DNA-binding domain, in a
pumpkin DNA-binding protein AOBP.

Shimofurutani N(1), Kisu Y, Suzuki M, Esaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Applied Biological Science, Hiroshima University, Kagamiyama,
Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan.

AOBP, a DNA-binding protein in pumpkin, contains a Dof domain that is composed of
52 amino acid residues and is highly conserved in several DNA-binding proteins of
higher plants. The Dof domain has a significant resemblance to Cys2/Cys2 zinc
finger DNA-binding domains of steroid hormone receptors and GATA1, but has a
longer putative loop where an extra Cys residue is conserved. We show that the
Dof domain in AOBP functions as a zinc finger DNA-binding domain and suggest that
the Cys residue uniquely conserved in the putative loop might negatively regulate
the binding to DNA.

PMID: 9688549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Genes Funct. 1997 Nov;1(4):245-58.

Molecular heterogeneity of regulatory elements of the mouse GATA-1 gene.

Ronchi A(1), Cirò M, Cairns L, Basilico L, Corbella P, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P,
Cross M, Ghysdael J, Ottolenghi S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università di
Milano, Italy.

The GATA-1 gene encodes a transcription factor expressed in early multipotent
haemopoietic progenitors, in more mature cells of the erythroid, megakaryocytic
and other lineages, but not in late myeloid precursors; its function is essential
for the normal development of the erythroid and megakaryocytic system. To define 
regulatory elements of the mouse GATA-1 gene, we mapped DNaseI-hypersensitive
sites in nuclei of erythroid and haemopoietic progenitor cells. Five sites were
detected. The two upstream sites, site 1 and site 2, represent a new and a
previously defined erythroid enhancer respectively. The site 1 enhancer activity 
depends both on a GATA-binding site (also footprinted in vivo) and on several
sites capable of binding relatively ubiquitous factors. A DNA fragment
encompassing site 1, placed upstream of a GATA-1 minimal promoter, is able to
drive expression of a simian virus 40 (SV40) T-antigen in the yolk sac, but not
bone-marrow cells, obtained from mice transgenic for this construct, allowing in 
vitro establishment of immortalized yolk-sac cells. A similar construct including
site 2, instead of site 1, and previously shown to be able to immortalize adult
marrow cells is not significantly active in yolk-sac cells. Sites 4 and 5,
located in the first large intron, have no enhancer activity; they include a long
array of potential Ets-binding sites. MnlI restriction sites, overlapping some of
the Ets sites, are highly accessible, in intact nuclei, to MnlI. Although these
sites are present in all GATA-1-expressing cells studied, they are the only
strong sites detectable in FDCP-mix multipotent progenitor cells, most of which
do not yet express GATA-1. The data indicate that appropriate GATA-1 regulation
may require the co-operation of different regulatory elements acting at different
stages of development and cell differentiation.

PMID: 9678901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Am J Pathol. 1998 Jul;153(1):247-54.

Association of v-Ha-ras transgene expression with development of erythroleukemia 
in Tg.AC transgenic mice.

Trempus CS(1), Ward S, Farris G, Malarkey D, Faircloth RS, Cannon RE, Mahler JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis, National Institute
of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709,
USA.

A transgenic mouse line (Tg.AC) carrying an activated v-Ha-ras oncogene fused to 
the embryonic zeta-globin promoter develops an array of spontaneous epithelial
and mesenchymal neoplasms. In this report we describe the morphological,
immunophenotypic, and molecular features of a unique hematopoietic neoplasm in
these mice. The cardinal lesion of this disease is marked hepatomegaly due to
leukemic proliferation and infiltration. In the peripheral blood, there is a
marked increase in the number of metarubricytes and other less differentiated
erythroid progenitor cells. Leukemic cells stain positively with an
erythroid-associated nuclear transcription factor (GATA-1). Using a reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction assay, co-expression of GATA-1 and
endogenous zeta-globin genes is detected in hematopoietic tissues of nonleukemic 
transgenic and nontransgenic mice. ras transgene expression is, however, detected
only in normal bone marrow and leukemic tissues of transgenic mice, and 5'
mapping experiments using S1 protection analysis of total RNA from leukemic
tissue indicates that transcription of the transgene mRNA is initiated from the
natural zeta-globin promoter start site, supporting the belief that the
zeta-globin promoter directs v-Ha-ras expression in erythroid progenitor cells,
ultimately leading to leukemic transformation.

PMCID: PMC1852926
PMID: 9665485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Blood. 1998 Jul 15;92(2):434-42.

Role of GATA-1 in proliferation and differentiation of definitive erythroid and
megakaryocytic cells in vivo.

Takahashi S(1), Komeno T, Suwabe N, Yoh K, Nakajima O, Nishimura S, Kuroha T,
Nagasawa T, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for TARA and the Division of
Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan.

To elucidate the contributions of GATA-1 to definitive hematopoiesis in vivo, we 
have examined adult mice that were rendered genetically defective in GATA-1
synthesis (Takahashi et al, J Biol Chem 272:12611, 1997). Because the GATA-1 gene
is located on the X chromosome, which is randomly inactivated in every cell,
heterozygous females can bear either an active wild-type or mutant (referred to
as GATA-1.05) GATA-1 allele, consequently leading to variable anemic severity.
These heterozygous mutant mice usually developed normally, but they began to die 
after 5 months. These affected animals displayed marked splenomegaly, anemia, and
thrombocytopenia. Proerythroblasts and megakaryocytes massively accumulated in
the spleens of the heterozygotes, and we showed that the neomycin resistance gene
(which is the positive selection marker in ES cells) was expressed profusely in
the abnormally abundant cells generated in the GATA-1.05 mutant females. We also 
observed hematopoiesis outside of the bone marrow in the affected mutant mice.
These data suggest that a small number of GATA-1.05 mutant hematopoietic
progenitor cells begin to proliferate vigorously during early adulthood, but
because the cells are unable to terminally differentiate, this leads to
progenitor proliferation in the spleen and consequently death. Thus, GATA-1 plays
important in vivo roles for directing definitive hematopoietic progenitors to
differentiate along both the erythroid and megakaryocytic pathways. The GATA-1
heterozygous mutant mouse shows a phenotype that is analogous to human
myelodysplastic syndrome and thus may serve as a useful model for this disorder.

PMID: 9657742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. EMBO J. 1998 Jul 1;17(13):3669-80.

Regulation of eosinophil-specific gene expression by a C/EBP-Ets complex and
GATA-1.

McNagny KM(1), Sieweke MH, Döderlein G, Graf T, Nerlov C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Biomedical Research Centre, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z3.

The EOS47 antigen is an early and specific marker of eosinophil differentiation
in the chicken haematopoietic system. To elucidate the transciptional events
controlling commitment to the eosinophil lineage, we studied the regulation of
the eosinophil-specific EOS47 promoter. This promoter is TATA-less, and binds
trancription factors of the Ets, C/EBP, GATA and Myb families. These sites are
contained within a 309 bp promoter fragment which is sufficient for specific high
level transcription in an eosinophil cell line. Co-transfection experiments in
Q2bn fibroblasts showed cooperative activation of the EOS47 proximal promoter by 
c-Myb, Ets-1/Fli-1, GATA-1 and C/EBPalpha. The Ets-1/Fli-1 and C/EBPalpha
proteins were the most potent activators, and acted with high synergy through
juxtaposed binding sites located approximately 60 bp upstream of the
transcription start site. The Ets-1 and C/EBPalpha proteins were found to
associate physically via their DNA-binding domains and to bind their combined
binding site cooperatively. GATA-1 showed biphasic regulation of the EOS47
promoter, activating at low and repressing at high protein concentrations. These 
results demonstrate combinatorial activation of an eosinophil-specific promoter
by ubiquitous and lineage-restricted haematopoietic transcription factors. They
also indicate that direct interactions between C/EBPs and specific Ets family
members, together with GATA-1, are important for eosinophil lineage
determination.

PMCID: PMC1170703
PMID: 9649437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 9;247(1):65-9.

Transcription factor NF-E2 is essential for the polyploidization of a human
megakaryoblastic cell line, Meg-J.

Kobayashi S(1), Teramura M, Ito K, Iwabe K, Inaba T, Mizoguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors regulating the process of megakaryocyte development remain 
largely unclarified. To clarify them further, we used a human megakaryoblastic
cell line, Meg-J, which showed prominant polyploidization and augmented platelet 
glycoprotein (GP) Ib expression after incubation with thrombopoietin (TPO, c-mpl 
ligand) and K252a (an indolocarbasole derivative). Under these conditions, we
analyzed the expression of the transcription factors and observed that the
expression of NF-E2 p45, but not those of GATA-1, GATA-2, Tal-1/SCL, Evi-1, and
MafK, was increased after TPO and K252a stimulation. Gel-shift assay confirmed
the enhanced binding activity to the NF-E2 site. The abolishment of NF-E2 p45
with NF-E2 antisense oligomers inhibited TPO plus K252a-induced polyploidization.
These findings suggest that NF-E2 p45 is essential for the polyploidization of
megakaryocytic cells.

PMID: 9636655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3278-88.

GATA-1 dominantly activates a program of erythroid gene expression in
factor-dependent myeloid FDCW2 cells.

Seshasayee D(1), Gaines P, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Erythrocyte development has previously been shown to depend upon the expression
of the lineage-restricted trans-acting factor GATA-1. Despite predicted roles for
this factor during early development, GATA-1-deficient cells in chimeric mice and
embryonic stem cell cultures mature to a late proerythroblast stage and express
at least certain genes that normally are thought to be regulated by GATA-1
(including erythroid Krüppel-like factor [EKLF] and the erythropoietin [Epo]
receptor). Opportunities to test roles for GATA-1 in erythroid gene activation in
these systems therefore are limited. In the present study, in an alternate
approach to test the function of GATA-1, GATA-1 has been expressed together with 
the Epo receptor in myeloid FDCW2 cells and the resulting effects on
cytokine-dependent proliferation and erythroid gene expression have been
assessed. GATA-1 expression at low levels delayed FDCW2ER cell cycle progression 
at the G1 phase specifically during Epo-induced mitogenesis. Upon expression of
GATA-1 at increased levels, proliferation in response to Epo, interleukin-3
(IL-3), and stem cell factor was attenuated and endogenous GATA-1, EKLF and
betamaj-globin gene expression was activated. Friend of GATA-1 (FOG) transcript
levels also were enhanced, and ets-1 and c-mpl but not Epo receptor gene
expression was induced. Finally, in FDCW2 cells expressing increased levels of
GATA-1 and a carboxyl-terminally truncated Epo receptor, Epo (with respect to
IL-3 as a control) was shown to markedly promote globin transcript expression.
Thus, novel evidence for select hierarchical roles for GATA-1 and Epo in
erythroid lineage specification is provided.

PMCID: PMC108909
PMID: 9584168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Virol. 1998 Jul;72(7):5579-88.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors bind to the U3 region of
Cas-Br-E and graffi retroviruses and transactivate their expression.

Barat C(1), Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Département de Sciences Biologiques,
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3P8.

Cas-Br-E and Graffi are two murine viruses that induce myeloid leukemia in mice: 
while Cas-Br-E induces mostly non-T, non-B leukemia composed of very immature
cells, Graffi causes exclusively a granulocytic leukemia (E. Rassart, J. Houde,
C. Denicourt, M. Ru, C. Barat, E. Edouard, L. Poliquin, and D. Bergeron, Curr.
Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 211:201-210, 1995). In an attempt to understand the
basis of the myeloid specificity of these two retroviruses, we used DNase I
footprinting analysis and gel mobility shift assays to identify a number of
protein binding sites within the Cas-Br-E and Graffi U3 regions. Two protected
regions include potential GATA binding sites. Methylation interference analysis
with different hematopoietic nuclear extracts showed the importance of the G
residues in these GATA sites, and supershift assays clearly identified the
binding factors as GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3. Transient assays with long
terminal repeat (LTR)-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs showed that
these three GATA family members are indeed able to transactivate Cas-Br-E and
Graffi LTRs. Thus, the availability and relative abundance of the various members
of the GATA family of transcription factors in a given cell type could influence 
the transcriptional tissue specificity of murine leukemia viruses and hence their
disease specificity.

PMCID: PMC110213
PMID: 9621016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 5;273(23):14347-54.

Multiple proteins binding to a GATA-E box-GATA motif regulate the erythroid
Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) gene.

Anderson KP(1), Crable SC, Lingrel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, USA.

Erythroid Krüppel-like factor (EKLF) is a zinc finger transcription factor
required for beta-globin gene expression and is implicated as one of the key
factors necessary for the fetal to adult switch in globin gene expression. In an 
effort to identify factors involved in the expression of this important
erythroid-specific regulatory protein, we have isolated the mouse EKLF gene and
systematically analyzed the promoter region. Initially, a reporter construct with
1150 base pairs of the EKLF 5'-region was introduced into transgenic mice and
shown to direct erythroid-specific expression. We continued the expression
studies in erythroid cells and have identified a sequence element consisting of
two GATA sites flanking an E box motif. The three sites act in concert to elevate
the transcriptional activity of the EKLF promoter. Each site is essential for
EKLF expression indicating that the three binding sites do not work additively,
but rather function as a unit. We further show that GATA-1 binds to the two GATA 
sites and present evidence for binding of another factor from erythroid cell
nuclear extracts to the E box motif. These results are consistent with the
formation of a quaternary complex composed of an E box dimer and two GATA-1
proteins binding at a combined GATA-E box-GATA activator element in the distal
EKLF promoter.

PMID: 9603943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Mol Biol. 1998 Apr 3;277(3):605-20.

The solution structure of a fungal AREA protein-DNA complex: an alternative
binding mode for the basic carboxyl tail of GATA factors.

Starich MR(1), Wikström M, Arst HN Jr, Clore GM, Gronenborn AM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0520, USA.

The solution structure of a complex between the DNA binding domain of a fungal
GATA factor and a 13 base-pair oligonucleotide containing its physiologically
relevant CGATAG target sequence has been determined by multidimensional nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The AREA DNA binding domain, from Aspergillus
nidulans, possesses a single Cys2-Cys2 zinc finger module and a basic C-terminal 
tail, which recognize the CGATAG element via an extensive network of hydrophobic 
interactions with the bases in the major groove and numerous non-specific
contacts along the sugar-phosphate backbone. The zinc finger core of the AREA DNA
binding domain has the same global fold as that of the C-terminal DNA binding
domain of chicken GATA-1. In contrast to the complex with the DNA binding domain 
of GATA-1 in which the basic C-terminal tail wraps around the DNA and lies in the
minor groove, the structure of complex with the AREA DNA binding domain reveals
that the C-terminal tail of the fungal domain runs parallel with the sugar
phosphate backbone along the edge of the minor groove. This difference is
principally attributed to amino acid substitutions at two positions of the AREA
DNA binding domain (Val55, Asn62) relative to that of GATA-1 (Gly55, Lys62). The 
impact of the different C-terminal tail binding modes on the affinity and
specificity of GATA factors is discussed.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press Limited.

PMID: 9533883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Blood. 1998 May 1;91(9):3447-58.

Mechanisms of transcription in eosinophils: GATA-1, but not GATA-2,
transactivates the promoter of the eosinophil granule major basic protein gene.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Ackerman SJ, Minegishi N, Takiguchi M, Yamamoto M, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, University School of Medicine, Kumamoto, Japan.

Granule major basic protein (MBP) is expressed exclusively in eosinophils,
basophils, and placental trophoblasts. To identify the cis-elements and
transcription factors involved in regulating MBP expression, we subcloned 3.2 kb 
of sequence upstream of the exon 9 transcriptional start site (P2 promoter) and
serial 5' deletions into the pXP2 luciferase reporter vector. An 80% decrement in
promoter activity was obtained when MBP sequences between bp -117 to -67 were
deleted. To identify transcription factors that bind to and transactivate through
the bp -117 to -67 region, we first compared the upstream genomic sequences of
human and murine MBP; a potential GATA binding consensus site was conserved in
the 50-bp region between the two genes. To determine which GATA proteins bind
this consensus site, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), 
which showed that both GATA-1 and GATA-2 can bind to this consensus site. To
determine the functionality of this site, we tested whether GATA-1 and GATA-2,
either individually or in combination, can transactivate the MBP promoter in the 
Jurkat T cell line. Cotransfection with a GATA-1 expression vector produced
20-fold augmentation of MBP promoter activity, whereas GATA-2 had no activity. In
contrast, combined cotransfection of GATA-1 and GATA-2 decreased the ability of
GATA-1 to transactivate the MBP promoter by approximately 50%. Our results
provide the first evidence for a GATA-1 target gene in eosinophils, a negative
regulatory role for GATA-2 in MBP expression, and possibly eosinophil gene
transcription in general during myelopoiesis.

PMID: 9558404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Med Chem. 1998 Apr 23;41(9):1371-81.

Anti-HIV agents that selectively target retroviral nucleocapsid protein zinc
fingers without affecting cellular zinc finger proteins.

Huang M(1), Maynard A, Turpin JA, Graham L, Janini GM, Covell DG, Rice WG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Antiviral Drug Mechanisms, National Cancer Institute-Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, SAIC Frederick, Frederick, Maryland
21702-1201, USA.

Agents that target the two highly conserved Zn fingers of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nucleocapsid p7 (NCp7) protein are under development
as antivirals. These agents covalently modify Zn-coordinating cysteine thiolates 
of the fingers, causing Zn ejection, loss of native protein structure and nucleic
acid binding capacity, and disruption of virus replication. Concentrations of
three antiviral agents that promoted in vitro Zn ejection from NCp7 and inhibited
HIV replication did not impact the functions of cellular Zn finger proteins,
including poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and the Sp1 and GATA-1 transcription
factors, nor did the compounds inhibit HeLa nuclear extract mediated
transcription. Selectivity of interactions of these agents with NCp7 was
supported by molecular modeling analysis which (1) identified a common
saddle-shaped nucleophilic region on the surfaces of both NCp7 Zn fingers, (2)
indicated a strong correspondence between computationally docked positions for
the agents tested and overlap of frontier orbitals within the nucleophilic loci
of the NCp7 Zn fingers, and (3) revealed selective steric exclusion of the agents
from the core of the GATA-1 Zn finger. Further modeling analysis suggests that
the thiolate of Cys49 in the carboxy-terminal finger is the site most susceptible
to electrophilic attack. These data provide the first experimental evidence and
rationale for antiviral agents that selectively target retroviral nucleocapsid
protein Zn fingers.

PMID: 9554870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Genes Cells. 1998 Jan;3(1):39-50.

Differential roles of GATA-1 and GATA-2 in growth and differentiation of mast
cells.

Harigae H(1), Takahashi S, Suwabe N, Ohtsu H, Gu L, Yang Z, Tsai FY, Kitamura Y, 
Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: While mast cells have been previously shown to express both GATA-1
and GATA-2 mRNAs, individual functions for these related factors during their
course of differentiation within the mast cell lineage have not yet been defined.
To address this question, the expression of GATA-1 and GATA-2 mRNAs and proteins 
were examined in three mouse mast cell progenitor lines as well as in mast cells 
isolated from both wild-type and GATA-1-deficient mice.
RESULTS: Both mast cell progenitor lines, as well as primary mouse bone
marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) and peritoneal mast cells (PMCs) were examined 
by RNA blotting and immunological analyses. GATA-2 protein was abundantly
expressed in all three mast cell lines and in BMMCs, but only weakly in some of
PMCs. In contrast, GATA-1 protein was expressed in PMCs and BMMCs after culture
in the presence of IL3 and SCF. We also found the presence of Alcian blue
staining-positive but berberine staining-negative mast cells in the skin of mice 
heterozygous to GATA-1 knock-down allele.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the expression of GATA factor-dependent
genes is regulated by GATA-2 during mast cell development and that GATA-1 is
required for the specification of differentiated mast cell phenotypes.

PMID: 9581981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Dev Biol. 1998 Apr 15;196(2):218-27.

Knock-in mutation of transcription factor GATA-3 into the GATA-1 locus: partial
rescue of GATA-1 loss of function in erythroid cells.

Tsai FY(1), Browne CP, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Transcription factors of the GATA-family are essential for proper development of 
diverse tissues or cell types. GATA-1 is required for differentiation of two
hematopoietic lineages (red blood cells and megakaryocytes), whereas GATA-3 is
essential for T-cell development. Functional studies suggest that many properties
of the GATA-family of proteins are shared and largely interchangeable. To test
whether the function of GATA-1 in erythroid differentiation can be replaced by
another GATA-factor, we generated a knock-in mutation of the GATA-1 locus in
which GATA-3 cDNA was introduced by gene targeting. Mutant embryos (designated
G1G3ki), though embryonic lethal, exhibit partial rescue, characterized by
increased survival of erythroid precursor cells and improved hemoglobin
production. The basis for the incomplete extent of rescue is likely to be
complex, but may be accounted for, in part, by insufficient accumulation of
GATA-3 protein (compared with the normal level of GATA-1). Our findings suggest
that GATA-3 protein is functional when expressed in an erythroid environment and 
is competent to act on at least a subset of erythroid-expressed target genes in
vivo.

PMID: 9576834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Immunol. 1997 Dec 1;159(11):5441-9.

Cloning and analysis of the promoter region of CCR5, a coreceptor for HIV-1
entry.

Moriuchi H(1), Moriuchi M, Fauci AS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The chemokine receptor CCR5 is a cofactor for cellular entry of macrophage-tropic
strains of HIV-1. Expression of CCR5 is restricted to T cells, macrophages, and
certain cell lines; however, the mechanisms controlling its expression remain
largely unknown. To delineate these mechanisms, approximately 1.0 kb of DNA from 
the immediate 5' upstream region of CCR5 was cloned and characterized. CCR5
promoter activity was up-regulated by PMA, and a region spanning -417 to +61
relative to the transcription start site was sufficient for the basal and induced
activity. DNase I footprinting assays demonstrated several protected areas within
this region, and gel shift assays determined binding sites for transcriptional
factors Oct-1, Oct-2, T cell factor 1alpha, and GATA1. CCR5 promoter activity was
also induced by IL-2 or anti-CD3 Ab, while stimulation with anti-CD28 Ab markedly
reduced CD3-mediated up-regulation of the CCR5 promoter. Flow cytometry confirmed
the findings at the level of cell surface expression. Further delineation of the 
regulation of the CCR5 promoter will be important for a more comprehensive
understanding of the pathogenesis of HIV disease.

PMID: 9548484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 3;95(5):2061-6.

CREB-binding protein cooperates with transcription factor GATA-1 and is required 
for erythroid differentiation.

Blobel GA(1), Nakajima T, Eckner R, Montminy M, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1 coordinates multiple events during terminal
erythroid cell maturation. GATA-1 participates in the transcription of virtually 
all erythroid-specific genes, blocks apoptosis of precursor cells, and controls
the balance between proliferation and cell cycle arrest. Prior studies suggest
that the function of GATA-1 is mediated in part through association with
transcriptional cofactors. CREB-binding protein (CBP) and its close relative p300
serve as coactivators for a variety of transcription factors involved in growth
control and differentiation. We report here that CBP markedly stimulates GATA-1's
transcriptional activity in transient transfection experiments in
nonhematopoietic cells. GATA-1 and CBP also coimmunoprecipitate from nuclear
extracts of erythroid cells. Interaction mapping pinpoints contact sites to the
zinc finger region of GATA-1 and to the E1A-binding region of CBP. Expression of 
a conditional form of adenovirus E1A in murine erythroleukemia cells blocks
differentiation and expression of endogenous GATA-1 target genes, whereas mutant 
forms of E1A unable to bind CBP/p300 have no effect. Our findings add GATA-1, and
very likely other members of the GATA family, to the growing list of molecules
implicated in the complex regulatory network surrounding CBP/p300.

PMCID: PMC19248
PMID: 9482838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Gene. 1998 Feb 27;208(2):117-22.

Further characterization of the murine collagenase (type IVB) gene promoter and
analysis of mRNA expression in murine tissues.

Roach J(1), Choi SJ, Schaub RL, Leach RJ, Roodman GD, Reddy SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Hematology, University of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio 78284-7880, USA.

The collagenase B type IV (Col4B) gene is highly expressed in the osteoclast, the
primary bone-resorbing cell. However, factors that regulate expression of the
Col4B gene are not well characterized. A murine P1 genomic clone containing a 94 
kb sequence insert which contains the Col4B gene was isolated. A 4 kb EcoR1 DNA
fragment containing the 5' flanking sequence of the gene was further subcloned
and restriction mapped. Putative transcription factors such as SRY, Lyf-1, and
GATA1 and 2, binding motifs were identified by sequence analysis in this promoter
region. Enhancer and suppressor regions were mapped by transient expression of
Col4B gene promoter deletion mutant-luciferase reporter gene constructs in HepG2 
cells. Col4B mRNA expression in different murine tissues was analyzed by reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and demonstrated high levels of
expression in bone, clavaria, spleen and thymus. This promoter provides a
valuable tool for targeting gene expression to the osteoclast.

PMID: 9524243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;12(3):378-90.

Testicular GATA-1 factor up-regulates the promoter activity of rat inhibin
alpha-subunit gene in MA-10 Leydig tumor cells.

Feng ZM(1), Wu AZ, Chen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Population Council, New York, New York 10021, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that the basal transcription of rat inhibin
alpha-subunit gene in a mouse testicular Leydig tumor cell line, MA-10, depends
upon a 67-bp DNA fragment at the position of -163 to -97. Within this promoter
region two GATA motifs were observed. In this study, we investigated the possible
role of GATA-binding proteins in the regulation of inhibin alpha-subunit gene
transcription in testicular cells. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses showed that 
mRNAs encoding GATA-binding proteins, GATA-1 and GATA-4, were detected in mouse
and rat testis and in MA-10 and rat Sertoli cells. Testis-specific GATA-1 mRNA,
which is transcribed from a promoter 8 kb upstream to the erythroid exon I of
mouse GATA-1 gene, was also identified in MA-10 cells. Mutations of GATA
sequences in alpha-subunit promoter markedly decreased the transcriptional
activity of alpha-subunit gene when measured by their ability of transient
expression of a bacterial reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT),
in MA-10 cells. Cotransfection of alphaCAT chimeric construct with cDNA
expression plasmid coding for mouse GATA-1 or GATA-4 protein revealed that GATA-1
but not GATA-4 can transactivate alpha-subunit promoter in a dose-dependent
manner. The transactivation by GATA-1 was inhibited if GATA sequences in
alpha-subunit promoter were mutated. Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay demonstrated that GATA-binding proteins present in nuclear extracts of
MA-10 cells and rat testis interacted with the GATA motifs in alpha-subunit
promoter, and the GATA-1 in these nuclear extracts formed a supershifted
immunocomplex with antibody raised against mouse GATA-1 protein. We therefore
concluded that the basal transcription of inhibin alpha-subunit gene in
testicular MA-10 cells is up-regulated by testicular GATA-1 but not GATA-4
through its interaction with the GATA motifs in alpha-subunit promoter. In
summary, we have provided the first evidence of the functional role of a
GATA-binding protein in the regulation of testicular gene expression.

PMID: 9514155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Feb 4;243(1):233-40.

Identification of 5' flanking sequence of RH50 gene and the core region for
erythroid-specific expression.

Iwamoto S(1), Omi T, Yamasaki M, Okuda H, Kawano M, Kajii E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine and Human Genetics, Jichi Medical School,
Tochigi, Japan. siwamoto@ms.jichi.ac.jp

The Rh blood group antigens are carried by two distinct but homologous membrane
proteins encoded by two closely related genes, RCHE and RHD. Rh50 glyco-protein
is the membrane protein tightly associated with Rh polypeptides and is critical
for expression of Rh antigens. The amino acid sequence and predicted membrane
topology of Rh50 glycoprotein are significantly homologous with those of the Rh
proteins. Northern blot analysis of leukemic cell lines showed that expression of
RH50 gene is restricted to cells with erythroid features. HEL and K562 cells
showed a transcription levels ratio of 1 to 9.9 for Rh50, and 12.3 to 1 for Rh.
The nucleotide sequence of 5' flanking region of RH50 gene and functional
promoter assays also supported the erythroid-specific regulation of the gene,
whereas the sequence had lower homology with the promoter sequence of RH genes.
Seven GATAs, nine E-boxes, two CACCCs, one YY1, and one October motif were
identified in the 1868bp 5' flanking sequence. The core promoter of RH50 gene was
located within 68bp length from the translation start position, which included an
inverse GATA motif, although obvious motifs for Sp1 or erythroid Krüppel-like
factor were lacking. The inverse GATA motif was the target sequence of GATA-1
protein, and disruption of the motif abolished the transactivating activity of
erythroid cells. These studies confirm the erythroid-specific expression of Rh
antigens, but suggest distinct regulatory mechanisms for RH vs RH50 genes.

PMID: 9473510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Blood. 1998 Jan 1;91(1):309-18.

Gamma-globin gene promoter elements required for interaction with globin
enhancers.

Langdon SD(1), Kaufman RE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Normal expression of the human beta-globin domain genes is dependent on at least 
three types of regulatory elements located within the beta-globin domain: the
locus control region (LCR), globin enhancer elements (3'beta and 3'Agamma), and
the individual globin gene promoter and upstream regions. It has been postulated 
that regulation occurs through physical interactions between factors bound to
these elements, which are located at considerable distances from each other. To
identify the elements required for promoter-enhancer interactions from a
distance, we have investigated the expression of the wild-type, truncated, and
mutated gamma-globin promoters linked to the 5'HS2 enhancer. We show that in K562
cells, 5'HS2 increases activity approximately 20-fold from both a wild-type and
truncated (-135 --> +25) gamma promoter and that truncation or site-directed
mutagenesis of the tandem CCAAT boxes eliminated the enhancement by 5'HS2.
Mutation of the gamma-globin gene promoter GATA-1 binding sites did not decrease 
either promoter strength or enhancement of activity by 5'HS2. To determine if
enhanced expression of gamma-globin gene promoters carrying mutations associated 
with hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) was due to greater
interactions with enhancers, we linked these HPFH gamma-globin gene promoters to 
5'HS2 and demonstrated a twofold to threefold higher expression than the
corresponding wild-type promoter plus enhancer in MEL cells. Addition of the
Agamma-globin gene 3' enhancer to a plasmid containing the gamma-globin gene
promoter and 5'HS2 did not further enhance promoter strength. Furthermore, we
have demonstrated that the previously identified core 5'HS2 enhancer (46-bp
tandem AP-1/NF-E2 sites) increased expression only when located 5', but not 3',
to the gamma-globin-luciferase reporter gene, suggesting that its enhancer effect
is not by DNA looping. Our results suggest that CCAAT boxes, but not GATA or
CACCC binding sites, are required for interaction between the gamma-globin
promoter and the LCR/5'HS2 and that regulatory elements in addition to the core
enhancer may be required for the enhancer to act from a distance.

PMID: 9414299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1477-82.

Estrogen receptor diminishes DNA-binding activities of chicken GATA-1 and
CACCC-binding proteins.

Holth LT(1), Sun JM, Coutts AS, Murphy LC, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

The estrogen receptor (ER) repressed erythroid differentiation and
erythroid-specific gene expression. In this study, we investigated the effect of 
ER alpha (referred to throughout as ER) on DNA-binding activities of
transcription factors involved in regulating the expression of erythroid-specific
genes, and, in particular, the histone H5 gene. Using electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, we found that in the presence of rabbit reticulocyte lysate, human 
ER reduced the binding activities of chicken immature erythrocyte nuclear
extracted proteins to GATA and CACCC sites in the H5 promoter and enhancer. In
contrast, the binding activities of NF1 and Sp1 were not affected by ER. Binding 
of ER to an estrogen response element was enhanced by addition of rabbit
reticulocyte lysate. This lysate was also necessary for ER to diminish the
DNA-binding activity of GATA-1. These results suggest that additional factor(s)
are necessary for full ER function. Both GATA-1 and CACCC-binding proteins are
critical for the developmentally regulated expression of erythroid-specific
genes. We hypothesize that interference in DNA-binding activities of GATA-1 and
CACCC-binding proteins is the mechanism by which the ER inhibits regulation of
these genes.

PMID: 9428796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Blood. 1998 Jan 15;91(2):450-7.

Forced GATA-1 expression in the murine myeloid cell line M1: induction of c-Mpl
expression and megakaryocytic/erythroid differentiation.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Zon LI, Ackerman SJ, Yamamoto M, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Differentiation, Kumamoto University School of Medicine,
Japan.

The "zinc-finger" transcription factor GATA-1 was first shown in cells of
erythroid lineage. It is also expressed in cells of other hematopoietic lineages 
including megakaryocytes, mast cells, and eosinophils. GATA-1 is now considered
to be one of the central regulators in hematopoietic cell differentiation. To
further analyze the role of GATA-1 in controlling differentiation from
hematopoietic stem cells, we investigated the phenotypic changes induced by the
overexpression of murine GATA-1 in the murine myeloid leukemic cell line, M1.
Forced expression of GATA-1 induced the appearance of erythroid cells and
megakaryocytes as assessed by cellular morphology, acetylcholinesterase activity,
and expression of platelet factor 4 and beta-globin mRNA synthesis. Because the
c-mpl ligand, thrombopoietin, plays an important role in megakaryopoiesis, the
expression of c-mpl and c-mpl ligand (thrombopoietin) mRNA was analyzed by
Northern blot and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in M1 
cells overexpressing GATA-1. The c-mpl ligand mRNA was equally expressed both in 
parental M1 cells and in those transfected with the GATA-1 expression vector. In 
contrast, the mRNA expression of c-mpl was increased only in GATA-1 expressing M1
cells differentiated towards erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages. The increased 
expression of c-mpl mRNA induced by GATA-1 raised the question as to whether or
not GATA-1 transactivated the c-mpl promoter. The activity of the c-mpl promoter 
in the presence of cotransfected GATA-1 was significantly increased compared with
that of the control. A plasmid with the mutated GATA-binding site did not show
transactivation ability in the cotransfection with a GATA expression vector.
These findings suggest that the upregulation of c-mpl induced by GATA-1
expression in M1 cells is closely associated with erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation.

PMID: 9427697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Development. 1997 Oct;124(20):4105-11.

GATA-1 expression pattern can be recapitulated in living transgenic zebrafish
using GFP reporter gene.

Long Q(1), Meng A, Wang H, Jessen JR, Farrell MJ, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics & Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta 30912, USA.

In this study, DNA constructs containing the putative zebrafish promoter
sequences of GATA-1, an erythroid-specific transcription factor, and the green
fluorescent protein reporter gene, were microinjected into single-cell zebrafish 
embryos. Erythroid-specific activity of the GATA-1 promoter was observed in
living embryos during early development. Fluorescent circulating blood cells were
detected in microinjected embryos 24 hours after fertilization and were still
present in 2-month-old fish. Germline transgenic fish obtained from the injected 
founders continued to express green fluorescent protein in erythroid cells in the
F1 and F2 generations. The green fluorescent protein expression patterns in
transgenic fish were consistent with the pattern of GATA-1 mRNA expression
detected by RNA in situ hybridization. These transgenic fish have allowed us to
isolate, by fluorescence-activated cell sorting, the earliest erythroid
progenitor cells from developing embryos for in vitro studies. By generating
transgenic fish using constructs containing other zebrafish promoters and green
fluorescent protein reporter gene, it should be possible to visualize the origin 
and migration of any lineage-specific progenitor cells in a living embryo.

PMID: 9374406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 14;272(46):29272-80.

Transactivation of an intronic hematopoietic-specific enhancer of the human
Wilms' tumor 1 gene by GATA-1 and c-Myb.

Zhang X(1), Xing G, Fraizer GC, Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The Wilms' tumor 1 gene (WT1) encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor which is
expressed in a tissue-specific manner. Our studies indicate that in addition to
the promoter, other regulatory elements are required for tissue-specific
expression of this gene. A 258-base pair hematopoietic specific enhancer in
intron 3 of the WT1 gene increased the transcriptional activity of the WT1
promoter by 8-10-fold in K562 and HL60 cells. Sequence analysis revealed both a
GATA and a c-Myb motif in the enhancer fragment. Mutation of the GATA motif
decreased the enhancer activity by 60% in K562 cells. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that the GATA-1 protein in K562 nuclear extracts binds to
this motif. Cotransfection of the enhancer containing reporter construct with a
GATA-1 expression vector showed that GATA-1 transactivated this enhancer,
increasing the CAT reporter activity 10-15-fold. Similar analysis of the c-Myb
motif by cotransfection with the enhancer CAT reporter construct and a c-Myb
expression vector showed that c-Myb transactivated the enhancer by 5-fold. A
DNase I-hypersensitive site has also been mapped in the 258-base pair enhancer
region. These data suggest that GATA-1 and c-Myb are responsible for the activity
of this enhancer in hematopoietic cells and may bind to the enhancer in vivo.

PMID: 9361007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Blood. 1997 Sep 15;90(6):2175-87.

Hematopoietic cell phosphatase negatively regulates erythropoietin-induced
hemoglobinization in erythroleukemic SKT6 cells.

Sharlow ER(1), Pacifici R, Crouse J, Batac J, Todokoro K, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, Department of Veterinary Science, Amgen, Inc,
Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.

In an increasing number of hematopoietic cytokine receptor systems (T-cell
receptor, B-cell receptor, and macrophage colony-stimulating factor, stem cell
factor, interleukin-3, and erythropoietin [EPO] receptors), inhibitory roles for 
the protein tyrosine phosphatase hematopoietic cell phosphatase (HCP; SHPTP1,
PTP1C, and SHP1) have been defined in proliferative signaling. However, evidence 
exists to suggest that HCP also may exert important effects on blood cell
differentiation. To investigate possible roles for HCP during late erythroid
differentiation, effects of manipulating HCP expression or recruitment on
EPO-induced hemoglobinization in erythroleukemic SKT6 cells have been
investigated. No effects of EPO on levels of HCP, Syp, Stat5, the EPO receptor,
or GATA-1 expression were observed during induced differentiation. However, the
tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, the EPO receptor, and Stat5 was efficiently
activated, and HCP was observed to associate constitutively with the EPO receptor
in this differentiation-specific system. In studies of HCP function, inhibition
of HCP expression by antisense oligonucleotides enhanced hemoglobinization,
whereas the enforced ectopic expression of wild-type (wt) HCP markedly inhibited 
EPO-induced globin expression and Stat5 activation. Based on these findings,
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor/EPO receptor chimeras containing either
the wt EPO receptor cytoplasmic domain (EECA) or a derived HCP binding site
mutant (EECA-Y429,431F) were expressed in SKT6 cells, and their abilities to
mediate differentiation were assayed. Each chimera supported EGF-induced
hemoglobinization, but efficiencies for EECA-Y429,431F were enhanced 400% to
500%. Thus, these studies show a novel role for HCP as a negative regulator of
EPO-induced erythroid differentiation. In normal erythroid progenitor cells, HCP 
may act to prevent premature commitment to terminal differentiation. In
erythroleukemic SKT6 cells, this action also may enforce mitogenesis.

PMID: 9310468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Leukemia. 1997 Sep;11(9):1575-9.

Time-course of butyric acid-induced differentiation in human K562 leukemic cell
line: rapid increase in gamma-globin, porphobilinogen deaminase and NF-E2 mRNA
levels.

Chénais B(1), Molle I, Trentesaux C, Jeannesson P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, EA2063, IFR53-Biomolécules, 
Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de Reims Champagne Ardenne, France.

Butyric acid (BA) was shown to induce hemoglobinization of K562 cells in a dose- 
and time-dependent manner. The maximal differentiation (54% of hemoglobinized
cells) was obtained with the 0.5 mM concentration, which induced a 60% inhibition
of cell growth at day 3 without cytotoxicity. Parallel to the kinetics of
hemoglobinization, a rapid increase in gamma-globin and porphobilinogen deaminase
(PBGD) mRNAs was observed in BA-treated cells. This increase was time-dependent
and higher for gamma-globin than for PBGD (six- and two-fold at day 3,
respectively). In contrast, erythropoietin receptor mRNAs were not affected by BA
treatment. Analysis of erythroid transcription factor mRNA levels during the time
course of BA treatment showed, for the first time, an early and marked (up to
three-fold) increase in p45 NF-E2 mRNA, contrasting with that of GATA-1 mRNA
(<1.5-fold). Taken together, these results showed the rapid differentiating
effect of BA and suggest the involvement of the NF-E2 transcription factor.

PMID: 9305615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Int J Cancer. 1997 Aug 7;72(4):696-9.

WT1 contributes to leukemogenesis: expression patterns in
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-induced leukemia.

Osaka M(1), Koami K, Sugiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.
osaka@med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The Wilms'-tumor gene WT1 may have a different function from a tumor-suppressor
gene in some leukemias. Using the 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-induced
rat leukemia system, we examined whether WT1 expression was involved during
leukemogenesis, since this model enabled us to analyze cells altered by DMBA at
various stages of leukemogenesis. By the semi-quantitative reverse-transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method, WT1 expression was detected in 15
(71%) of 21 DMBA-induced erythroblastic leukemias. Among 15 WT1-expressing
leukemias, GATA-1, which is an erythroid-specific transcription factor and might 
regulate WT1 expression, was also expressed in 13 cases (p < 0.05). On the other 
hand, WT1 expression was not detected in any normal or early pre-leukemic rats
and was detected in 1 of 8 rats in late pre-leukemic stages. These results showed
that cells with a high expression level of WT1 tended to develop into leukemia
and that WT1 contributed to leukemogenesis in the late stage, suggesting that the
expression of WT1 plays an important role in cell proliferation and in
maintaining the viability of some leukemia cells.

PMID: 9259412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 22;94(15):7976-81.

An upstream, DNase I hypersensitive region of the hematopoietic-expressed
transcription factor GATA-1 gene confers developmental specificity in transgenic 
mice.

McDevitt MA(1), Fujiwara Y, Shivdasani RA, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1, which is expressed in several hematopoietic
lineages and multipotential progenitors, is required for the development of red
blood cells and platelets. To identify control elements of the mouse GATA-1 gene,
we analyzed DNase I hypersensitivity of the locus in erythroid chromatin and the 
expression of GATA-1/Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase (lacZ) transgenes in
mice. Transgenes with 2.7 kb of promoter sequences are expressed infrequently and
only within adult (definitive) erythroid cells. We show that inclusion of an
upstream hypersensitive site (HS I) markedly enhances the frequency of expressing
transgenic lines and activates expression in primitive erythroid cells. This
pattern recapitulates the proper pattern of GATA-1 expression during development.
By breeding a GATA-1/lacZ transgene into a GATA-1(-) background, we also have
shown that the activation or maintenance of GATA-1 expression does not require
the presence of GATA-1 itself, thereby excluding simple models of positive
autoregulation. The transgene cassette reported here should be useful in
directing expression of foreign sequences at the onset of hematopoiesis in the
embryo and may assist in the identification of upstream regulators of the GATA-1 
gene.

PMCID: PMC21540
PMID: 9223298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell. 1997 Jul 11;90(1):109-19.

FOG, a multitype zinc finger protein, acts as a cofactor for transcription factor
GATA-1 in erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation.

Tsang AP(1), Visvader JE, Turner CA, Fujiwara Y, Yu C, Weiss MJ, Crossley M,
Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for development of the
erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. Using the conserved zinc finger
DNA-binding domain of GATA-1 in the yeast two-hybrid system, we have identified a
novel, multitype zinc finger protein, Friend of GATA-1 (FOG), which binds GATA-1 
but not a functionally inactive mutant lacking the amino (N) finger. FOG is
coexpressed with GATA-1 during embryonic development and in erythroid and
megakaryocytic cells. Furthermore, FOG and GATA-1 synergistically activate
transcription from a hematopoietic-specific regulatory region and cooperate
during both erythroid and megakaryocytic cell differentiation. These findings
indicate that FOG acts as a cofactor for GATA-1 and provide a paradigm for the
regulation of cell type-specific gene expression by GATA transcription factors.

PMID: 9230307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. EMBO J. 1997 Jul 1;16(13):3965-73.

A lineage-selective knockout establishes the critical role of transcription
factor GATA-1 in megakaryocyte growth and platelet development.

Shivdasani RA(1), Fujiwara Y, McDevitt MA, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for red blood cell maturation and,
therefore, for survival of developing mouse embryos. GATA-1 is also expressed in 
megakaryocytes, mast cells, eosinophils, multipotential hematopoietic progenitors
and Sertoli cells of the testis, where its functions have been elusive. Indeed,
interpretation of gene function in conventional knockout mice is often limited by
embryonic lethality or absence of mature cells of interest, creating the need for
alternate methods to assess gene function in selected cell lineages. Emerging
strategies for conditional gene inactivation through site-specific recombinases
rely on the availability of mouse strains with high fidelity of transgene
expression and efficient, tissue-restricted DNA excision. In an alternate
approach, we modified sequences upstream of the GATA-1 locus in embryonic stem
cells, including a DNase I-hypersensitive region. This resulted in generation of 
mice with selective loss of megakaryocyte GATA-1 expression, yet sufficient
erythroid cell levels to avoid lethal anemia. The mutant mice have markedly
reduced platelet numbers, associated with deregulated megakaryocyte proliferation
and severely impaired cytoplasmic maturation. These findings reveal a critical
role for GATA-1 in megakaryocyte growth regulation and platelet biogenesis, and
illustrate how targeted mutation of cis-elements can generate lineage-specific
knockout mice.

PMCID: PMC1170020
PMID: 9233806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 24;94(13):6781-5.

A "knockdown" mutation created by cis-element gene targeting reveals the
dependence of erythroid cell maturation on the level of transcription factor
GATA-1.

McDevitt MA(1), Shivdasani RA, Fujiwara Y, Yang H, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The hematopoietic-restricted transcription factor GATA-1 is required for both
mammalian erythroid cell and megakaryocyte differentiation. To define the
mechanisms governing its transcriptional regulation, we replaced upstream
sequences including a DNase I hypersensitive (HS) region with a
neomycin-resistance cassette by homologous recombination in mouse embryonic stem 
cells and generated mice either harboring this mutation (neoDeltaHS) or lacking
the selection cassette (DeltaneoDeltaHS). Studies of the consequences of these
targeted mutations provide novel insights into GATA-1 function in erythroid
cells. First, the neoDeltaHS mutation leads to a marked impairment in the rate or
efficiency of erythroid cell maturation due to a modest (4- to 5-fold) decrease
in GATA-1 expression. Hence, erythroid differentiation is dose-dependent with
respect to GATA-1. Second, since expression of GATA-1 from the DeltaneoDeltaHS
allele in erythroid cells is largely restored, transcription interference imposed
by the introduced cassette must account for the "knockdown" effect of the
mutation. Finally, despite the potency of the upstream sequences in conferring
high-level, developmentally appropriate expression of transgenes in mice, other
cis-regulatory elements within the GATA-1 compensate for its absence in erythroid
cells. Our work illustrates the usefulness of targeted mutations to create
knockdown mutations that may uncover important quantitative contributions of gene
function not revealed by conventional knockouts.

PMCID: PMC21235
PMID: 9192642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Cell Physiol. 1997 Jun;171(3):343-56.

Growth factor receptor expression during in vitro differentiation of partially
purified populations containing murine stem cells.

Ashihara E(1), Vannucchi AM, Migliaccio G, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematopoietic Growth Factors, Lindsley F. Kimball Research
Institute, New York Blood Center, New York 10021, USA.

We have investigated, by semiquantitative RT-PCR, the kinetics of activation of
hematopoietic receptors and differentiation markers in partially purified murine 
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) induced to differentiate in serum-free culture
with combinations of growth factor (GF). The combinations of GF used sustained
either multilineage [stem cell factor (SCF) + interleukin 3 (IL-3), or erythroid 
[SCF + IL-3 + erythropoietin (Epo)] or myeloid [SCF + IL-3 + granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)] differentiation. The GF receptor genes
investigated were the alpha and beta subunits of the IL-3 and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) receptor, the
erythropoietin receptor, the G-CSF receptor, and c-Fms, the receptor for
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). The expression of Gata1 and alpha- 
and beta-globin was investigated at the same time as a marker of erythroid
differentiation. HSC were purified according to standard protocols, which include
partitioning of lineage-negative bone marrow cells with the mitochondrial dye
Rhodamine 123 (Rho) into Rho-dull (> or = 17% of which reconstitute long-term
hematopoiesis in recipient mice) and into Rho-bright (which are as capable as
Rho-dull of multilineage differentiation but do not permanently reconstitute the 
host). The following pattern of expression was observed: the alpha subunit of the
IL-3 receptor clearly was expressed in both Rho-bright and Rho-dull cells at the 
outset, and its expression did not change over time in culture. The beta subunits
of the IL-3 and GM-CSF receptor, the alpha subunit of the GM-CSF receptor, the
Epo and G-CSF receptors and Fms barely were expressed in purified Rho-bright and 
Rho-dull cells, but their expression increased in cells cultured both in
erythroid and in myeloid GF combinations. Gata1 was expressed maximally in
Rho-bright cells but was below the level of detection in Rho-dull cells. Rho-dull
cells expressed Gata1 when cultured both in erythroid and in myeloid GF
combinations. In contrast, alpha- and beta-globin, which also were not expressed 
in the purified cells, were induced only in cells stimulated with Epo. These
results indicate that the genes for all the GF receptors investigated (with the
exception of the alpha subunit of the IL-3 receptor) are expressed at low levels,
if any, in purified Rho-bright or Rho-dull cells, but are expressed in their
progeny cultured either in erythroid or myeloid GF combinations. The expression
of the Epo receptor, in particular, is activated both in erythroid (alpha- and
beta-globin positive and in myeloid (alpha- and beta-globin negative) cells.
Therefore, activation of the expression of the Epo receptor gene and activation
of the erythroid differentiation program are two independent events in normal
hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9180904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 9;272(19):12611-5.

Arrest in primitive erythroid cell development caused by promoter-specific
disruption of the GATA-1 gene.

Takahashi S(1), Onodera K, Motohashi H, Suwabe N, Hayashi N, Yanai N, Nabesima Y,
Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai, Tsukuba 305, Japan.

To elucidate the in vivo function of GATA-1 during hematopoiesis, we specifically
disrupted the erythroid promoter of the GATA-1 gene in embryonic stem cells and
generated germ line chimeras. Male offspring of chimeras bearing the targeted
mutation were found to die by 12.5 days post coitus due to severe anemia while
heterozygous females displayed characteristics ranging from severe anemia to
normal erythropoiesis. When female heterozygotes were crossed with transgenic
males carrying a reporter gene, which specifically marks primitive erythroid
progenitors, massive accumulation of undifferentiated erythroid cells were
observed in the yolk sacs of the GATA-1-mutant embryos, demonstrating that GATA-1
is required for the terminal differentiation of primitive erythroid cells in
vivo.

PMID: 9139715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 29;94(9):4487-92.

GATA-1 transcription is controlled by distinct regulatory mechanisms during
primitive and definitive erythropoiesis.

Onodera K(1), Takahashi S, Nishimura S, Ohta J, Motohashi H, Yomogida K, Hayashi 
N, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-77, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-1 is required for the terminal differentiation of both 
the primitive and definitive erythroid cell lineages, and yet the regulatory
mechanisms of GATA-1 itself are not well understood. To clarify how the GATA-1
gene is transcriptionally controlled in vivo, presumptive regulatory regions of
the gene were tested by fusion to a reporter gene and then examined in transgenic
mice. We found that a transcriptional control element located between -3.9 and
-2.6 kb 5' to the erythroid first exon serves as an activating element and that
this sequence alone is sufficient to recapitulate the expression of GATA-1 (but
uniquely in primitive erythroid cells). Addition of sequences from the GATA-1
first intron to this upstream element provides a necessary and sufficient
condition for complete recapitulation of GATA-1 expression in both primitive and 
definitive erythroid cells. The first intron element does not possess intrinsic
transcriptional activation potential when linked to the GATA-1 gene promoter but 
rather requires the upstream activating element for its activity. These
experiments show that GATA-1 gene expression is regulated by discrete
transcriptional control elements during definitive and primitive erythropoiesis: 
The 5' element displays properties anticipated for a primitive erythroid
cell-specific activating element, and the novel element within the GATA-1 first
intron specifically augments this activity in definitive erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC20749
PMID: 9114016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 28;233(3):729-36.

Involvement of the transcriptional factor GATA-1 in regulation of expression of
coproporphyrinogen oxidase in mouse erythroleukemia cells.

Tanabe A(1), Furukawa T, Ogawa Y, Yamamoto M, Hayashi N, Tokunaga R, Taketani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Kansai Medical University, Osaka, Japan.

Coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPO; EC 1.3.3.3), the sixth enzyme of heme
biosynthesis, transcribed from a single promoter is markedly induced during
erythroid differentiation. CPO is ubiquitously expressed in all cells. To
determine cis-acting elements of the human CPO gene, the promoter region of the
gene was isolated, and three potential GATA-1 motifs and four GC boxes were found
within this fragment. In a functional analysis of various deletion mutants, we
found that the GATA-1 binding site at -143 to -138 was essential for basic and
inducible expressions of the CPO gene in mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. Gel
mobility shift assay revealed that GATA-1 bound to the region is required for the
expression and this was confirmed by observations that the nuclear protein bound 
to the GATA-1 motif was supershifted with anti GATA-1 antibody, by gel mobility
shift assay. Furthermore, co-expression of mouse GATA-1 in MEL cells led to an
increase in the promoter activity, which was markedly increased by dimethyl
sulfoxide-treatment. These results indicate that GATA-1 plays an important role
in regulation of transcription of the CPO gene in erythroid cells.

PMID: 9168923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Apr 10;232(1):90-6.

Induction of erythroid gene expression by microcell fusion.

Kanamori H(1), Siegel JN.

Author information: 
(1)Immune Cell Biology Program, Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20889-5607, USA.

The molecular events which underlie lineage commitment and differentiation in
hematopoietic cells are still incompletely understood. Microcell fusion is a
versatile technique which has been utilized in characterizing and mapping genes
involved in tumor suppression, cell senescence, and certain aspects of
differentiation. Microcell fusion has the potential to contribute to the
understanding of hematopoietic differentiation; however, application of this
technique is limited by the need to use adherent cells as microcell donors, by
the need to tag candidate chromosomes with a selectable marker, and by the need
for prolonged selection of fused cells prior to characterization of their
phenotype. We developed a modified technique of microcell fusion using square
wave electroporation, which allows higher efficiency fusion than polyethylene
glycol fusion. By using cross-species fusion and species-specific PCR primers, we
were able to detect new gene induction events 48 h after microcell fusion. To
study erythroid gene expression, we fused microcells from human erythroid K562
cells to murine B-lymphoid SP-2 cells. We found that microcell fusion induced the
nonerythroid recipient cells to express alpha-globin mRNA in a dose-dependent
manner. They also expressed RNA for beta-globin, GATA-1, and NF-E2. In contrast, 
there was no expression of heart- or liver-specific genes. We conclude that
microcells from erythroid cells contain all the information necessary to induce
expression of multiple erythroid genes. Analysis of the components of the
microcells responsible for this new gene induction may allow the characterization
of cellular factors responsible for erythroid-specific gene expression.

PMID: 9141625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:307-12.

LIM-only protein Lmo2 forms a protein complex with erythroid transcription factor
GATA-1.

Osada H(1), Grutz GG, Axelson H, Forster A, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research Council, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

The LIM-only protein Lmo2, originally identified as an oncogenic protein in human
T cell leukemia, is essential for erythropoiesis. A possible role for Lmo2 in
transcription during erythropoiesis has been investigated. Direct interaction of 
Lmo2 was observed in vitro and in vivo with the zinc finger transcription factor 
GATA-1, as well as with the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
Tall. By using mammalian two-hybrid analysis, E47/Tall/Lmo2/GATA-1 protein
complex could be demonstrated. Thus, a molecular link exists between three
proteins crucial for erythropoiesis. This data suggest that variations in amounts
of complexes involving Lmo2, Tall, and GATA-1 could be important for erythroid
differentiation.

PMID: 9209374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Hematol. 1997 Apr;65(3):239-49.

Expression of GATA transcription factors in myelogenous and lymphoblastic
leukemia cells.

Minegishi N(1), Morita S, Minegishi M, Tsuchiya S, Konno T, Hayashi N, Yamamoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan.

In the hematopoietic lineage, the transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 show
restricted and largely overlapping expression profiles, but GATA-2 is uniquely
expressed in early hematopoietic progenitors. GATA-3 is found exclusively in T
cells of hematopoietic lineage. To clarify whether these expression profiles are 
preserved or changed during the development of malignancies, we analyzed the
expression of GATA factors in the blasts from leukemic children. A total of 18
myelogenous leukemia and 24 lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cases were investigated.
In the majority of the former cases, GATA-2 mRNA expression and the expression of
CD34 and c-kit antigens on leukemic cells were demonstrated. In contrast, GATA-2 
mRNA and c-kit antigen could not be detected in CD34-positive cells from ALL
patients. GATA-3 mRNA was expressed in all T-ALL cases, but not in any precursor 
B-ALL. These findings suggest that down-regulation of GATA-2 and expression of
GATA-3 are important events for the commitment of cells to lymphoid and T cell
lineage, respectively. The expression profiles of GATA factors in leukemic cells 
are generally consistent with those in their normal counterparts, and thus
provide a useful tool to determine the lineage commitment of unclassified
leukemia.

PMID: 9114595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):3245-9.

Inhibition of DLX-7 homeobox gene causes decreased expression of GATA-1 and c-myc
genes and apoptosis.

Shimamoto T(1), Nakamura S, Bollekens J, Ruddle FH, Takeshita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Medical Center, NY 10016, USA.

The DLX gene family is a family of divergent homeobox genes which are related to 
the Drosophila distal-less (Dll) gene and has been reported to be expressed
primarily in the forebrain and craniofacial structures. We have previously
identified a new member of this family, DLX-7. We now report that this gene is
expressed in normal hematopoietic cells and leukemia cell lines with erythroid
characteristics. We used an antisense oligonucleotide targeted against the
translation start site of DLX-7 mRNA to inhibit its expression in a human
erythroleukemia cell line K562, which expresses DLX-7 at a high level. The
antisense oligonucleotide efficiently reduced the DLX-7 mRNA, while control
oligonucleotides, including a mutant oligonucleotide identical to the antisense
sequence except for four nucleotide mismatches, had no effect on DLX-7 mRNA
level. Inhibition of DLX-7 expression decreased the plating efficiency by
approximately 70% compared with control. The antisense treatment caused
apoptosis, as shown by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
deoxyuridine triphosphate-digoxigenin nick end labeling (TUNEL) method.
Down-regulation of DLX-7 expression by antisense treatment was associated with a 
reduction in GATA-1 and c-myc mRNA levels. Thus, we conclude that DLX-7 is
expressed in hematopoietic cells and that the inhibition of its expression
results in the decreased levels of GATA-1 and c-myc genes, with an accompanying
induction of apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC20354
PMID: 9096378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 18;94(6):2444-8.

Binary transgenic mouse model for studying the trans control of globin gene
switching: evidence that GATA-1 is an in vivo repressor of human epsilon gene
expression.

Li Q(1), Clegg C, Peterson K, Shaw S, Raich N, Stamatoyannopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle 98185, USA.

To test whether human GATA-1 (hGATA-1) is involved in the transcriptional control
of globin gene switching, we produced transgenic mice overexpressing hGATA-1,
crossed them with mice carrying a human beta-globin locus yeast artificial
chromosome (beta YAC), and analyzed globin gene expression in their progeny. Mice
carrying both the hGATA-1 and the beta YAC transgenes had normal levels of gamma-
and beta-globin mRNA and no distortion in the rate or in the timing of
gamma-to-beta switch, indicating that hGATA-1 is not involved in the
developmental control of gamma- and beta-globin genes. In contrast, mice carrying
the hGATA-1 and the beta YAC transgenes had 5- to 6-fold lower expression of the 
human epsilon globin gene compared with beta YAC mice lacking the hGATA-1
transgene. These results provide direct in vivo evidence that hGATA-1 is a
specific repressor of human epsilon gene expression. Our findings also suggest
that binary transgenic mouse systems based on overexpression of transcriptional
factors can be used to investigate the trans control of human globin gene
switching. Systems as the one we describe here should be useful in the study of
any developmentally controlled human gene for which transgenic mice are
available.

PMCID: PMC20107
PMID: 9122214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Leukemia. 1997 Mar;11(3):352-8.

The leukemia-associated gene MDS1/EVI1 is a new type of GATA-binding
transactivator.

Soderholm J(1), Kobayashi H, Mathieu C, Rowley JD, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

EVI1, located at chromosome band 3q26, encodes a 1051 amino acid zinc finger
protein inappropriately expressed in the leukemic cells of 2-5% of acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients. The activation of
EVI1 often follows a chromosomal rearrangement involving band 3q26, and the two
most frequent rearrangements are the t(3;3)(q21;q26) and the inv(3)(q21q26). EVI1
exists also as a longer protein that includes 188 additional amino acids at the
N-terminus, named MDS1/EVI1. Both genes are expressed at very low levels in the
normal bone marrow. The genomic region between the first coding exon of MDS1/EVI1
and the first coding exon of EVI1 is 150-300 kb. The majority of the chromosomal 
breakpoints at the 5' end of EVI1 in the t(3;3) resulting in EVI1 activation have
been mapped in this region. As a consequence of the t(3;3), the cell would be
unable to express MDS1/EVI1, although it would express EVI1. We have compared the
transcriptional activity of MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1, and we show that MDS1/EVI1 is a
strong activator of promoters containing the AGATA motif, whereas EVI1 is a
repressor. In addition, whereas EVI1 represses activation by the GATA-1 erythroid
factor, MDS1/EVI1 does not, and is itself repressed by EVI1. By gene fusion to
the DNA-binding domain of Gal4, we further show that the activation properties of
MDS1/EVI1 are restricted to an acidic segment encoded by the second and third
exons in the 5' untranslated region of EVI1. We have also examined the relative
expression of the two genes in normal bone marrow and in the bone marrow of
leukemia patients with 3q26 rearrangements. Our results indicate that the
rearrangements at 3q26 affect expression of EVI1, but not of MDS1/EVI1. We
propose that rearrangements at 3q26 involving EVI1 could result in leukemia by a 
two-step process involving first transcriptional disruption of MDS1/EVI1, and
next by inappropriately activating expression of EVI1.

PMID: 9067573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Blood. 1997 Mar 1;89(5):1690-700.

Erythropoietin-induced activation of STAT5 is impaired in the myelodysplastic
syndrome.

Hoefsloot LH(1), van Amelsvoort MP, Broeders LC, van der Plas DC, van Lom K,
Hoogerbrugge H, Touw IP, Löwenberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Department of
Hematology, Dijkzigt Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) have ineffective in vivo and in
vitro erythropoiesis, characterized by an impaired response to erythropoietin
(Epo). We examined proliferation and maturation of MDS marrow cells in response
to Epo in more detail. Epo-dependent DNA synthesis as well as induction of GATA-1
binding activity in marrow cells from 15 MDS cases were severely reduced as
compared with normal bone marrow (NBM). Additionally, the appearance of
morphologically identifiable erythroid cells was decreased in MDS cell cultures. 
These data indicate that both the Epo-dependent proliferation as well as the
differentiation induction by Epo is suppressed. To study more upstream events of 
the Epo signal transduction route we investigated activation of the signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5. In all 15 MDS samples tested,
STAT5 activation was absent or greatly suppressed in response to Epo. In
contrast, interleukin-3 induced a normal STAT5 response in MDS cells. Further, in
MDS the subset of CD71+ BM cells that is phenotypically similar to Epo-responsive
cells in normal marrow, was present. We conclude that the Epo response in MDS is 
disturbed at an early point in the Epo-receptor (EpoR) signal transduction
pathway.

PMID: 9057652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1642-51.

Erythroid-cell-specific properties of transcription factor GATA-1 revealed by
phenotypic rescue of a gene-targeted cell line.

Weiss MJ(1), Yu C, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1 is essential for erythropoiesis. In
its absence, committed erythroid precursors arrest at the proerythroblast stage
of development and undergo apoptosis. To study the function of GATA-1 in an
erythroid cell environment, we generated an erythroid cell line from in
vitro-differentiated GATA-1- murine embryonic stem (ES) cells. These cells,
termed G1E for GATA-1- erythroid, proliferate as immature erythroblasts yet
complete differentiation upon restoration of GATA-1 function. We used rescue of
terminal erythroid maturation in G1E cells as a stringent cellular assay system
in which to evaluate the functional relevance of domains of GATA-1 previously
characterized in nonhematopoietic cells. At least two major differences were
established between domains required in G1E cells and those required in
nonhematopoietic cells. First, an obligatory transactivation domain defined in
conventional nonhematopoietic cell transfection assays is dispensable for
terminal erythroid maturation. Second, the amino (N) zinc finger, which is
nonessential for binding to the vast majority of GATA DNA motifs, is strictly
required for GATA-1-mediated erythroid differentiation. Our data lead us to
propose a model in which a nuclear cofactor(s) interacting with the N-finger
facilitates transcriptional action by GATA-1 in erythroid cells. More generally, 
our experimental approach highlights critical differences in the action of
cell-specific transcription proteins in different cellular environments and the
power of cell lines derived from genetically modified ES cells to elucidate gene 
function.

PMCID: PMC231889
PMID: 9032291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1260-9.

Characterization of the human platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1
promoter: identification of a GATA-2 binding element required for optimal
transcriptional activity.

Gumina RJ(1), Kirschbaum NE, Piotrowski K, Newman PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Research Institute, The Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin,
Milwaukee 53201-2178, USA.

Platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) is a 130-kD member of the
Ig gene superfamily that is expressed on platelets, endothelial cells, and
certain leukocyte subsets. To examine the factors controlling vascular-specific
expression of PECAM-1, we cloned the 5'-flanking region of the PECAM-1 gene and
analyzed its transcriptional activity. 5'-Rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(5'-RACE) analysis showed that transcription initiation occurred at several
closely spaced nearby sites originating approximately 204 bp upstream from the
translation start site. Analysis of the sequence immediately upstream from the
transcription initiation site (TIS) showed no canonical TATA or CAAT elements,
however an initiator element commonly found in TATA-less promoters encompassed
the TIS. 5'-serially truncated PECAM-1 promoter segments cloned in front of a
luciferase reporter drove transcription in both a lineage- and
orientation-specific manner. Putative cis-acting control elements present within 
a 300-bp core promoter included two ets sites, an Sp1 site, tandem E-box domains,
two GATA-associated sites (CACCC), an AP-2 binding site, and a GATA element at
-24. Mutational analysis showed that optimal transcriptional activity required
the GATA sequence at position -24, and gel-shift assays further showed that the
GATA-2 transcription factor, but not GATA-1, bound to this region of the PECAM-1 
promoter. Understanding the cis- and transacting factors that regulate the
tissue-specific expression of PECAM-1 should increase our understanding of the
mechanisms by which vascular-specific gene expression is achieved.

PMID: 9028949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1182-8.

Cell-cycle-dependent regulation of erythropoietin receptor gene.

Komatsu N(1), Kirito K, Kashii Y, Furukawa Y, Kikuchi J, Suwabe N, Yamamoto M,
Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Hematology, Jichi Medical School,
Tochigi-ken, Japan.

To understand the regulatory mechanism of erythropoietin (EPO) receptor (EPOR)
gene expression, the effect of EPO on the steady-state level of EPOR mRNA was
examined using the human EPO-dependent cell line UT-7 as a model system. We found
that the treatment of UT-7 cells with EPO resulted in a transient decrease of the
EPOR mRNA level. This transient downregulation was also induced by stimulation
with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), another
stimulator of UT-7 cell growth. These results raised the possibility that EPOR
gene expression is in part related to cell growth. Moreover, it was found that
EPO-induced downregulation of EPOR mRNA level was preceded by a transient
downregulation of GATA-1 mRNA. To examine the relationship between the expression
of EPOR, GATA-1, and GATA-2 mRNA levels and the cell cycle, logarithmically
growing UT-7 cells were centrifugically fractionated according to the cell-cycle 
phase. Both EPOR and GATA-1 mRNA levels, but not the GATA-2 mRNA level,
concomitantly decreased at the G0/G1 phase and increased at the S and G2/M
phases. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that in
EPO-stimulated UT-7 cells, the dynamic changes in EPOR gene expression paralleled
the GATA-1 DNA-binding activity to the oligonucleotide probe containing a
GATA-binding site located at the promoter region of the EPOR gene. These findings
suggest that the regulation of EPOR mRNA level is mainly associated with GATA-1
gene expression in UT-7 cells undergoing proliferation, and that these serial
events are under the control of, or related to, the cell cycle.

PMID: 9028940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1154-64.

Initiation of murine embryonic erythropoiesis: a spatial analysis.

Silver L(1), Palis J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics and Cancer
Center, NY 14642, USA.

Hematopoiesis in the mouse conceptus begins in the visceral yolk (VYS), with
primitive erythroblasts first evident in blood islands at the headfold stage
(E8.0). VYS erythropoiesis is decreased or abrogated by targeted disruption of
the hematopoietic transcription factors tal-1, rbtn2, GATA-1, and GATA-2. To
better understand the potential roles of these genes, and to trace the initial
temporal and spatial development of mammalian embryonic hematopoiesis, we
examined their expression patterns, and that of betaH1-globin, in normal mouse
conceptuses by means of in situ hybridization. Attention was focused on the
36-hour period from mid-primitive streak to early somite stages (E7.25 to E8.5), 
when the conceptus undergoes rapid morphologic changes with formation of the yolk
sac and blood islands. Each of these genes was expressed in extraembryonic
mesoderm, from which blood islands are derived. This VYS expression occurred in a
defined temporal sequence: tal-1 and rbtn2 transcripts were detected earlier than
the others, followed by GATA-2 and GATA-1, and then by betaH1-globin. Transcripts
for all of these genes were present in VYS mesoderm cell masses at the neural
plate stage (E7.5), indicating commitment of these cells to the erythroid lineage
before the appearance of morphologically recognizable erythroblasts. By early
somite stages (E8.5), GATA-2 mRNA expression is downregulated in VYS blood
islands as terminal primitive erythroid differentiation proceeds. We conclude
that primitive mammalian erythropoiesis arises during gastrulation through the
ordered temporal expression of tal-1, rbtn2, GATA2, and GATA-1 in a subset of
extraembryonic mesoderm cells. During the stages analyzed, tal-1 and rbtn2
expression was also present in posterior embryonic mesoderm, while GATA-1 and
GATA-2 expression was evident in extraembryonic tissues of ectodermal origin.

PMID: 9028937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Feb 13;231(2):299-304.

Expression in hematopoietic cells of GATA-1 transcripts from the alternative
"testis" promoter during development and cell differentiation.

Moroni E(1), Cairns L, Ottolenghi S, Giglioni B, Ashihara E, Migliaccio G,
Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Studio sulla Patologia Cellulare, CNR, Milan, Italy.

GATA-1 is a transcription factor expressed both in the hematopoietic system and
in the Sertoli cells of the testis, and is essential for correct erythropoiesis. 
Hematopoietic and Sertoli cells transcribe GATA-1 from two different promoters:
the proximal (erythroid) is active in hematopoietic cells; the distal (testis) is
active in Sertoli cells. We investigated by RT-PCR the possibility that GATA-1
might be transcribed from the testis promoter also in hematopoietic cells. Testis
promoter-derived transcripts are present at low levels in vivo at all stages of
hematopoietic development. Purified multipotent progenitors, fractionated into
populations expressing low or high levels of GATA-1, do not contain any "testis" 
transcripts. However, when grown in vitro, they rapidly express GATA-1 from the
testis promoter in the presence of Erythropoietin (Epo) but not in that of other 
growth factors. This result reflects an Epo-dependent differentiation event,
rather than a direct effect of Epo. Indeed, immortalized progenitor cell lines
which respond to both Epo and SCF, continue to express testis-derived transcripts
when switched from Epo to SCF.

PMID: 9070267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Genes Funct. 1997 Feb;1(1):37-49.

Genetic and molecular characterization of murine GATA-1 in Aspergillus defines a 
critical role for the N-terminal finger.

Caddick MX(1), Peters DG, Hooley P, Nayler A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Gene Structure and Function Group, Donnan
Laboratories, University of Liverpool, UK.

We have utilized Aspergillus nidulans as a model system for the characterization 
of the major vertebrate transcription factor GATA-1. This has been achieved both 
by analysing the function of murine GATA-1 directly and by using direct gene
replacement to introduce chimaeric areA::GATA-1 derivatives at the areA locus,
which encodes a GATA factor involved in regulating nitrogen metabolism in A.
nidulans. Although GATA-1 shows only limited function when expressed in A.
nidulans, the C-terminal GATA DNA-binding domain can replace the native GATA
domain of AREA and retain near wild-type function. Surprisingly, inclusion of the
N-terminal DNA-binding domain of GATA-1 has a major role in determining the
function of areA::GATA constructs in vivo, leading to a general loss of
activation. This negative function is partially dominant and is dependent on both
the fidelity of the zinc-chelating structure and a second factor encoded by A.
nidulans. The presence of two GATA domains also disrupts modulation of AREA
activity. The ability of duplicate GATA domains to disrupt normal signal
transduction is not dependent on the relative position of the domains or on the
fidelity of the zinc-chelating structure. This demonstrates the utility of
nitrogen metabolism's regulation in A. nidulans as a model system for the
molecular and genetic characterization of heterologous GATA factors while also
providing insights into native Aspergillus regulatory components.

PMID: 9680327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Genes Funct. 1997 Feb;1(1):11-24.

The level of the tissue-specific factor GATA-1 affects the cell-cycle machinery.

Whyatt DJ(1), Karis A, Harkes IC, Verkerk A, Gillemans N, Elefanty AG, Vairo G,
Ploemacher R, Grosveld F, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)MGC-Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

GATA-1 is a tissue-specific DNA-binding protein containing two zinc-finger-like
domains. It is expressed predominantly in erythrocytes. Consensus binding sites
for GATA-1 have been found in the regulatory elements of all erythroid-specific
genes examined. GATA-1 protein is required for erythroid differentiation beyond
the proerythroblast stage. In this paper, we demonstrate that the overexpression 
of GATA-1 in murine erythroleukaemia (MEL) cells alleviates DMSO-induced terminal
erythroid differentiation. Hence, there is no induction of globin gene
transcription and the cells do not arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that expression of GATA-1 in non-transformed
erythroid precursors also affects their proliferative capacity and terminal
differentiation, as assayed by adult globin gene transcription. To gain insight
into the mechanism of this effect, we studied the levels and activities of
regulators of cell-cycle progression during DMSO-induced differentiation. A
decrease in cyclin D-dependent kinase activity was observed during the induction 
of both control and GATA-1-overexpressing MEL cells. However, cyclin E-dependent 
kinase activity decreased more than 20-fold in control but less than 2-fold in
GATA-1-overexpressing MEL cells upon induction. Thus GATA-1 may exert its effects
by regulating cyclin E-dependent kinase activity. We also show that GATA-1 binds 
to the retinoblastoma protein in vitro, but not to the related protein p107,
which may indicate that GATA-1 interacts directly with specific members of the
cell-cycle machinery in vivo. We conclude that GATA-1 regulates cell fate, in
terms of differentiation or proliferation, by affecting the cell-cycle apparatus.

PMID: 9680325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Genes Cells. 1997 Feb;2(2):107-15.

Upstream and downstream of erythroid transcription factor GATA-1.

Yamamoto M(1), Takahashi S, Onodera K, Muraosa Y, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Japan. masiya@igaku.md.tsukuba.ac.jp

All mature blood lineages in the peripheral circulation are derived from
pluripotent haematopoietic stem cell. Progressive lineage-restriction of this
stem cell is executed, in part, by the interplay and cross-talk between a host of
lineage-restricted as well as ubiquitous transcription factors. To elucidate the 
regulatory mechanisms underlying the erythroid gene regulation, it is essential
to understand how individual transcription factors contribute to the regulation
of specific target genes, and how these erythroid transcription factor genes are 
regulated in turn. These key issues of mammalian development have been addressed 
by examining the activities controlling the prototype transcription factor,
GATA-1. The transcriptional regulation of GATA-1 has been intensively
investigated, thereby leading to the identification of its developmental
stage-specific regulatory sequences. Loss-of-function mutant animals, combined
with specific marking of the primitive and definitive erythroid lineages have
also shed new insight into how GATA-1 activity is required in vivo at specific
developmental stages. Procedures have also been developed for ascertaining
whether or not the GATA-1 protein actually binds in vivo to regulatory GATA
motifs in candidate target genes. Application of a similar multifaceted approach 
should enable investigators to examine the physiological roles that any
transcription factor might play in vivo during the differentiation of any well
defined cell lineage.

PMID: 9167968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biochem. 1997 Feb;121(2):251-63.

Conserved structure, regulatory elements, and transcriptional regulation from the
GATA-1 gene testis promoter.

Onodera K(1), Yomogida K, Suwabe N, Takahashi S, Muraosa Y, Hayashi N, Ito E, Gu 
L, Rassoulzadegan M, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University, School of Medicine, Sendai.

Transcription factor GATA-1 was first identified in erythroid cells, but was
later shown to also be expressed in Sertoli cells of the mouse testis. GATA-1
transcription in testis initiates from a different first exon (exon IT) than the 
erythroid mRNA (transcribed from exon IE). To begin to address the question of
how expression of GATA-1 might be differentially regulated in Sertoli and
erythroid cells, we have cloned and determined the structure of the IT promoters 
of both the rat and mouse GATA-1 genes. The transcription regulatory mechanism(s)
controlling the synthesis of exon IT-derived mRNA was investigated by
transfection of wild-type and mutant reporter genes, with and without
co-transfected GATA factor expression plasmids, into either fibroblasts or
Sertoli cell lines. Two GATA binding sites in the IT promoter were found to be
required for GATA factor-mediated activation in fibroblasts: GATA-IT-directed
reporter gene expression was activated only after co-transfection with GATA-1,
implying that transcriptional activation of GATA-1 in the testis might be at
least partially mediated through these GATA regulatory elements. We also found
that the endogenous GATA-1 gene was silent in primary culture and two different
Sertoli cell lines, and that the repression of co-transfected GATA-1 reporter
genes could not be relieved by forced expression of GATA-1 in Sertoli cells. Thus
the GATA-IT promoter may be under the control of a regulatory network in Sertoli 
cells which involves both positive and negative regulation of transcription, and 
conserved GATA motifs found in the IT promoter may be required for transducing
these effects.

PMID: 9089398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 24;272(4):2464-9.

GATA-1 DNA binding activity is down-regulated in late S phase in erythroid cells.

Cullen ME(1), Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, The Randall Institute, King's College
London, 26-29 Drury Lane, London WC2B 5RL, United Kingdom.

We have set out to test a model for tissue-specific gene expression that relies
on the early replication of expressed genes to sequester limiting activating
transcription factors. Using an erythroid cell line, we have tested the changes
in the DNA binding activity of the lineage-restricted transcription factor GATA-1
through the cell cycle. We find that GATA-1 activity is low in G1, peaks in mid-S
phase, and then decreases in G2/M. In contrast, the binding activities of two
ubiquitous transcription factors, Oct1 and Sp1, remain high in G2/M. GATA-1
protein and mRNA vary in a similar manner through the cell cycle, suggesting that
the expression of the gene or the stability of its message is regulated. Although
a number of transcription factors involved in the control of the cell cycle or
DNA replication have been shown to peak in S phase, this is the first example of 
a lineage-restricted transcription factor displaying S phase-specific DNA binding
activity. One interpretation of these data leads to a model in which the peak in 
GATA-1 DNA binding amplifies the effect of early replication on the activation of
erythroid-specific genes at the same time as preventing activation of
non-erythroid genes containing GATA-responsive elements. These results may also
relate to recent data implicating GATA-1 function in apoptosis and cell cycle
progression.

PMID: 8999960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Growth Factors. 1997;14(2-3):161-76.

Epo-induced hemoglobinization of SKT6 cells is mediated by minimal cytoplasmic
domains of the Epo or prolactin receptors without modulation of GATA-1 or EKLF.

Reese TT(1), Gregory RC, Sharlow ER, Pacifici RE, Crouse JA, Todokoro K,
Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Pathobiology, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park 16802, USA.

Interaction of erythropoietin with its type 1 receptor is essential to the
development of late erythroid progenitor cells. Through the ectopic expression of
receptor mutants in lymphoid and myeloid cell lines, insight has been gained
regarding effectors that regulate Epo-induced proliferation. In contrast,
effectors that regulate Epo-induced differentiation events (e.g. globin gene
expression) are largely undefined. For in vitro studies of this pathway,
erythroleukemic SKT6 cell sublines have been isolated which stably and
efficiently hemoglobinize in response to Epo. Epo rapidly activated Jak2, STAT5
and detectably STATs 1 and 3, while no effects on GATA-1, EKLF or STAT5
expression were observed. Finally, efficient hemoglobinization of SKT6 cells was 
shown to be mediated by chimeric receptors comprised of the EGF receptor
extracellular domain and truncated cytoplasmic subdomains of either the Epo
receptor or the prolactin Nb2 receptor. This work further establishes SKT6 cells 
as an important model for studies of Epo-stimulated differentiation, and shows
that this signaling pathway is promoted by a limited set of membrane-proximal
receptor domains and effectors.

PMID: 9255607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1997;23(1):27-38.

Expression of transcription factors during sodium phenylacetate induced erythroid
differentiation in K562 cells.

Rath AV(1), Schmahl GE, Niemeyer CM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Freiburg, Germany.

During 15 days of treatment of K562 cells with sodium phenylacetate, we observed 
an increase in the cellular hemoglobin concentration with a similar increase in
the expression of gamma-globin mRNA. Morphological studies demonstrated
characteristic features of erythroid differentiation and maturation. At the same 
time there was no change in the level of expression of the cell surface antigenes
CD33, CD34, CD45, CD71 and glycophorin A. Likewise, the level of expression of
the erythroid transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, NF-E2, SCL and RBTN2, all
expressed in untreated K562 cells, did not increase during sodium phenylacetate
induced erythroid differentiation. The expression of the nuclear factors Evi-1
and c-myb, known to inhibit erythroid differentiation, did not decrease. We
conclude that sodium phenylacetate treatment of K562 cells increases gamma-globin
mRNA and induces cell maturation as judged by morphology without affecting the
expression of the erythroid transcription factors, some of which are known to be 
involved in the regulation of beta-like globin genes.

PMID: 9215748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 8;271(45):28439-44.

Histidine decarboxylase expression in mouse mast cell line P815 is induced by
mouse peritoneal cavity incubation.

Ohtsu H(1), Kuramasu A, Suzuki S, Igarashi K, Ohuchi Y, Sato M, Tanaka S,
Nakagawa S, Shirato K, Yamamoto M, Ichikawa A, Watanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology I, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-77, Japan. J23613@CCTU.CC.TOHOKU.AC.JP

Phenotype of P815 mouse mast cells changes markedly during culture in the
peritoneal cavity of syngenic BDF1 mice. The cells, cultured for 1 week in the
peritoneal cavity of syngenic BDF1 mice, proliferate and express high levels of
L-histidine decarboxylase (HDC) and mouse mast cell protease (MMCP)-6 mRNAs,
indicating the ability of P815 cells to differentiate toward mature connective
tissue mast cells. Peritoneal fluid aspirated from P815-inoculated BDF1 mouse and
added to cultured P815 cells in vitro was also found to induce HDC mRNA
expression, suggesting that at least some of the humoral factors in the
peritoneal fluid induce HDC mRNA transcription. Among the erythroid transcription
factors, P815 cells expressed GATA-2 but not GATA-1 mRNA before and after the
intraperitoneal incubation. In contrast, the expression of NF-E2 subunit p45
disappeared, while expression of subunit mafK was markedly reduced after
incubation. Cotransfection assays using HDC-luciferase reporter and p45 and/or
mafK expression constructs showed that NF-E2 affects the transactivation of HDC
gene. These results suggest that NF-E2 is also an important transcription factor 
in mast cell differentiation.

PMID: 8910469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Nov;23(5-6):545-50.

Expression of erythroid-specific genes in megakaryoblastic disorders.

Ito E(1), Kasai M, Toki T, Arai K, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Currently available data indicate that erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation pathways are closely related to each other, and there may exist
progenitor cells common to those two lineages may exist. Acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia (AML-M7) and transient myeloproliferative disorder in Down's syndrome
(TMD) are characterized by rapid growth of abnormal blast cells which express
megakaryocytic markers. These blast cells express lineage-specific transcription 
factors such as GATA-1 common to these lineages and frequently express
erythroid-specific mRNAs such as gamma-globin and erythroid delta-aminolevulinate
synthase (ALAS-E), indicating that most of the blasts in M7 and TMD cases have
erythroid and megakaryocytic phenotypes. These results suggest that blasts in M7 
and TMD may correspond to progenitors of both erythroid and megakaryocytic
lineages.

PMID: 9031085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Leuk Lymphoma. 1996 Nov;23(5-6):431-6.

Pattern of expression and their clinical implications of the GATA family, stem
cell leukemia gene, and EVI1 in leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes.

Ohyashiki K(1), Ohyashiki JH, Shimamoto T, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors play a key role in controlling the cellular differentiation
of hematopoietic cells. Among the known transcription factors, both GATA-1 and
SCL play roles in the cellular differentiation of erythrocytic and megakaryocytic
lineages, while GATA-2 is thought to maintain and promote the proliferation of
early hematopoietic progenitors. In this review, the clinical implications of
expression of the GATA family, SCL, and EVI1 gene in various types of human
leukemia are discussed. De novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients may be
subdivided into three categories depending on the expression pattern of
transcription factors, i.e., GATA-1(+)SCL(+), GATA-1(+)SCL(-), and
GATA-1(-)SCL(-). AML patients with both GATA-1 and SCL expression have a poor
prognosis and have some characteristic clinical and hematologic features. The
EVI1 gene may be expressed through at least two pathways in hematologic
malignancies; one is related to chromosomal changes at 3q26, while the other is
related to myelodysplasia regardless of chromosomal changes at 3q26 region. These
findings suggest that the pattern of expression in transcription factors in
abnormal hematopoietic cells is reflected in the malignant phenotype and play a
role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

PMID: 9031072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6055-64.

Essential role of NF-E2 in remodeling of chromatin structure and transcriptional 
activation of the epsilon-globin gene in vivo by 5' hypersensitive site 2 of the 
beta-globin locus control region.

Gong QH(1), McDowell JC, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2715, USA.

Much of our understanding of the process by which enhancers activate
transcription has been gained from transient-transfection studies in which the
DNA is not assembled with histones and other chromatin proteins as it is in the
cell nucleus. To study the activation of a mammalian gene in a natural chromatin 
context in vivo, we constructed a minichromosome containing the human
epsilon-globin gene and portions of the beta-globin locus control region (LCR).
The minichromosomes replicate and are maintained at stable copy number in human
erythroid cells. Expression of the minichromosomal epsilon-globin gene requires
the presence of beta-globin LCR elements in cis, as is the case for the
chromosomal gene. We determined the chromatin structure of the epsilon-globin
gene in both the active and inactive states. The transcriptionally inactive locus
is covered by an array of positioned nucleosomes extending over 1,400 bp. In
minichromosomes with a (mu)LCR or DNase I-hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) which
actively transcribe the epsilon-globin gene, the nucleosome at the promoter is
altered or disrupted while positioning of nucleosomes in the rest of the locus is
retained. All or virtually all minichromosomes are simultaneously hypersensitive 
to DNase I both at the promoter and at HS2. Transcriptional activation and
promoter remodeling, as well as formation of the HS2 structure itself, depended
on the presence of the NF-E2 binding motif in HS2. The nucleosome at the promoter
which is altered upon activation is positioned over the transcriptional elements 
of the epsilon-globin gene, i.e., the TATA, CCAAT, and CACCC elements, and the
GATA-1 site at -165. The simple availability of erythroid transcription factors
that recognize these motifs is insufficient to allow expression. As in the
chromosomal globin locus, regulation also occurs at the level of chromatin
structure. These observations are consistent with the idea that one role of the
beta-globin LCR is to maintain promoters free of nucleosomes. The restricted
structural change observed upon transcriptional activation may indicate that the 
LCR need only make a specific contact with the proximal gene promoter to activate
transcription.

PMCID: PMC231608
PMID: 8887635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 29;93(22):12355-8.

Arrested development of embryonic red cell precursors in mouse embryos lacking
transcription factor GATA-1.

Fujiwara Y(1), Browne CP, Cunniff K, Goff SC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The X chromosome-linked transcription factor GATA-1 is expressed specifically in 
erythroid, mast, megakaryocyte, and eosinophil lineages, as well as in
hematopoietic progenitors. Prior studies revealed that gene-disrupted GATA-1-
embryonic stem cells give rise to adult (or definitive) erythroid precursors
arrested at the proerythroblast stage in vitro and fail to contribute to adult
red blood cells in chimeric mice but did not clarify a role in embryonic (or yolk
sac derived) erythroid cells. To examine the consequences of GATA-1 loss on
embryonic erythropoiesis in vivo, we inactivated the GATA-1 locus in embryonic
stem cells by gene targeting and transmitted the mutated allele through the mouse
germ line. Male GATA-1- embryos die between embryonic day 10.5 and 11.5
(E10.5-E11.5) of gestation. At E9.5, GATA-1- embryos exhibit extreme pallor yet
contain embryonic erythroid cells arrested at an early proerythroblast-like stage
of their development. Embryos stain weakly with benzidine reagent, and yolk sac
cells express globin RNAs, indicating globin gene activation in the absence of
GATA-1. Female heterozygotes (GATA-1+/-) are born pale due to random inactivation
of the X chromosome bearing the normal allele. However, these mice recover during
the neonatal period, presumably as a result of in vivo selection for progenitors 
able to express GATA-1. Our findings conclusively establish the essential role
for GATA-1 in erythropoiesis within the context of the intact developing mouse
and further demonstrate that the block to cellular maturation is similar in
GATA-1- embryonic and definitive erythroid precursors. Moreover, the recovery of 
GATA-1+/- mice from anemia seen at birth provides evidence indicating a role for 
GATA-1 at the hematopoietic progenitor cell level.

PMCID: PMC37995
PMID: 8901585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Genomics. 1996 Oct 15;37(2):238-41.

The mouse X-linked developmental mutant, tattered, lies between DXMit55 and Xkh
and is associated with hyperkeratinization.

Uwechue IC(1), Cooper BF, Goble C, Hacker T, Blair HJ, Burke DT, Herman G, Boyd
Y.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Mammalian Genetics Unit, Harwell, Oxon, United Kingdom.

The X-linked mouse mutant phenotype, tattered (Td), is associated with prenatal
lethality of males and has been mapped previously to the proximal region of the
mouse X chromosome. We report here a refined position for Td and demonstrate that
it lies in the approximately 0.9-cM interval between DXMit55 and Xkh. This
enables us to predict that the human homologue lies either between CLCN5 and the 
evolutionary breakpoint that lies between GATA1 and PFC or distal to XK and
proximal to the evolutionary breakpoint that lies between XK and DMD.
Histological analysis of dorsal skin taken from 5-day-old heterozygous animals
revealed that the mutation was associated with patches of hyperkeratinzation in
the epidermis and in the hair follicles, accompanied by a mild inflammatory
infiltrate in the underlying dermis.

PMID: 8921395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Blood. 1996 Oct 15;88(8):3074-82.

The biologic properties of recombinant human thrombopoietin in the proliferation 
and megakaryocytic differentiation of acute myeloblastic leukemia cells.

Matsumura I(1), Kanakura Y, Kato T, Ikeda H, Horikawa Y, Ishikawa J, Kitayama H, 
Nishiura T, Tomiyama Y, Miyazaki H, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka University Medical School,
Japan.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is implicated as a primary regulator of megakaryopoiesis and
thrombopoiesis. However, the biologic effects of TPO on human acute myeloblastic 
leukemia (AML) cells are largely unknown. To determine if recombinant human (rh) 
TPO has proliferation-supporting and differentiation-inducing activities in AML
cells, 15 cases of AML cells that were exclusively composed of undifferentiated
leukemia cells and showed growth response to rhTPO in a short-term culture (72
hours) were subjected to long-term suspension culture with or without rhTPO. Of
15 cases, rhTPO supported proliferation of AML cells for 2 to 4 weeks in 4 cases 
whose French-American-British subtypes were M0, M2, M4, and M7, respectively. In 
addition to the proliferation-supporting activity, rhTPO was found to induce AML 
cells to progress to some degree of megakaryocytic differentiation at both
morphologic and surface-phenotypic level in 2 AML cases with M0 and M7 subtypes. 
The treatment of AML cells with rhTPO resulted in rapid tyrosine phosphorylation 
of the TPO-receptor, c-mpl, and STAT3 in all of cases tested. By contrast, the
expression of erythroid/megakaryocyte-specific transcription factors (GATA-1,
GATA-2, and NF-E2) was markedly induced or enhanced in only 2 AML cases that
showed megakaryocytic differentiation in response to rhTPO. These results
suggested that, at least in a fraction of AML cases, TPO could not only support
the proliferation of AML cells irrespective of AML subtypes, but could also
induce megakaryocytic differentiation, possibly through activation of GATA-1,
GATA-2, and NF-E2.

PMID: 8874206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5634-44.

NF-E2 disrupts chromatin structure at human beta-globin locus control region
hypersensitive site 2 in vitro.

Armstrong JA(1), Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The human beta-globin locus control region (LCR) is responsible for forming an
active chromatin structure extending over the 100-kb locus, allowing expression
of the beta-globin gene family. The LCR consists of four erythroid-cell-specific 
DNase I hypersensitive sites (HS1 to -4). DNase I hypersensitive sites are
thought to represent nucleosome-free regions of DNA which are bound by
trans-acting factors. Of the four hypersensitive sites only HS2 acts as a
transcriptional enhancer. In this study, we examine the binding of an erythroid
protein to its site within HS2 in chromatin in vitro. NF-E2 is a transcriptional 
activator consisting of two subunits, the hematopoietic cell-specific p45 and the
ubiquitous DNA-binding subunit, p18. NF-E2 binds two tandem AP1-like sites in HS2
which form the core of its enhancer activity. In this study, we show that when
bound to in vitro-reconstituted chromatin, NF-E2 forms a DNase I hypersensitive
site at HS2 similar to the site observed in vivo. Moreover, NF-E2 binding in
vitro results in a disruption of nucleosome structure which can be detected 200
bp away. Although NF-E2 can disrupt nucleosomes when added to preformed
chromatin, the disruption is more pronounced when NF-E2 is added to DNA prior to 
chromatin assembly. Interestingly, the hematopoietic cell-specific subunit, p45, 
is necessary for binding to chromatin but not to naked DNA. Interaction of NF-E2 
with its site in chromatin-reconstituted HS2 allows a second erythroid factor,
GATA-1, to bind its nearby sites. Lastly, nucleosome disruption by NF-E2 is an
ATP-dependent process, suggesting the involvement of energy-dependent nucleosome 
remodeling factors.

PMCID: PMC231563
PMID: 8816476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):22076-80.

Identification of a mutation in a GATA binding site of the platelet glycoprotein 
Ibbeta promoter resulting in the Bernard-Soulier syndrome.

Ludlow LB(1), Schick BP, Budarf ML, Driscoll DA, Zackai EH, Cohen A, Konkle BA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research, Jefferson Medical College of
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Bernard-Soulier Syndrome (BSS) is a rare congenital bleeding disorder due to
absent or decreased expression of the glycoprotein Ib-IX-V (GpIb-IX-V) receptor
complex on the platelet surface. To date, only mutations in GpIbalpha or GpIX
have been reported in patients with BSS. GpIbbeta differs from the other proteins
in this receptor in that the gene is more complex, and an alternative form is
expressed in cells of non-megakaryocytic lineage, including endothelial cells. It
appears that the megakaryocytic and endothelial cell mRNA species are transcribed
from different start sites and have different proximal promoter regions. We have 
identified a patient with BSS who has a deletion on one chromosome 22, resulting 
in velocardiofacial syndrome. The GpIbbeta gene has been mapped to this deleted
(22q11.2) region of chromosome 22. The patient has greatly reduced levels of
GpIbbeta mRNA and no detectable platelet GpIbbeta protein, suggesting that his
BSS results from a mutation in his remaining GpIbbeta allele. Sequence analysis
revealed that the coding region of GpIbbeta is normal, but the 5'-upstream region
contains a C to G transversion at base -133 from the transcription start site
used in megakaryocytes. The mutation changes a GATA consensus binding site,
disrupts GATA-1 binding to the mutated site, and decreases promoter activity by
84%. Thus, in this patient, Bernard-Soulier syndrome results from a deletion of
one copy of GpIbbeta and a mutated GATA binding site in the promoter of the
remaining allele, resulting in decreased promoter function and GpIbbeta gene
transcription.

PMID: 8703016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Oncogene. 1996 Sep 5;13(5):1037-42.

Transactivation of the GATA-1 promoter by a myb-ets-containing mouse retrovirus
is mediated by CACCC elements.

Sun-Hoffman L(1), Aurigemma RE, Sun B, Ruscetti SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Onocology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

The myb-ets-containing ME26 virus causes erythroleukemia in mice by a novel
mechanism involving the inappropriate activation of erythroid-specific genes in
hematopoietic precursor cells. We have previously shown that the ME26 viral
protein can transactivate the GATA-1 promoter in transient transactivation assays
carried out in mouse fibroblasts. The mouse GATA-1 promoter, whose activity is
regulated by the GATA-1 protein itself, contains a double GATA consensus sequence
at its 5' end and two CACCC elements at its 3' end, both of which are crucial for
promoter activity in erythroid cells, as well as a nonconsensus GATA sequence and
several putative c-myb and c-ets binding sites. In order to determine which
sequences in the GATA-1 promoter are crucial for activation by the ME26 viral
protein, we made deletions of the promoter, cloned them into a luciferase
expression vector and tested their activity in mouse fibroblasts, which do not
express GATA-1. Our results indicate that sequences in the 3' end of the GATA-1
promoter, which include two CACCC elements, are essential for transactivation by 
ME26 virus, while other upstream sites contribute to full activation by the
virus. Mutation of the CACCC sites abolishes ME26 viral transactivation. The
interaction of cell extracts containing ME26 viral protein and the GATA-1
promoter fragment containing the two CACCC elements was examined by
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis (EMSA) and the results showed no direct
interaction between the two. However, we could detect the ubiquitous
transcription factor Sp1 bound to this sequence. These data demonstrate that the 
CACCC element is necessary for GATA-1 promoter transactivation by ME26 virus and 
that the viral protein may indirectly transactivate the promoter by binding to
Sp1.

PMID: 8806693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Aug;7(8):1023-9.

Transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of erythroid gene expression
in anthracycline-induced differentiation of human erythroleukemic cells.

Morceau F(1), Chénais B, Gillet R, Jardillier JC, Jeannesson P, Trentesaux C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Faculte de Pharmacie,
Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne, France.

Aclacinomycin (ACLA) and doxorubicin (DOX) were used at subtoxic concentrations
to induce erythroid differentiation in the human leukemic cell line K562. Cell
hemoglobinization was accompanied by the increased expression of genes encoding
gamma-globin and porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), an enzyme of heme synthesis.
By using run-on assays, ACLA was shown to induce an enhancement of the
transcription of erythroid genes, including gamma-globin, PBGD, erythropoietin
receptor, and GATA-1 transcription factor. In contrast, in DOX-treated cells, the
transcription rate of these genes was unchanged in comparison with control cells.
In addition, inhibition of mRNA synthesis with actinomycin D indicated that DOX
induced an increased stability of PBGD and GATA-1 mRNAs, whereas ACLA did not
affect the half-lives of these mRNAs. Because the increase in erythroid mRNA
steady-state level in anthracycline-treated cells was inhibited by cycloheximide,
this suggests that transcriptional activation in ACLA-treated cells and mRNA
stabilization in DOX-treated cells were dependent on de novo protein synthesis.
Finally, GATA-1 protein level was shown to be increased in ACLA-treated but not
in DOX-treated cells. These two anthracyclines, although closely related in their
structures, appeared to act as differentiation inducers by distinct mechanisms.
Indeed, erythroid gene expression was demonstrated to be regulated
transcriptionally by ACLA and mainly posttranscriptionally by DOX.

PMID: 8853898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 1;24(13):2511-8.

Genetic regulation of delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase during erythropoiesis.

Bishop TR(1), Miller MW, Beall J, Zon LI, Dierks P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

In an effort to understand how the heme biosynthetic pathway is uniquely
regulated in erythroid cells, we examined the structure of the gene encoding
murine delta-aminolevulinate dehydratase (ALAD; EC4.2.1.24), which is the second 
enzyme of the pathway. The gene contains two first exons, named 1A and 1B, which 
are alternatively spliced to exon 2, where the coding region begins. Each first
exon has its own promoter. The promoter driving exon 1A expression is TATA-less
and contains many GC boxes. In contrast, the exon 1B promoter bears regulatory
sequences similar to those found for beta-globin and other erythroid-specific
genes. Tissue distribution studies reveal that ALAD mRNA containing axon 1A is
ubiquitous, whereas mRNA containing axon 1B is found only in erythroid tissues.
This finding, together with our further observation that GATA-1 mRNA levels
increase 3-fold during maturation of murine erythroid progenitor cells, may help 
explain simultaneous 3-fold increases in exon 1B expression. The unexpected
result that axon 1A expression also increases 3-fold during CFU-E maturation may 
be attributable to the action of NF-E2, since there is a potential binding site
in a position analogous to the NF-E2 site in the locus control region of the
beta-globin gene cluster.

PMCID: PMC145987
PMID: 8692689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Leukemia. 1996 Jul;10(7):1127-33.

Expression pattern of WT1 and GATA-1 in AML with chromosome 16q22 abnormalities.

Patmasiriwat P(1), Fraizer GC, Claxton D, Kantarjian H, Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA.

WT1 is a tumor suppressor gene that can repress transcription of many
growth-factor and growth-factor receptor genes. We quantitated WT1 expression
levels in 62 acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) samples and found that 82% strongly
expressed WT1. WT1 expression levels are highest in the undifferentiated and
granulocytic French-American-British (FAB) subclasses and lower in the monocytic 
subclasses. WT1 was strongly expressed in normal CD34+ bone marrow (BM) stem
cells but only weakly or not expressed in normal mature blood cells. This
suggests that WT1 gene expression is associated with immature cells, which have
high proliferative capacities. Previous studies of WT1 gene regulation showed
that GATA-1 may regulate WT1 expression. To understand the relationship between
WT1 and GATA-1 expression in leukemia, we examined the expression pattern of
GATA-1 in the cells described above. Overall, AML samples expressed significant
amounts of both WT1 and GATA-1. However, AML samples with 16q22 abnormalities,
presumably interrupting the core binding factor (CBF) beta gene expressed lower
than normal levels of GATA-1 but high levels of WT1. Our data suggest that the
transcription factor CBF beta may be important for GATA-1 gene regulation. Thus, 
WT1 expression varied in different FAB subclasses, and GATA-1 expression was
strongly affected by the presence of chromosome 16q22 abnormalities.

PMID: 8683991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Genomics. 1996 Jul 1;35(1):66-70.

Comparative mapping identifies the fusion point of an ancient mammalian
X-autosomal rearrangement.

Wilcox SA(1), Watson JM, Spencer JA, Graves JA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Genetics and Human Variation, La Trobe University, Melbourne,
Victoria, 3083, Australia.

Previous comparisons of gene location in the three major groups of mammals
(eutherians, marsupials, and monotremes) have suggested that the long arm of the 
human X represents the ancestral mammalian X chromosome, whereas the short arm
represents an autosomal region(s) recently added to the eutherian X chromosome.
To identify the fusion point of this ancient X-autosome rearrangement, we have
mapped four genes, three of which map near the centromere of the human Xp, in
marsupials and in a monotreme. We found that ARAF1, ALAS2, and GATA1 are located 
on the X chromosome in marsupials, and ALAS2 and GATA1 are also located on the X 
in the platypus. This implies that the proximal short arm of the human X
chromosome, including the centromere, was part of the ancestral mammalian X
chromosome. The fusion point between the conserved region and the recently added 
regions therefore maps to human Xp11.23, although gene order on the human X
indicates that there has been some rearrangement of this region.

PMID: 8661105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 14;271(24):14082-91.

Globin gene switching. In vivo protein-DNA interactions of the human beta-globin 
locus in erythroid cells expressing the fetal or the adult globin gene program.

Ikuta T(1), Papayannopoulou T, Stamatoyannopoulos G, Kan YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

To characterize the protein-DNA interactions important for the developmental
control of the human beta-globin locus, we analyzed by in vivo dimethyl sulfate
footprinting erythroid cells expressing either the fetal or the adult globin
developmental program. In the locus control region (LCR) of the beta-globin
locus, in vivo footprints on NF-E2 (or AP-1) and GATA-1 motifs remained the same 
regardless of whether the fetal or the adult globin genes are expressed. In
contrast, in vivo footprints on GT (CACCC) motifs differed between the cells
expressing the fetal or the adult globin program. In promoter regions, the
actively transcribed genes demonstrated extensive and consistent footprints over 
the canonical elements, such as CACCC and CCAAT motifs. The adult globin
expressing cells displayed more extensive footprints than the fetal globin
expressing cells in the 3' regulatory sequences of both the Agamma- and the
beta-globin genes, suggesting a role of these 3' elements in beta-globin gene
expression. Our results suggest that the bulk of protein-DNA interactions that
underlies the developmental control of globin genes takes place in the gamma- and
beta-globin gene promoters, and that GT motifs of the beta-globin locus LCR may
play a role in the developmental regulation of human beta-globin gene expression,
perhaps by increasing the probability of interaction of the LCR holocomplex with 
the fetal or the adult globin gene.

PMID: 8662960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 7;271(23):13542-8.

Regulatory function of delta/YY-1 on the locus control region-like sequence of
mouse glycophorin gene in erythroleukemia cells.

Nemoto Y(1), Terajima M, Shoji W, Obinata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku
University, Seiryomachi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-77, Japan.

The far upstream region (-1.2-0.9 kilobase pairs) of the mouse glycophorin gene
contains the locus control region (LCR)-like region, which acts as an
erythroid-specific enhancer dependent on chromosomal integration in murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. In the present study, we demonstrated that this
region binds six nuclear factors. The binding of GATA-1 to corresponding sites
did not show any change before or after induction with dimethyl sulfoxide, but
the binding of Spi-1/PU.l and an unidentified factor called glycophorin
regulatory element binding factor (GRBF) showed a change during induction. While 
binding activity of Spi-l/PU.l dropped soon after induction, the GRBF activity
increased after induction when expression of the glycophorin gene began. After
identification of the consensus binding site of GRBF, we cloned cDNA for that
factor by Southwestern method, and it was identified as a previously reported
transcription factor, delta, a murine form of YY-l which is a versatile
transcription factor. Mutation analysis in the delta/YY-1 binding site within the
LCR-like region indicated that delta/YY-1 acts as a regulatory protein in
combination with the E-box-binding protein that binds to the neighboring
sequence.

PMID: 8662744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4678-85.

Analysis of the thrombopoietin receptor (MPL) promoter implicates GATA and Ets
proteins in the coregulation of megakaryocyte-specific genes.

Deveaux S(1), Filipe A, Lemarchandel V, Ghysdael J, Roméo PH, Mignotte V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

The MPL gene codes for the thrombopoietin receptor, whose ligand specifically
controls megakaryocytic differentiation. To understand the molecular basis for
the megakaryocyte-specific expression of MPL, we analyzed the promoter of this
gene. A 200 bp fragment is sufficient for high-level specific expression. This
fragment can bind several trans-acting factors in vitro, including GATA-1 and
members of the Ets family. GATA-1 binds with low affinity to a unique GATA motif 
at -70 in the MPL promoter, and destruction of this site yields only a modest
decrease in expression level in HEL cells. Ets proteins also bind with low
affinity to two sites. One is located at position -15 and its destruction reduces
expression to 50%; the other is located immediately downstream of the GATA motif 
and plays a crucial role in expression of the promoter in HEL cells, as its
inactivation reduces expression to 15%. Furthermore, GATA-1 and two Ets proteins,
Ets-1 and Fli-1, can trans-activate the MPL promoter in heterologous cells. The
effects of GATA-1 and these two Ets proteins are additive. Together with our
previous results on the glycoprotein IIb (GpIIb) promoter, this study indicates a
molecular basis for the coregulation of early markers of megakaryocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 8639837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4552-60.

Establishment and characterization of the thrombopoietin-dependent megakaryocytic
cell line, UT-7/TPO.

Komatsu N(1), Kunitama M, Yamada M, Hagiwara T, Kato T, Miyazaki H, Eguchi M,
Yamamoto M, Miura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi,
Japan.

UT-7 is a human megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line with absolute dependence on
interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, or
erythropoietin (EPO) for growth and survival. We investigated the effect of
thrombopoietin (TPO), the ligand for the receptor encoded by c-mpl
proto-oncogene, on the proliferation and differentiation of UT-7 and its
sublines. We found that UT-7/GM, which is a subline of UT-7, but neither UT-7 nor
UT-7/EPO, can proliferate in response to TPO. The subline, UT-7/TPO, was
established from UT-7/GM by culture at lower concentrations of TPO. UT-7/TPO
cells had morphologically mature megakaryocytic characteristics such as developed
demarcation membrane in the cytoplasm and multinucleated appearance. This was
also confirmed by the high expression of platelet factor-4 and glycoprotein IIb
at the mRNA levels and by the high level of DNA content. UT-7/TPO can be
maintained by TPO alone, with a doubling time of 24 hours in log growth phase. In
the absence of TPO, the majority of the cells died within a few days. Thus,
UT-7/TPO has an absolute dependence on TPO for growth and survival and has mature
megakaryocytic features. The mRNA for c-mpl was detected in UT-7/TPO and, to a
lesser degree, in UT-7/GM. The mRNA level of NF- E2 p45, reported to be an
erythroid-specific transcription factor, was upregulated in UT-7/TPO, whereas it 
was down-regulated in the erythroid subline, UT-7/EPO. There were no significant 
differences in GATA-1 and GATA-2 mRNA levels among UT-7 and its sublines. Not
only EPO but also TPO induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2 tyrosine
kinase and STAT5-related protein. These findings indicate that UT-7/TPO would be 
a useful model with which to analyze the gene regulation of megakaryocytic
maturation-associated proteins and to study the specific actions of TPO.

PMID: 8639823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Genomics. 1996 May 1;33(3):488-97.

A 2-megabase physical contig incorporating 43 DNA markers on the human X
chromosome at p11.23-p11.22 from ZNF21 to DXS255.

Boycott KM(1), Halley GR, Schlessinger D, Bech-Hansen NT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N
4N1, Canada.

A comprehensive physical contig of yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) and cosmid
clones between ZNF21 and DXS255 has been constructed, spanning 2 Mb within the
region Xp11.23-p11.22. As a portion of the region was found to be particularly
unstable in yeast, the integrity of the contig is dependent on additional
information provided by the sequence-tagged site (STS) content of cosmid clones
and DNA marker retention in conventional and radiation hybrids. The contig was
formatted with 43 DNA markers, including 19 new STSs from YAC insert ends and an 
internal Alu-PCR product. The density of STSs across the contig ranges from one
marker every 20 kb to one every 60 kb, with an average density of one marker
every 50 kb. The relative order of previously known genes and expressed sequence 
tags in this region is predicted to be Xpter-ZNF21-DXS7465E (MG66)-DXS7927E
(MG81)-WASP, DXS1011E, DXS7467E (MG21)-DXS- 7466E (MG44)-GATA1-DXS7469E
(Xp664)-TFE3-SYP (DXS1007E)-Xcen. This contig extends the coverage in Xp11 and
provides a framework for the future identification and mapping of new genes, as
well as the resources for developing DNA sequencing templates.

PMID: 8661008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):2238-47.

A palindromic regulatory site within vertebrate GATA-1 promoters requires both
zinc fingers of the GATA-1 DNA-binding domain for high-affinity interaction.

Trainor CD(1), Omichinski JG, Vandergon TL, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM, Felsenfeld
G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

GATA-1, a transcription factor essential for the development of the erythroid
lineage, contains two adjacent highly conserved zinc finger motifs. The
carboxy-terminal finger is necessary and sufficient for specific binding to the
consensus GATA recognition sequence: mutant proteins containing only the
amino-terminal finger do not bind. Here we identify a DNA sequence (GATApal) for 
which the GATA-1 amino-terminal finger makes a critical contribution to the
strength of binding. The site occurs in the GATA-1 gene promoters of chickens,
mice, and humans but occurs very infrequently in other vertebrate genes known to 
be regulated by GATA proteins. GATApal is a palindromic site composed of one
complete [(A/T)GATA(A/G)] and one partial (GAT) canonical motif. Deletion of the 
partial motif changes the site to a normal GATA site and also reduces by as much 
as eightfold the activity of the GATA-1 promoter in an erythroid precursor cell. 
We propose that GATApal is important for positive regulation of GATA-1 expression
in erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC231211
PMID: 8628290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Blood. 1996 May 1;87(9):3711-21.

Constitutive expression of GATA-1 interferes with the cell-cycle regulation.

Dubart A(1), Roméo PH, Vainchenker W, Dumenil D.

Author information: 
(1)U 362 INSERM, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

GATA-1, mainly expressed during erythroid differentiation, has been shown to
regulate the genes specifically expressed in the late stages of erythropoiesis
and to protect erythroid cells from apoptosis, suggesting that it might interfere
with the cell cycle. By expressing the retrovirally transduced human GATA-1 cDNA 
in NIH3T3 fibroblasts, we have shown that GATA-1 alone was unable to
transactivate its erythroid-specific target genes in these nonerythroid cells.
However, GATA-1 expression had a dramatic effect on the proliferation of these
fibroblasts. The cloning efficiency of the GATA-1-expressing fibroblasts was
maintained but their S phase was greatly elongated and their G1 and G2/M phases
were reduced, impairing substantially their proliferation. When cultured at low
serum concentrations for 48 hours, GATA-1-expressing fibroblasts failed to
accumulate in the G0/G1 phases but did not become serum independent.
GATA-1-expressing fibroblasts expressed D1, A, and B1 cyclin mRNAs under
conditions of serum starvation or at confluence, whereas these cyclin mRNAs were 
downregulated in the parental NIH3T3 cells cultured under the same conditions.
Moreover, these effects of GATA-1 expression on proliferation were not limited to
NIH3T3 cells, since different clones of hGATA-1 virus-infected FDCP-1 cells, a
murine interleukin-3-dependent hematopoietic cell line, had a slower growth rate 
than control cells. Based on these data, we hypothesize that GATA-1 plays a role 
in the regulation of the cell cycle during terminal erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 8611696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1687-94.

Estrogen-induced apoptosis by inhibition of the erythroid transcription factor
GATA-1.

Blobel GA(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Steroid hormones regulate diverse biological functions, including programmed cell
death (apoptosis). Although steroid receptors have been studied extensively,
relatively little is known regarding the cellular targets through which apoptosis
is triggered. We show here that the ligand-activated estrogen receptor (ER)
induces apoptosis in an erythroid cell line by binding to, and consequently
inhibiting the activity of, GATA-1, an erythroid transcription factor essential
for the survival and maturation of erythroid precursor cells. GATA-1 inhibition
is reflected in the downregulation of presumptive GATA-1 target genes.
Constitutive overexpression of a GATA-binding protein resistant to the effects of
the ER partially rescues ER-induced apoptosis. Induction of apoptosis by a mutant
ER defective in binding to the estrogen response element but active in GATA-1
inhibition suggests that ER-mediated inhibition of GATA-1 is direct and does not 
require estrogen response element-dependent transcriptional activation. Thus, a
lineage-restricted transcription factor, such as GATA-1, constitutes one cellular
target through which steroid hormones may control apoptosis. As GATA-binding
proteins are evolutionarily conserved, we speculate that members of the steroid
receptor family may exert some of their diverse biological functions in different
cellular contexts through interference with the function of GATA-binding
proteins.

PMCID: PMC231155
PMID: 8657144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biochem Pharmacol. 1996 Mar 22;51(6):839-45.

Evidence for distinct regulation processes in the aclacinomycin- and
doxorubicin-mediated differentiation of human erythroleukemic cells.

Morceau F(1), Aries A, Lahlil R, Devy L, Jardillier JC, Jeannesson P, Trentesaux 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire De Biochimie, GIBSA, UFR De Pharmacie, Reims, France.

Human erythroleukemic K 562 cells were induced to were induced to differentiate
along the erythroid lineage by anthracycline antitumor drugs, such as
aclacinomycin (ACLA) and doxorubicin (DOX). Subsequent stimulation of heme and
globin synthesis led to a differential quantitative expression of hemoglobins.
Gower 1 (epsilon2, zeta2) was the major type for ACLA and X (epsilon2, gamma2)
for DOX. Although ACLA and DOX increased both the expression of gamma-globin and 
porphobilinogen deaminase mRNAs, striking differences were observed in the
expression of erythropoietin receptor mRNAs and in erythroid transcription
factors GATA-1 and NF-E2, known to play a key role in erythroid gene regulation. 
Indeed, ACLA induces an increase either in the binding capacity of GATA-1 and
NF-E2 or in the accumulation of erythropoietin receptor, GATA-1 and NF-E2
transcripts. In contrast, their expression with DOX was not significantly
modified compared to uninduced cells, except for a slight decrease in NF-E2
expression on day 3. In conclusion, these data show that: 1. increased expression
of erythroid transcription factors and erythroid genes are associated only with
ACLA treatment, and 2. although cytotoxicity of both ACLA and DOX is certainly
dependent on DNA intercalation, regulation of differentiation processes by these 
two drugs involves distinct mechanisms.

PMID: 8602880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Blood. 1996 Mar 15;87(6):2221-34.

Induction of hematopoietic commitment and erythromyeloid differentiation in
embryonal stem cells constitutively expressing c-myb.

Melotti P(1), Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA USA.

To provide insight into the mechanisms by which c-myb regulates hematopoiesis, we
analyzed the expression of markers for multiple hematopoietic lineages in
differentiating parental embryonic stem (ES) cells and in ES cells transfected
with c-myb or with a mutant c-myb deficient in DNA binding and assessed the
ability of these cells to undergo hematopoietic commitment and colony formation. 
Undifferentiated ES cells transfected with intact c-myb, but not cells
transfected with mutant c-myb, expressed CD34, c-kit, GATA1, and flt3 mRNA as
well as surface CD34, c-kit, and flt3 product. In contrast, the kinetics of
GATA-2 mRNA expression was identical in parental and Myb-transfected ES cells.
Transient expression assays suggested transactivation of gene expression
dependent on interaction with Myb binding sites in the CD34 and GATA1 5' flanking
regions. Undifferentiated parental and c-myb mutant-transfected ES cells were not
clonogenic, whereas c-myb transfectants formed erythromyeloid colonies in
methylcellulose cultures in the absence of added hematopoietic growth factors
and, at higher frequency, in the presence of kit and flt-3 ligands. Colony
formation was suppressed by treatment with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides
specifically downregulating c-kit and flt-3 expression. These findings indicate
that c-myb regulates hematopoietic commitment and progenitor cell proliferation
and differentiation through the activation of certain genes that define the
stem/progenitor cell compartment.

PMID: 8630382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 1996 Mar 1;87(5):1793-801.

Functional interaction of GATA1 with erythroid Krüppel-like factor and Sp1 at
defined erythroid promoters.

Gregory RC(1), Taxman DJ, Seshasayee D, Kensinger MH, Bieker JJ, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, USA.

GATA and CACC elements commonly are codistributed within the regulatory domains
of a variety of erythroid genes. Using Drosophila S2 cells, the actions of GATA1,
Sp1, and erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF) at these elements within model
erythroid promoters have been assessed. For each promoter studied (erythroid
pyruvate kinase, glycophorin B, and a murine betamaj globin-derived construct,
GCT) Sp1 and EKLF each activated transcription despite differences in CACC
element sequence, orientation, and positioning. However, GATA1 acted in apparent 
cooperativity with Sp1 at the pyruvate kinase promoter; with EKLF at the betamaj 
globin-derived GCT promoter; and with either Sp1 or EKLF at the glycophorin B
promoter. Thus, GATA1 may functionally interact with each of these Krüppel-like
factors depending on promoter context; and at the GCT promoter, transcriptional
activation by GATA1 and EKLF was > or = 10-fold higher than levels attributable
to additive effects. The possibility that interactions between these activators
may be direct was supported by the specific binding of baculoviral-expressed EKLF
to GATA1. This report underlines the likelihood that discrete roles exist for Sp1
and EKLF in erythroid gene activation, and supports a mechanism of direct
cooperativity for EKLF and GATA1 as coregulators.

PMID: 8634425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Br J Haematol. 1996 Mar;92(4):780-7.

Two regulation points for differentiation in the cell cycle of human
megakaryocytes.

Yoshino T(1), Sakaguchi M, Masuda T, Kawakita M, Takatsuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Fuji Gotemba Research Laboratory Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Shizuoka, Japan.

To examine the relationship between cell cycle progression and differentiation in
megakaryocytes, variances in the cell cycle during PMA (phorbol
12-myristate-13-acetate)-induced differentiation were analysed in synchronized
growing CMK cells. The cells stimulated with PMA in early S phase showed cell
cycle arrest in G2 phase. In addition, the cells stimulated with PMA in early G1 
phase showed cell cycle arrest in late G1. The expression of gpIIb/IIIa,
megakaryocytic differentiation marker, was markedly induced in G2 phase when the 
cells were stimulated in early S phase, and was also induced in late G1 phase
when cells were stimulated in early G1 phase. Therefore, the induction of
gpIIb/IIIa expression seems to be associated with cell cycle blockage in both G2 
and late G1. Expression of the transcription factor GATA-1 in cells stimulated in
early S phase was much higher than that in controls at G2 phase. Furthermore,
GATA-1 expression in cells stimulated in early G1 tended to be higher than that
in controls at late G1. These periods corresponded to the time that the cell
cycle arrest and gpIIb/IIIa expression were induced by PMA. These results suggest
that the cell cycle in human megakaryocytic lineage cells may have two regulation
points for differentiation.

PMID: 8616067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jan 15;24(2):342-7.

CACCC and GATA-1 sequences make the constitutively expressed alpha-globin gene
erythroid-responsive in mouse erythroleukemia cells.

Ren S(1), Li J, Atweh GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029,
USA.

Although the human alpha-globin and beta-globin genes are co-regulated in adult
life, they achieve the same end by very different mechanisms. For example, a
transfected beta-globin gene is expressed in an inducible manner in mouse
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells while a transfected alpha-globin gene is
constitutively expressed at a high level in induced and uninduced MEL cells.
Interestingly, when the alpha-globin gene is transferred into MEL cells as part
of human chromosome 16, it is appropriately expressed in an inducible manner. We 
explored the basis for the lack of erythroid-responsiveness of the proximal
regulatory elements of the human alpha-globin gene. Since the alpha-globin gene
is the only functional human globin gene that lacks CACCC and GATA-1 motifs, we
asked whether their addition to the alpha-globin promoter would make the gene
erythroid-responsive in MEL cells. The addition of each of these binding sites to
the alpha-globin promoter separately did not result in inducibility in MEL cells.
However, when both sites were added together, the alpha-globin gene became
inducible in MEL cells. This suggests that erythroid non-responsiveness of the
alpha-globin gene results from the lack of erythroid binding sites and is not
necessarily a function of the constitutively active, GC rich promoter.

PMCID: PMC145638
PMID: 8628660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. EMBO J. 1996 Jan 15;15(2):319-33.

GATA transcription factors associate with a novel class of nuclear bodies in
erythroblasts and megakaryocytes.

Elefanty AG(1), Antoniou M, Custodio N, Carmo-Fonseca M, Grosveld FG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, UK.

The nuclear distribution of GATA transcription factors in murine haemopoietic
cells was examined by indirect immunofluorescence. Specific bright foci of GATA-1
fluorescence were observed in erythroleukaemia cells and primary murine
erythroblasts and megakaryocytes, in addition to diffuse nucleoplasmic
localization. These foci, which were preferentially found adjacent to nucleoli or
at the nuclear periphery, did not represent sites of active transcription or
binding of GATA-1 to consensus sites in the beta-globin loci. Immunoelectron
microscopy demonstrated the presence of intensely labelled structures likely to
represent the GATA-1 foci seen by immunofluorescence. The GATA-1 nuclear bodies
differed from previously described nuclear structures and there was no
co-localization with nuclear antigens involved in RNA processing or other
ubiquitous (Spl, c-Jun and TBP) or haemopoietic (NF-E2) transcription factors.
Interestingly, GATA-2 and GATA-3 proteins also localized to the same nuclear
bodies in cell lines co-expressing GATA-1 and -2 or GATA-1 and -3 gene products. 
This pattern of distribution is, thus far, unique to the GATA transcription
factors and suggests a protein-protein interaction with other components of the
nuclear bodies via the GATA zinc finger domain.

PMCID: PMC449947
PMID: 8617207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 12;271(2):1104-10.

Zinc fingers 1-7 of EVI1 fail to bind to the GATA motif by itself but require the
core site GACAAGATA for binding.

Perkins AS(1), Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8023, USA.

EVI1 is a zinc finger oncoprotein that binds via fingers 1-7 to the sequence
GACAAGATAA. The target genes on which EVI1 acts are unknown. This binding motif
overlaps with that for the GATA transcription factors, (T/A)GATA(A/G), and GATA-1
can bind to and activate transcription via a GACAAGATAA motif. The possibility
has been raised that, when overexpressed in leukemogenesis, EVI1 may function by 
interfering with the differentiation-promoting action of GATA factors. To explore
this, we have assessed the affinity of EVI1 for the GATA binding sites derived
from erythroid-specific GATA-1 target genes, and found only low affinity
interactions. We examined the contacts between EVI1 and DNA by methylation
interference studies, which revealed extensive contacts between EVI1 and its
binding site. The importance of the contacts for high affinity binding was shown 
by in vitro quantitative gel shift studies and in vivo cotransfection studies. To
examine what types of sequences from mouse genomic DNA bind to EVI1, we isolated 
and sequenced five EVI1-binding fragments, and each showed the GACAAGATA site.
The data presented contribute to our knowledge of the binding specificity of
EVI1, and yield a clearer picture of what sequences can, and cannot, act as
targets for EVI1 action.

PMID: 8557637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Stem Cells. 1996;14 Suppl 1:232-9.

Transcriptional regulation in megakaryocytes: the thrombopoietin receptor gene as
a model.

Mignotte V(1), Deveaux S, Filipe A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

The MPL gene codes for the thrombopoietin receptor, whose ligand specifically
controls megakaryocytic differentiation. In order to understand the molecular
basis for the megakaryocyte-specific expression of MPL, we analyzed the
regulatory elements of this gene. Two regions are hypersensitive to DNase I in
nuclei of cells that express MPL: the promoter and a portion of intron 6. The
latter behaves as a chromatin-dependent enhancer. A 200 bp fragment of the
promoter is sufficient for high-level specific expression. This fragment can bind
several transacting factors in vitro, including GATA-1 and members of the Ets
family. GATA-1 binds with low affinity to a unique GATA motif at -70 in the MPL
promoter, and destruction of this site yields only a modest decrease in
expression level in human erythroleukemia (HEL) cells. Ets proteins also bind
with low affinity to two sites. One is located at position -15 and its
destruction reduces expression to 50%; the other is located immediately
downstream of the GATA motif and plays a crucial role in expression of the
promoter in HEL cells, as its inactivation reduces expression to 15%. This study 
indicates a molecular basis for the coregulation of markers of megakaryocyte
differentiation. Finally, we describe other nuclear factor binding sites that may
be involved in the cell-type-specific expression of MPL.

PMID: 11012226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Acta Haematol. 1996;95(3-4):229-35.

Erythroid-specific activation of the distal (testis) promoter of GATA1 during
differentiation of purified normal murine hematopoietic stem cells.

Migliaccio AR(1), Migliaccio G, Ashihara E, Moroni E, Giglioni B, Ottolenghi S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematopoietic Growth Factors, New York Blood Center, NY 10021,
USA.

To understand the molecular mechanisms of erythroid differentiation, we analyzed 
by semiquantitative RT-PCR the expression of the transcription factor GATA1, the 
erythropoietin receptor (EpoR), and erythroid (beta-globin) differentiation
markers in purified hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) after in-vitro-induced
differentiation. Whether GATA1 transcription was from the proximal (with respect 
to the AUG, also known as erythroid) or the distal (also known as testis)
promoter was analyzed as well. Low-density marrow cells which bind to wheat germ 
agglutinin, but not to the antibody 15.1.1, and which either do or do not retain 
the dye rhodamine-123 (Rho-bright and Rho-dull, respectively), were purified.
Rho-dull, but not Rho-bright cells permanently reconstitute lymphomyelopoiesis in
W/Wv and severe-combined-immunodeficiency mice and, therefore, contain HSCs. Both
Rho-dull and Rho-bright cells give rise to progenitor and differentiated cells
(peak values at days 15 and 5, respectively) in liquid culture. Multilineage,
erythroid-restricted or myeloid-restricted differentiation is observed when the
cultures are stimulated with stem cell factor (SCF) + interleukin (IL)-3, SCF +
IL-3 + Epo, or SCF + IL-3 + granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor, respectively. 
Rho-dull cells have barely detectable reconstitution potential at day 5 of
culture. None of the genes examined were expressed in purified Rho-bright or
Rho-dull cells. The only exception was GATA1 which was expressed at maximal
levels in Rho-bright cells at the onset of culture. Rho-dull cells did not
express GATA1 before day 3 of culture (maximal expression at days 10-15).
Activation of GATA1 and EpoR was observed in all growth of mRNA for the two genes
expressed by the cells. In contrast, beta-globin mRNA was detected only in the
presence of Epo. The transcription of GATA1 was exclusively from the proximal
promoter in the absence of Epo but both proximal and distal transcripts were
observed in its presence. Maximum transcription from the distal promoter
(approximately equal to 0.2% of total GATA1 mRNA) coincided with maximal globin
mRNA levels (day 5 or day 15 for Rho-bright and Rho-dull cells, respectively).
These results indicate that GATA1 is activated at the transition point between
HSCs and pluripotent progenitor cells and erythroid-specific GATA1 regulation
involves activation of the distal GATA1 promoter.

PMID: 8677748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Eur J Haematol. 1996 Jan-Feb;56(1-2):62-7.

3'-Azido-3'-deoxythymidine inhibits erythroid-specific transcription factors in
human erythroid K562 leukemia cells.

Bridges EG(1), Trentesaux C, Lahlil R, Spiga MG, Jeannesson P, Sommadossi JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Center for AIDS Research and the
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.

The present study examines genetic mechanism(s) possibly involved in the observed
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT)-induced inhibition of globin gene transcription 
by evaluating the direct phenotypic erythroid effects of AZT on
erythroid-specific transcription factors which regulate globin gene promoters. In
vitro binding of GATA-1 or NFE-2 to its consensus sequence was decreased in the
presence of AZT reaching a maximum inhibition as early as 24 h after AZT
treatment. Nuclear extracts from butyric acid-induced K562 cells treated with an 
IC50 concentration of AZT exhibited a decrease in GATA-1 and NFE-2 binding by
approximately 30% and 35%. In contrast, 2',3'-dideoxycytidine which inhibits cell
growth without affecting hemoglobin synthesis, had no effect on binding of GATA-1
and NFE-2 factors. Northern blot analysis revealed a 25% decrease by AZT in
GATA-1 mRNA steady-state levels at 24 h and this inhibitory effect was maintained
until 72 h after drug addition. A similar decrease in NFE-2 mRNA steady-state
levels was observed at 72 h after AZT treatment. This study suggests that AZT
inhibition of erythroid differentiation is subsequent to a decrease of nuclear
factors gene expression which affect their DNA binding.

PMID: 8599995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biochem J. 1996 Jan 1;313 ( Pt 1):245-51.

PEST motifs are not required for rapid calpain-mediated proteolysis of c-fos
protein.

Carillo S(1), Pariat M, Steff Am, Jariel-Encontre I, Poulat F, Berta P,
Piechaczyk M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier/UMR 9942, France.

Cytoplasmic degradation of c-fos protein is extremely rapid. Under certain
conditions, it is a multi-step process initiated by calcium-dependent and
ATP-independent proteases called calpains. PEST motifs are peptide regions rich
in proline, glutamic acid/aspartic acid and serine/threonine residues, commonly
assumed to constitute built-in signals for rapid recognition by intracellular
proteases and particularly by calpains. Using a cell-free degradation assay and
site-directed mutagenesis, we report here that the three PEST motifs of c-fos are
not required for rapid cleavage by calpains. Testing the susceptibility of PEST
motif-bearing and non-bearing transcription factors including GATA1, GATA3, Myo
D, c-erbA, Tal-1 and Sry, demonstrates that PEST sequences are neither necessary 
nor sufficient for specifying degradation of other proteins by calpains. This
conclusion is strengthened by the observation that certain proteins, reportedly
known to be cleavable by calpains, are devoid of PEST motifs.

PMCID: PMC1216890
PMID: 8546691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Dec 5;92(25):11598-602.

Alternative translation initiation site usage results in two functionally
distinct forms of the GATA-1 transcription factor.

Calligaris R(1), Bottardi S, Cogoi S, Apezteguia I, Santoro C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Nazionale-Consorzio Interuniversitario Biotecnologie, Trieste,
Italy.

GATA-1 is a zinc-finger transcription factor that plays a critical role in the
normal development of hematopoietic cell lineages. In human and murine erythroid 
cells a previously undescribed 40-kDa protein is detected with GATA-1-specific
antibodies. We show that the 40-kDa GATA-1 (GATA-1s) is produced by the use of an
internal AUG initiation codon in the GATA-1 transcript. The GATA-1 proteins share
identical binding activity and form heterodimers in erythroleukemic cells but
differ in their transactivation potential and in their expression in developing
mouse embryos.

PMCID: PMC40449
PMID: 8524811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Dec;6(12):1559-66.

Nitric oxide-releasing agents and cGMP analogues inhibit murine erythroleukemia
cell differentiation and suppress erythroid-specific gene expression: correlation
with decreased DNA binding of NF-E2 and altered c-myb mRNA expression.

Suhasini M(1), Boss GR, Pascual FE, Pilz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0652, USA.

Differentiation of murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells induced by hexamethylene
bisacetamide (HMBA) and DMSO was inhibited by several structurally unrelated
nitric oxide (NO)-releasing agents and two membrane-permeable cGMP analogues.
Since the effect of the NO-releasing agents was augmented by a cGMP
phosphodiesterase inhibitor, at least some of their effect appeared to be
mediated by activation of cytosolic guanylate cyclase. The drugs did not globally
block differentiation since hemin-induced differentiation was undisturbed. In
HMBA-treated cells, the NO-releasing agents and cGMP analogues reduced
beta-globin and delta-aminolevulinate synthetase mRNA expression and inhibited
the late down-regulation of c-myb mRNA that is required for HMBA-induced
differentiation of MEL cells; the regulation of c-myc mRNA was not changed by the
drugs. Nuclear run-off analyses showed that the drugs inhibited the HMBA-induced 
changes in beta-globin and c-myb transcription rates, and transient transfection 
of a reporter gene construct demonstrated that the drugs inhibited HMBA-inducible
enhancer function of the alpha-globin control region, which contains binding
sites for the erythroid transcription factors NF-E2 and GATA-1. The NO-releasing 
agents and cGMP analogues largely prevented HMBA-induced increases in DNA binding
of NF-E2, whereas DNA binding of GATA-1 and SP-1 was not affected. The inhibition
of erythroid gene expression by NO and cGMP analogues may be physiologically
important under conditions of high NO production by endothelial cells and
macrophages, i.e. during acute or chronic inflammation.

PMID: 9019161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Dec;4(12):2307-11.

RBM3, a novel human gene in Xp11.23 with a putative RNA-binding domain.

Derry JM(1), Kerns JA, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Insitute, Stanford University Medical Center, CA 94305, 
USA.

Using cDNA selection with a YAC from the Xp11.2 region, we have identified a
novel gene (RBM3) that encodes a polypeptide with high sequence similarity to a
group of proteins that bind to RNA. On a YAC contig map, RBM3 is located between 
OATL1 and GATA1/TFE3 in sub-band Xp11.23, and gives rise to alternatively spliced
transcripts in a variety of human tissues. The longest open reading frame encodes
a 157 amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 17 kDa. Its
putative RNA-binding domain most closely resembles that of two previously
characterized human RNA-binding proteins, YRRM, the gene for which has been
implicated in azoospermia, and hnRNP G, a glycoprotein, also identified as an
auto-antigen. The homology of RMB3 in both sequence and size to an RNA binding
protein from maize, AAIP , suggests that it functions in a fundamental pathway
conserved from plants to mammals.

PMID: 8634703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Leuk Res. 1995 Dec;19(12):933-43.

Megakaryocytic differentiation of a leukemic cell line, MC3, by phorbol ester:
induction of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa and effects on expression of IL-6, IL-6
receptor, mpl and GATA genes.

Okabe M(1), Kunieda Y, Shoji M, Nakane S, Kurosawa M, Tanaka J, Hansen SR, Asaka 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

We investigated megakaryocytic differentiation in a newly-established
Ph1-positive leukemic cell line, MC3, which showed tri-lineage immunophenotypes
(myeloid antigens2+, CD19(1+) and CD41a1+) and was positive for CD34 and CD38.
TPA induced MC3 cells to differentiate to an early stage of megakaryocyte lineage
exhibiting an increase in the expression of platelet glycoproteins (GP) IIb/IIIa 
(CD41a), and an increase in cell size and nuclear ploidy. TPA treatment also
enhanced the expression of GPIIb mRNA, and induced the expression of
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and its receptor mRNAs, while it did not induce transcripts 
of the genes IL-11 and mpl ligand, and further decreased the transcript of the
mpl gene. Consistent with these findings, MC3 cells treated with TPA showed an
increased expression of GATA-1, but not GATA-3 transcripts, whereas those without
TPA treatment expressed only the GATA-2 transcript. These results provide an
insight into the study for the regulatory mechanism of megakaryocytopoiesis and
leukemic cell differentiation.

PMID: 8632663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Blood. 1995 Dec 1;86(11):4124-33.

Dysregulated expression of GATA-1 following retrovirus-mediated gene transfer
into murine hematopoietic stem cells increases erythropoiesis.

Farina SF(1), Girard LJ, Vanin EF, Nienhuis AW, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Section, National Center for Human Genome Research/National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4470, USA.

Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer was used to study the effects of dysregulated
expression of the zinc-finger transcription factor, GATA-1, which has been shown 
to be required for erythropoiesis. A retroviral vector (PGK-GATA-1) was
constructed with the murine GATA-1 gene linked to the human phosphoglycerate
kinase (PGK) promoter. Expression of GATA-1 was demonstrated by super-shift
analysis with a monoclonal antibody against murine GATA-1 using extracts of
nonerythroid cytotoxic T-lymphocyte line (CTLL) cells transduced with the
PGK-GATA-1 virus. Mouse bone marrow cells were transduced in vitro and
transplanted into recipient animals. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis
performed on DNA extracted from peripheral blood 12 to 40 weeks
posttransplantation demonstrated the presence of the PGK-GATA-1 provirus.
Proviral integrity and copy number were demonstrated by Southern blot analysis of
DNA from spleen, thymus, and bone marrow tissues from the long-term animals. At
16 weeks posttransplant, animals that received cells transduced by the GATA-1
virus maintained a lower white blood cell (WBC) count and absolute neutrophil
count (ANC) and a higher red blood cell (RBC) count than control animals that
received cells transduced with a virus containing a neor gene. Erythropoiesis was
stimulated in GATA-1 and control animals by phlebotomy. GATA-1 animals required
more extensive phlebotomy to reach a hematocrit less than 25 and their hematocrit
returned to normal levels sooner than control animals. The effect of twice-daily 
injections of 10 U recombinant erythropoietin (epo) was also examined. The
hematocrit of GATA-1 animals showed a more rapid and elevated response to epo
than the hematocrit of control animals. These data suggest that dysregulated
expression of GATA-1 in primitive hematopoietic cells enlarges the pool of
epo-responsive erythroid progenitor cells.

PMID: 7492769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Nov 7;92(23):10713-7.

Intraembryonic hematopoietic cell migration during vertebrate development.

Detrich HW 3rd(1), Kieran MW, Chan FY, Barone LM, Yee K, Rundstadler JA, Pratt S,
Ransom D, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Vertebrate hematopoietic stem cells are derived from vental mesoderm, which is
postulated to migrate to both extra- and intraembryonic positions during gastrula
and neurula stages. Extraembryonic migration has previously been documented, but 
the origin and migration of intraembryonic hematopoietic cells have not been
visualized. The zebrafish and most other teleosts do not form yolk sac blood
islands during early embryogenesis, but instead hematopoiesis occurs solely in a 
dorsal location known as the intermediate cell mass (IM) or Oellacher. In this
report, we have isolated cDNAs encoding zebrafish homologs of the hematopoietic
transcription factors GATA-1 and GATA-2 and have used these markers to determine 
that the IM is formed from mesodermal cells in a posterior-lateral position on
the yolk syncytial layer of the gastrula yolk sac. Surprisingly, cells of the IM 
then migrate anteriorly through most of the body length prior to the onset of
active circulation and exit onto the yolk sac. These findings support a
hypothesis in which the hematopoietic program of vertebrates is established by
variations in homologous migration pathways of extra- and intraembryonic
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC40682
PMID: 7479870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Leuk Res. 1995 Nov;19(11):811-5.

Aberrant progenitors common to megakaryocytic and myeloid cells in a Down's
infant with transient abnormal myelopoiesis.

Sato A(1), Imaizumi M, Noro T, Ichinohasama R, Saito T, Yoshinari M, Suwabe N,
Suzuki H, Koizumi Y, Cui Y, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

Phenotypic characteristics of blasts were studied in a Down's infant with
transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM). Two major subpopulations were identified: 
(1) CD33+CD42b+ cells with platelet peroxidase activity, the commitment of which 
to megakaryocytic lineage was supported by an increased expression of GATA-1
mRNA; (2) CD33+CD34+CD7+CD4+ cells with immature ultrastructure, which could be
either immature megakaryocytic or myeloid cells with aberrant differentiation.
Mixed colonies containing megakaryocytes and monocyte/macrophages in the
peripheral blood suggested the presence of progenitors common to these
subpopulations. These results may indicate that subpopulations of blasts with
phenotypic diversity could be derived from aberrant common progenitors to
megakaryocytic and myeloid lineages in this patient.

PMID: 8551797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Blood. 1995 Oct 15;86(8):3173-80.

The expression pattern of erythrocyte/megakaryocyte-related transcription factors
GATA-1 and the stem cell leukemia gene correlates with hematopoietic
differentiation and is associated with outcome of acute myeloid leukemia.

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki K, Ohyashiki JH, Kawakubo K, Fujimura T, Iwama H,
Nakazawa S, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

To understand the clinical implications of transcription factors and their
biologic roles during cellular differentiation in the hematopoietic system, we
examined the expression of GATA-1, GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene in
human leukemia cell lines and various leukemia patients using the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Cell lines exhibiting megakaryocytic or 
erythrocytic phenotypes had GATA-1, GATA-2, and SCL gene transcripts, while
monocytic cell lines had no detectable GATA-1, GATA-2, or SCL gene mRNA. In some 
myeloid cell lines, GATA-1 expression, but not SCL gene expression, was detected;
GATA-1 expression in HL-60 cells was downregulated during the process of
monocytic differentiation. We next examined GATA-1, GATA-2, and SCL gene
expression in 110 leukemia samples obtained from 76 patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), 19 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and 15 with chronic
myeloid leukemia in blast crisis (CML-BC). SCL gene expression was usually
accompanied by GATA-1 expression and was preferentially detected in patients with
leukemia exhibiting megakaryocytic or erythrocytic phenotypes, while patients
with monocytic leukemia were clustered in the group with no detectable GATA-1
expression. None of the patients with ALL or CML-lymphoid-BC expressed SCL. De
novo AML patients with SCL gene expression had a lower complete remission (CR)
rate and had a significantly poorer prognosis. Among the patients with AML not
expressing SCL, a high percentage of patients with CD7+ AML and CD19+ AML had
detectable GATA-1, while patients with GATA-1-negative AML had the best CR rate
(87.5%). Our results suggest that the expression pattern of transcription factors
reflects the lineage potential of leukemia cells, and GATA-1 and SCL gene
expression may have prognostic value for the outcome of patients with AML.

PMID: 7579412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Oct 10;92(21):9623-7.

Transcription factor GATA-1 permits survival and maturation of erythroid
precursors by preventing apoptosis.

Weiss MJ(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-1 recognizes a consensus motif present in
regulatory regions of numerous erythroid-expressed genes. Mouse embryonic stem
cells lacking GATA-1 cannot form mature red blood cells in vivo. In vitro
differentiation of GATA-1- embryonic stem cells gives rise to a population of
committed erythroid precursors that exhibit developmental arrest and death. We
show here that the demise of GATA-1- erythroid cells is accompanied by several
features characteristics of apoptosis. This process occurs despite normal
expression of all known GATA target genes examined, including the erythropoietin 
receptor, and independent of detectable accumulation of the tumor suppressor
protein p53. Thus, in addition to its established role in regulating genes that
define the erythroid phenotype, GATA-1 also supports the viability of red cell
precursors by suppressing apoptosis. These results illustrate the multifunctional
nature of GATA-1 and suggest a mechanism by which other hematopoietic
transcription factors may ensure the development of specific lineages.

PMCID: PMC40854
PMID: 7568185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Oct 10;92(21):9585-9.

Association of erythroid transcription factors: complexes involving the LIM
protein RBTN2 and the zinc-finger protein GATA1.

Osada H(1), Grutz G, Axelson H, Forster A, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research Council, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

The RBTN2 LIM-domain protein, originally identified as an oncogenic protein in
human T-cell leukemia, is essential for erythropoiesis. A possible role for RBTN2
in transcription during erythropoiesis has been investigated. Direct interaction 
of the RBTN2 protein was observed in vivo and in vitro with the GATA1 or -2
zinc-finger transcription factors, as well as with the basic helix-loop-helix
protein TAL1. By using mammalian two-hybrid analysis, complexes involving RBTN2, 
TAL1, and GATA1, together with E47, the basic helix-loop-helix heterodimerization
partner of TAL1, could be demonstrated. Thus, a molecular link exists between
three proteins crucial for erythropoiesis, and the data suggest that variations
in amounts of complexes involving RBTN2, TAL1, and GATA1 could be important for
erythroid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC40846
PMID: 7568177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Sep 25;214(3):927-33.

HMG-I binds to GATA motifs: implications for an HPFH syndrome.

Magis W(1), Martin DI.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, USA.

We have examined binding of the nuclear protein HMG-I to the human gamma-globin
promoter. We find that HMG-I binds preferentially to the more 3' of a pair of
GATA motifs in the gamma-globin promoter; this paired motif is bound by the
erythroid factor GATA-1. A naturally occurring mutation (-175 T-C) in the area
bound by HMG-I results in overexpression of gamma-globin in adult red blood cells
(HPFH) and up-regulation of the gamma-globin promoter in in vitro expression
assays; HMG-I does not bind to this mutant sequence. A survey of GATA motifs from
other globin cis-elements demonstrates HMG-I binding to most of them. These
findings implicate HMG-I in the HPFH phenotype; we speculate that it may
participate in the formation of multiprotein complexes that regulate globin gene 
expression.

PMID: 7575565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Genomics. 1995 Sep 20;29(2):496-502.

Construction of two YAC contigs in human Xp11.23-p11.22, one encompassing the
loci OATL1, GATA, TFE3, and SYP, the other linking DXS255 to DXS146.

Fisher SE(1), Hatchwell E, Chand A, Ockenden N, Monaco AP, Craig IW.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

We have constructed two YAC contigs in the Xp11.23-p11.22 interval of the human X
chromosome, a region that was previously poorly characterized. One contig, of at 
least 1.4 Mb, links the pseudogene OATL1 to the genes GATA1, TFE3, and SYP and
also contains loci implicated in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and synovial sarcoma. A
second contig, mapping proximal to the first, is estimated to be over 2.1 Mb and 
links the hypervariable locus DXS255 to DXS146, and also contains a chloride
channel gene that is responsible for hereditary nephrolithiasis. We have used
plasmid rescue, inverse PCR, and Alu-PCR to generate 20 novel markers from this
region, 1 of which is polymorphic, and have positioned these relative to one
another on the basis of YAC analysis. The order of previously known markers
within our contigs, Xpter-OATL1-GATA-TFE3-SYP-DXS255146- Xcen, agrees with
genomic pulsed-field maps of the region. In addition, we have constructed a
rare-cutter restriction map for a 710-kb region of the DXS255-DXS146 contig and
have identified three CPG islands. These contigs and new markers will provide a
useful resource for more detailed analysis of Xp11.23-p11.22, a region implicated
in several genetic diseases.

PMID: 8666400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Genomics. 1995 Sep 20;29(2):471-7.

The mouse homolog of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) gene is highly
conserved and maps near the scurfy (sf) mutation on the X chromosome.

Derry JM(1), Wiedemann P, Blair P, Wang Y, Kerns JA, Lemahieu V, Godfrey VL,
Wilkinson JE, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University Medical Center,
California 94305, USA.

The mouse WASP gene, the homolog of the gene mutated in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome,
has been isolated and sequenced. the predicted amino acid sequence is 86%
identical to the human WASP sequence. A distinct feature of the mouse gene is an 
expanded polymorphic GGA trinucleotide repeat that codes for polyglycine and
varies from 15 to 17 triplets in different Mus musculus strains. The genomic
structure of the mouse WASP gene is expressed as an approximately 2.4-kb mRNA in 
thymus and spleen. Chromosomal mapping in an interspecific M. Musculus/M. spretus
backcross placed the Wasp locus near the centromere of the mouse X chromosome,
inseparable from Gata1, Tcfe3, and scurfy (sf). This localization makes Wasp a
candidate for involvement in scurfy, a T cell-mediated fatal lymphoreticular
disease of mice that has previously been proposed as a mouse homolog of
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Northern analysis of sf tissue samples indicated the
presence of WASP mRNA in liver and skin, presumably as a consequence of
lymphocytic infiltration, but non abnormalities in the amount or size of mRNA
present.

PMID: 8666397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Sep 1;232(2):620-6.

A new approach to isolate genomic control regions. Application to the GATA
transcription factor family.

Joulin V(1), Richard-Foy H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 33, Bicêtre,
France.

We have designed a new strategy to isolate unknown DNA regions interacting with
one or several related regulatory proteins. It involves trapping such DNAs by
their cognate binding proteins followed by PCR amplification, as described
previously [Kinzler, K. & Vogelstein, B. (1989) Nucleic Acids Res. 17,
3645-3653]. To overcome the inability of such a procedure to discriminate between
functional and non-functional binding sites as well as to specifically trap short
DNA motifs from the whole higher eukaryotic genome, we have used as starting
material DNA isolated from transcriptionally competent chromatin fractions,
instead of total genomic DNA. To test our strategy, we selected human DNA
sequences that bind members of the GATA family, known to recognize similar WGATAR
motifs. These proteins are expressed in different cell types in which they
regulate the transcription of different sets of genes; thus, transcriptionally
active chromatin containing GATA motifs should differ according to the cell type.
We have trapped and analyzed DNA fragments isolated from an active chromatin
fraction, from erythroid cells and lymphoid cells, using GATA-1 and GATA-3
proteins, respectively. We show that regulatory GATA sequences known to be in
open chromatin in erythroid cells (typified by the HSIII fragment of the
beta-globin locus control region) or in lymphoid cells (typified by a fragment of
the CD2 locus control region) are dramatically enriched in a cell-specific
manner, demonstrating the potency of the method. The sequences of the erythroid
or lymphoid DNA fragments isolated through the procedure described here were
determined and display subset-site preference for GATA-1 and GATA-3.

PMID: 7556215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 25;270(34):19673-5.

Thrombopoietin induces megakaryocyte differentiation in hematopoietic progenitor 
FDC-P2 cells.

Nagata Y(1), Nagahisa H, Aida Y, Okutomi K, Nagasawa T, Todokoro K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

Thrombopoietin (Tpo) is a cytokine that specifically regulates megakaryocyte
maturation and platelet production. Little is known about the molecular and
cellular mechanism of the Tpo-induced megakaryocyte maturation process including 
polyploidization and platelet release. To study Tpo-induced megakaryocyte
differentiation, a mouse cell line FD-TPO, which responds and grows with Tpo, was
established from a interleukin-3-dependent hematopoietic progenitor cell line
FDC-P2. The FD-TPO cells, expressing endogenous Tpo receptor, grew with Tpo in a 
dose-dependent manner. Further, Tpo stimulation dramatically induced expression
of megakaryocyte/erythroid-specific transcription factors GATA-1 and NF-E2 in
FD-TPO cells. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that expression of
platelet-specific cell surface antigens including CD61 (GPIIIa) dramatically
increased in Tpo-stimulated FD-TPO cells and that expression of myeloid-specific 
antigens, Gr-1 and Mac-1, decreased. Therefore, we concluded that the binding of 
Tpo to FD-TPO cells induces not only cell growth but also differentiation into
mature megakaryocyte-like cells, and thus this cell line was found to be useful
for the study of Tpo receptor-mediated growth and differentiation signals.

PMID: 7649975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Blood. 1995 Aug 15;86(4):1502-14.

Lineage-restricted regulation of the murine SCL/TAL-1 promoter.

Bockamp EO(1), McLaughlin F, Murrell AM, Göttgens B, Robb L, Begley CG, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

The SCL/TAL-1 gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is 
expressed in multipotent hematopoietic progenitors before lineage commitment. Its
expression is maintained during differentiation along erythroid, mast, and
megakaryocytic lineages, but is repressed after commitment to nonexpressing
lineages. To begin to address the molecular mechanisms underlying this complex
pattern of expression, we have studied the regulation of the murine SCL promoter 
in erythroid and T-cell lines. Analysis of the methylation and chromatin
structure of the SCL promoter region showed that SCL mRNA expression correlated
with DNase hypersensitive sites and methylation status of the promoter. Transient
reporter assays showed that promoter 1a was active in erythroid cells but not in 
T cells. Sequences between -187 and +26 were sufficient for lineage-restricted
activity of promoter 1a. A joint promoter construct containing both promoter 1a
and promoter 1b also exhibited lineage-restricted activity. Conserved GATA (-37),
MAZ (+242), and ETS (+264) motifs were all shown to contribute to SCL promoter
activity in erythroid cells, but several other motifs were not required for full 
promoter activity. The pattern of complexes binding to the +242 MAZ and +264 ETS 
sites were the same in erythroid and T cells. However, GATA-1 bound the -37 GATA 
site in erythroid cells, whereas in T cells GATA-3 was only able to bind weakly, 
if at all. Moreover, GATA-1 but not GATA-2 or GATA-3 was able to transactivate
SCL promoter 1a in a T-cell environment. These results suggest that inactivity of
SCL promoter 1a in T cells reflected the absence of GATA-1 rather than the
presence of trans-dominant negative regulators.

PMID: 7632958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Aug 11;23(15):3041-9.

Regulation of transcription of the human erythropoietin receptor gene by proteins
binding to GATA-1 and Sp1 motifs.

Chin K(1), Oda N, Shen K, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erythropoietin (Epo), the primary regulator of the production of erythroid cells,
acts by binding to a cell surface receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitors. We
used deletion analysis and transfection assays with reporter gene constructs to
examine the transcription control elements in the 5' flanking region of the human
EpoR gene. In erythroid cells most of the transcription activity was contained in
a 150 bp promoter fragment with binding sites for transcription factors AP2, Sp1 
and the erythroid-specific GATA-1. The 150 bp hEpoR promoter exhibited high and
low activity in erythroid OCIM1 and K562 cells, respectively, reflecting the high
and low levels of constitutive hEpoR expression. The GATA-1 and Sp1 binding sites
in this promoter lacking a TATA sequence were necessary for a high level of
transcription activation. Protein-DNA binding studies suggested that Sp1 and two 
other CCGCCC binding proteins from erythroid and non-erythroid cells could bind
to the Sp1 binding motif. By increasing GATA-1 levels via co-transfection, we
were able to transactivate the hEpoR promoter in K562 cells and non-erythroid
cells, but not in the highly active OCIM1 cells, although GATA-1 mRNA levels were
comparable in OCIM1 and K562. Interestingly, when we mutated the Sp1 site,
resulting in a marked decrease in hEpoR promoter activity, we could restore
transactivation by increasing GATA-1 levels in OCIM1 cells. These data suggest
that while GATA-1 can transactivate the EpoR promoter, the level of hEpoR gene
expression does not depend on GATA-1 alone. Rather, hEpoR transcription activity 
depends on coordination between Sp1 and GATA-1 with other cell-specific factors, 
including possibly other Sp1-like binding proteins, to provide high level,
tissue-specific expression.

PMCID: PMC307147
PMID: 7659529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):305-10.

High-resolution comparative mapping of the proximal region of the mouse X
chromosome.

Blair HJ(1), Ho M, Monaco AP, Fisher S, Craig IW, Boyd Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, MRC Radiobiology Unit, Chilton, Oxon, United Kingdom.

The murine homologues of the loci for McLeod syndrome (XK), Dent's disease
(CICN5), and synaptophysin (SYP) have been mapped to the proximal region of the
mouse X chromosome and positioned with respect to other conserved loci in this
region using a total of 948 progeny from two separate Mus musculus x Mus spretus 
backcrosses. In the mouse, the order of loci and evolutionary breakpoints (EB)
has been established as centromere-(DXWas70, DXHXF34h)-EB-Clcn5-(Syp, DXMit55,
DXMit26)-Tfe3-Gata1-EB-Xk-Cybb-telomere. In the proximal region of the human X
chromosome short arm, the position of evolutionary breakpoints with respect to
key loci has been established as DMD-EB-XK-PFC-EB-GATA1-C1CN5-EB-DXS1272E-ALAS2-E
B-DXF34-centromere. These data have enabled us to construct a high-resolution
genetic map for the approximately 3-cM interval between DXWas70 and Cybb on the
mouse X chromosome, which encompasses 10 loci. This detailed map demonstrates the
power of high-resolution genetic mapping in the mouse as a means of determining
locus order in a small chromosomal region and of providing an accurate framework 
for the construction of physical maps.

PMID: 8530041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Oncogene. 1995 Jul 6;11(1):191-8.

The Evi-1 zinc finger myeloid transforming protein binds to genomic fragments
containing (GATA)n sequences.

Matsugi T(1), Kreider BL, Delwel R, Cleveland JL, Askew DS, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

The EVI1 gene is activated by chromosomal translocations and inversions in
approximately 5% of human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and by retroviral
insertion in approximately 20% of murine myeloid leukemias. EVI1 encodes a
nuclear DNA-binding protein having 10 zinc finger motifs in two noncontiguous
domains consisting of an amino-terminal domain of seven fingers and a carboxyl
domain containing three fingers. To evaluate the sequence specificity of Evi-1
binding and potentially identify genomic targets, whole-genome PCR was utilized
to isolate multiple Sau3A fragments which specifically bind to the amino-terminal
zinc finger domain. The majority of these clones represented single copy
sequences and virtually all contained variable numbers of repeats of the GATA
motif, the target sequence for the erythroid-specific transcription factor
GATA-1. GST/Evi-1 fusion proteins containing the amino-terminal domain of zinc
fingers bound the GATA motif in these clones as well as to those present in the
human gamma-globin promoter, similar to the binding of purified GATA-1 protein.
By obtaining corresponding large genomic clones for eight of these fragments,
transcription units were found associated with two. One corresponded to the
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene and its expression was not affected
by Evi-1. The second is a novel gene whose expression is repressed in murine
myeloid cell lines that express Evi-1.

PMID: 7624127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Thromb Haemost. 1995 Jul;74(1):210-2.

Regulation of gene transcription during the differentiation of megakaryocytes.

Uzan G(1), Prandini MH, Berthier R.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Laboratoire d'Hématologie, INSERM U217, Département de Biologie
Moléculaire et Structurale, CEN Grenoble, France.

Glycoprotein IIb (GPIIb) is an early and specific marker of the megakaryocytic
lineage. Thus studies on the transcriptional regulation of this gene may provide 
helpful information on the mechanisms controlling cell specificity and
differentiation of this lineage. In previous experiments, the promoter of GPIIb
gene was isolated and we have shown that a fragment extending 643 bp upstream the
transcription start site was able to control the cell specificity of a reporter
gene in transfection experiments of different permanent cell lines. Most of the
transcriptional activity is contained in an enhancer containing binding sites for
members of the GATA and ets transcription factors families. The transcription
factor GATA1 is not only a major regulator of the transcription of erythroid
genes, but it also regulates the expression of GPIIb and other megakaryocytic
genes. We suggest that the lineage specificity and the temporal activation of
GPIIb gene during hematopoiesis rely on the activity of a repressor that has been
identified on the promoter. To test this hypothesis, we have developed a cell
model allowing the study of the megakaryocytes differentiation from very immature
progenitors to fully differentiated cells. This model is based on the
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. We have obtained megakaryocytes
together with erythrocytic and granulo-macrophagic cells. The transfection in
these ES cells of GPIIb promoter constructs mutated or not on different regions, 
including the repressor element will provide important information on the
mechanisms controlling gene activation or repression during megakaryocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 8578459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Blood. 1995 Jul 1;86(1):323-8.

Constitutive expression of GATA-1, EPOR, alpha-globin, and gamma-globin genes in 
myeloid clonogenic cells from juvenile chronic myelocytic leukemia.

Privitera E(1), Schirò R, Longoni D, Ronchi A, Rambaldi A, Bernasconi S,
Ottolenghi S, Masera G, Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetica e di Biologia dei Microganismi, Università di Milano,
Italy.

Juvenile chronic myelocytic leukemia (JCML) is a rare disorder of early
childhood. Characteristic of JCML are the progressive appearance of high levels
of fetal hemoglobin (HbF), reflecting a true reversion to a fetal type of
erythropoiesis, and the presence of colony-forming cells able to grow in vitro
spontaneously in the absence of growth factors. To better understand the
relationship between the erythroid abnormalities and the leukemic process, we
analyzed the expression pattern of specific genes related to erythroid
differentiation--GATA-1, EPOR, alpha-globin, beta-globin, and gamma-globin
genes--in JCML peripheral blood (PB) cells and in vitro-derived colonies.
Northern blot analysis of PB cells from five JCML patients indicated levels of
GATA-1 transcripts much higher than those usually found in other types of
leukemic cells, and S1 nuclease protection assay detected significantly increased
expression of gamma-globin mRNA. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) analysis of single granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming unit (CFU-GM)
colonies, obtained in vitro in the absence of added growth factors from four JCML
patients, detected GATA-1, EPOR, and globin (alpha and gamma) transcripts in most
of the colonies tested, in contrast with control CFU-GM from normal bone marrow, 
which were positive only for GATA-1. Single JCML colonies were tested for the
presence of two different transcripts; whereas alpha- and gamma-globin genes
appeared mostly coexpressed, beta-globin mRNA was detected only in a minority of 
the gamma-globin-positive colonies, indicating that the leukemic pattern of
hemoglobin synthesis is mainly fetal. In addition, the leukemic cells occurring
during blast crisis of one of our patients displayed the typical features of a
stem cell leukemia (CD34+, CD19-, CD2-, myeloperoxidase-). In this sorted CD34+
population, we detected the presence of a marker chromosome, der(12)t(3;12),
previously identified in bone marrow cells at diagnosis and an expression pattern
superimposable to that of the JCML colonies, consistently displaying a high
gamma-globin:beta-globin mRNA ratio. The expression of erythroid markers within
populations of leukemic cells, both in vivo and in vitro, supports the hypothesis
that abnormal JCML erythroid cells may originate from the same mutated progenitor
that sustains the growth of the leukemic cells.

PMID: 7795240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Br J Haematol. 1995 Jul;90(3):607-14.

Expression of erythroid-specific genes in acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia and
transient myeloproliferative disorder in Down's syndrome.

Ito E(1), Kasai M, Hayashi Y, Toki T, Arai K, Yokoyama S, Kato K, Tachibana N,
Yamamoto M, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia (M7) and transient myeloproliferative disorder
in Down's syndrome (TMD) are characterized by rapid growth of abnormal blast
cells which express megakaryocytic markers. To clarify properties of the blast
cells in M7 and TMD cases, we examined erythroid markers expression in blasts
from six cases with M7 and seven cases with TMD in this study. Erythroid-specific
mRNAs encoding gamma-globin and erythroid delta-aminolevulinate synthase were
found to be expressed in blasts from most of these cases, indicating that
majorities of the blasts in M7 and TMD cases have erythroid and megakaryocytic
phenotypes. We also found that mRNAs encoding GATA-1 and GATA-2 are expressed in 
all these cases. These results suggest that M7 blasts and TMD blasts correspond
to the erythroid/megakaryocytic bipotential progenitor cells.

PMID: 7647001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Blood. 1995 Jun 15;85(12):3713-8.

Ecotropic virus integration site-1 gene preferentially expressed in
post-myelodysplasia acute myeloid leukemia: possible association with GATA-1,
GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia gene expression.

Ohyashiki JH(1), Ohyashiki K, Shimamoto T, Kawakubo K, Fujimura T, Nakazawa S,
Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

We investigated expression of the human ecotropic virus integration site-1 (EVI1)
gene in patients with leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) using the
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method. The EVI1
transcripts were detected in 5 (10.0%) of 50 patients with de novo acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML), including two AML patients with trilineage myelodysplasia, and in
8 (34.8%) of 23 patients with post-myelodysplastic syndrome AML (post-MDS AML).
EVI1 expression was also detected in 6 (35.3%) of 17 MDS patients and three of
six patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in myelomegakaryoblast crisis.
No EVI1 transcripts were detected in patients with acute lymphoid leukemia (n =
15) or CML in lymphoid blast crisis (n = 4). Chromosomal abnormalities at the
3q26 region, where the EVI1 gene is located, were found in one patient with MDS
and two patients with CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis who had EVI1 expression. Our
results showed that EVI1 expression was frequent in patients with post-MDS AML
and AML with trilineage myelodysplasia, regardless of the presence or absence of 
3q26 abnormalities. EVI1 expression was accompanied by expression of GATA-1 and
GATA-2, and often by stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene expression. In patients with
post-MDS AML, EVI1 expression was not always associated with a 3q26 abnormality, 
whereas EVI1 expression in CML myelomegakaryoblast crisis was often linked to a
3q26 abnormality. Our results suggest that the leukemogenic role of EVI1
expression may differ between post-MDS AML and leukemia, with EVI1 expression
associated with a 3q26 abnormality.

PMID: 7780155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jun;15(6):3147-53.

Ligand-dependent repression of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 by the
estrogen receptor.

Blobel GA(1), Sieff CA, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

High-dose estrogen administration induces anemia in mammals. In chickens,
estrogens stimulate outgrowth of bone marrow-derived erythroid progenitor cells
and delay their maturation. This delay is associated with down-regulation of many
erythroid cell-specific genes, including alpha- and beta-globin, band 3, band
4.1, and the erythroid cell-specific histone H5. We show here that estrogens also
reduce the number of erythroid progenitor cells in primary human bone marrow
cultures. To address potential mechanisms by which estrogens suppress
erythropoiesis, we have examined their effects on GATA-1, an erythroid
transcription factor that participates in the regulation of the majority of
erythroid cell-specific genes and is necessary for full maturation of
erythrocytes. We demonstrate that the transcriptional activity of GATA-1 is
strongly repressed by the estrogen receptor (ER) in a ligand-dependent manner and
that this repression is reversible in the presence of 4-hydroxytamoxifen.
ER-mediated repression of GATA-1 activity occurs on an artificial promoter
containing a single GATA-binding site, as well as in the context of an intact
promoter which is normally regulated by GATA-1. GATA-1 and ER bind to each other 
in vitro in the absence of DNA. In coimmunoprecipitation experiments using
transfected COS cells, GATA-1 and ER associate in a ligand-dependent manner.
Mapping experiments indicate that GATA-1 and the ER form at least two contacts,
which involve the finger region and the N-terminal activation domain of GATA-1.
We speculate that estrogens exert effects on erythropoiesis by modulating GATA-1 
activity through protein-protein interaction with the ER. Interference with
GATA-binding proteins may be one mechanism by which steroid hormones modulate
cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC230546
PMID: 7760810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Nat Genet. 1995 Jun;10(2):224-8.

Disruption of a GATA motif in the Duffy gene promoter abolishes erythroid gene
expression in Duffy-negative individuals.

Tournamille C(1), Colin Y, Cartron JP, Le Van Kim C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM U76, GIP-Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris,
France.

The mRNA for the Duffy blood group antigen, the erythrocyte receptor for the
Plasmodium vivax malaria parasite, has recently been cloned and shown to encode a
widely expressed chemokine receptor. Here, we show that the Duffy
antigen/chemokine receptor gene (DARC) is composed of a single exon and that most
Duffy-negative blacks carry a silent FY*B allele with a single T to C
substitution at nucleotide -46. This mutation impairs the promoter activity in
erythroid cells by disrupting a binding site for the GATA1 erythroid
transcription factor. With the recent characterization of the FY*A and FY*B
alleles, these findings provide the molecular basis of the Duffy blood group
system and an explanation for the erythroid-specific repression of the DARC gene 
in Duffy-negative individuals.

PMID: 7663520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1995 Jun;36(6):547-51.

[The expression pattern of transcription factors (GATA, SCL) and biological
characteristics in various leukemia cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki JH, Ohyashiki K, Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College.

We have studied gene expression of GATA-1, GATA-2, and SCL, which are known as
cell-specific transcription factors, in 110 various leukemias consisted of 76
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 19 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(ALL), and 15 with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in blast crisis by the revearse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay. Accordingly, we divided into three
groups. Group I (GATA-1+SCL+): patients with AML exhibiting phenotypic
characteristics of erythroid or megakaryocytic lineage and most of CML myeloid
blast crisis were included. Group II (GATA-1+, SCL-): Not only CD7-positive and
CD19-positive AML, but also a part of Ph+ALL demonstrated this pattern. Leukemia 
in this group is considered to have a capability to differentiate into myeloid
and lymphoid lineages. Group III (GATA-1-, SCL-): patients in this group
consisted of leukemias which are differentiated into specific cell-lineages,
either myeloid or lymphoid, when compared to groups I or II. Our data suggest
that the expression pattern of transcription factors reflects lineage potential
in leukemia cells, leading to classification of leukemias.

PMID: 7643449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Jun 1;230(2):475-80.

The major erythroid DNA-binding protein GATA-1 is stimulated by erythropoietin
but not by chemical inducers of erythroid differentiation.

Busfield SJ(1), Spadaccini A, Riches KJ, Tilbrook PA, Klinken SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Australia.

The expression of the major erythroid DNA-binding protein GATA-1 was studied
during erythropoietin and chemically induced erythroid differentiation of J2E and
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. An increase in GATA-1 mRNA levels was
observed shortly after hormonal stimulation of J2E cells, due to increased
transcription and not stabilization of the short-lived transcripts.
Concomitantly, an increase in protein capable of binding to the GATA motif was
detected. Premature removal of erythropoietin from culture resulted in submaximal
GATA-1, globin, and hemoglobin production. In contrast, differentiation of J2E
cells initiated by sodium butyrate resulted in a sudden depletion of GATA-1
transcripts. Similarly, dimethyl sulphoxide induction of MEL cells produced a
transient decrease in GATA-1 mRNA. Surprisingly, these decreases in mRNA were not
reflected in alterations to GATA-1 protein content, or the ability of the
transcription factor to bind DNA. We concluded from this study that the sequence 
of events initiated by erythropoietin was not followed during chemical
stimulation of erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 7607218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4601-5.

Pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells contain high levels of mRNA for c-kit,
GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, and c-myb and low levels or no mRNA for c-fms and the
receptors for granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and interleukins 5 and 7.

Orlic D(1), Anderson S, Biesecker LG, Sorrentino BP, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopoiesis Section, National Center for Human Genome Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells (PHSCs) were highly enriched from mouse bone
marrow by counterflow centrifugal elutriation, lineage subtraction, and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting based on high c-kit receptor expression
(c-kitBR). We used reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to assay the
c-kitBR subset and the subsets expressing low (c-kitDULL) and no (c-kitNEG) c-kit
receptor for expression of mRNA encoding hematopoietic growth factor receptors
and transcription factors. The c-kitBR cells had approximately 3.5-fold more
c-kit mRNA than unfractionated bone marrow cells. The c-kitDULL cells had 47-58% 
of the c-kit mRNA found in c-kitBR cells and the c-kitNEG cells had 4-9% of the
c-kit mRNA present in c-kitBR cells. By comparing mRNA levels in c-kitBR cells
(enriched for PHSCs) with those of unfractionated bone marrow, we demonstrated
that c-kitBR cells contained low or undetectable levels of mRNA for c-fms,
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor, interleukin 5 receptor (IL-5R),
and IL-7R. These same cells had moderate levels of mRNA for erythropoietin
receptor, IL-3R subunits IL-3R alpha (SUT-1), AIC-2A, and AIC-2B, IL-6R and its
partner gp-130, and the transcription factor GATA-1 and high levels of mRNA for
transcription factors GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, and c-myb. We conclude from these
findings that PHSCs are programmed to interact with stem cell factor, IL-3, and
IL-6 but not with granulocyte or macrophage colony-stimulating factor. These
findings also indicate that GATA-2, p45 NF-E2, and c-myb activities may be
involved in PHSC maintenance or proliferation.

PMCID: PMC41992
PMID: 7538677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2437-47.

Functional synergy and physical interactions of the erythroid transcription
factor GATA-1 with the Krüppel family proteins Sp1 and EKLF.

Merika M(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

An unresolved aspect of current understanding of erythroid cell-specific gene
expression relates to how a limited number of transcriptional factors cooperate
to direct high-level expression mediated by cis-regulatory elements separated
over large distances within globin loci. In this report, we provide evidence that
GATA-1, the major erythroid transcription factor, activates transcription in a
synergistic fashion with two Krüppel family factors, the ubiquitous protein Sp1
and the erythroid-restricted factor EKLF (erythroid Krüppel-like factor), which
recognize GC and/or GT/CACC motifs. Binding sites for both GATA-1 and these
Krüppel proteins (especially Sp1) are found in close association in the promoters
and enhancers of numerous erythroid cell-expressed genes and appear to cooperate 
in directing their expression. We have shown that GATA-1 interacts physically
with Sp1 and EKLF and that interactions are mediated through their respective
DNA-binding domains. Moreover, we show that GATA-1 and Sp1 synergize from a
distance in constructs designed to mimic the architecture of globin locus control
regions and downstream globin promoters. Finally, the formation of GATA-1-SP1
complexes was demonstrated in vivo by the ability of Sp1 to recruit GATA-1 to a
promoter in the absence of GATA-binding sites. These experiments provide the
first evidence for functionally important protein-protein interactions involved
in erythroid cell-specific expression and suggest a mechanism by which DNA loops 
between locus control regions and globin promoters (or enhancers) might be formed
or stabilized.

PMCID: PMC230473
PMID: 7739528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Clin Invest. 1995 May;95(5):2346-58.

Differential expression and functional role of GATA-2, NF-E2, and GATA-1 in
normal adult hematopoiesis.

Labbaye C(1), Valtieri M, Barberi T, Meccia E, Masella B, Pelosi E, Condorelli
GL, Testa U, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

We have explored the expression of the transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and 
NF-E2 in purified early hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) induced to gradual 
unilineage erythroid or granulocytic differentiation by growth factor stimulus.
GATA-2 mRNA and protein, already expressed in quiescent HPCs, is rapidly induced 
as early as 3 h after growth factor stimulus, but then declines in advanced
erythroid and granulocytic differentiation and maturation. NF-E2 and GATA-1 mRNAs
and proteins, though not detected in quiescent HPCs, are gradually induced at
24-48 h in both erythroid and granulocytic culture. Beginning at late
differentiation/early maturation stage, both transcription factors are further
accumulated in the erythroid pathway, whereas they are suppressed in the
granulopoietic series. Similarly, the erythropoietin receptor (EpR) is induced
and sustainedly expressed during erythroid differentiation, although beginning at
later times (i.e., day 5), whereas it is barely expressed in the granulopoietic
pathway. In the first series of functional studies, HPCs were treated with
antisense oligomers targeted to transcription factor mRNA: inhibition of GATA-2
expression caused a decreased number of both erythroid and granulocyte-monocytic 
clones, whereas inhibition of NF-E2 or GATA-1 expression induced a selective
impairment of erythroid colony formation. In a second series of functional
studies, HPCs treated with retinoic acid were induced to shift from erythroid to 
granulocytic differentiation (Labbaye et al. 1994. Blood. 83:651-656); this was
coupled with abrogation of GATA-1, NF-E2, and EpR expression and conversely
enhanced GATA-2 levels. These results indicate the expression and key role of
GATA-2 in the early stages of HPC proliferation/differentiation. Conversely,
NF-E2 and GATA-1 expression and function are apparently restricted to erythroid
differentiation and maturation: their expression precedes that of the EpR, and
their function may be in part mediated via the EpR.

PMCID: PMC295853
PMID: 7738198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Blood. 1995 May 1;85(9):2587-97.

Identification of a major positive regulatory element located 5' to the human
zeta-globin gene.

Sabath DE(1), Koehler KM, Yang WQ, Patton K, Stamatoyannopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle 98195,
USA.

The function of the zeta-globin promoter was studied using a series of
zeta-globin promoter deletion constructs to drive luciferase expression in
transiently transfected human erythroleukemia cells. The promoters were used
without enhancers, or with enhancers derived from the beta-globin locus control
region and the alpha-globin HS-40 enhancer. When transfected into K562 cells,
which express zeta-globin, comparable amounts of activity were obtained from the 
-557 and -417 zeta-luciferase constructs and the alpha-luciferase constructs when
no enhancers or the alpha-globin locus enhancers were used. When the constructs
were transfected into OCIM1 cells, which do not express zeta-globin, the
zeta-globin promoters were at best 20% as active as the alpha-globin promoters.
When sequences from -417 to -207 5' to the zeta-globin mRNA cap site were
deleted, up to 95% of the zeta-globin promoter activity was lost in K562 cells.
Reinsertion of these sequences into zeta-luciferase constructs missing the -417
to -207 region showed that the sequences lack classical enhancer activity. Point 
mutation of a GATA-1 site at -230 reduced promoter activity by 37%. Point
mutation of a CCACC site at -240 had no effect. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays indicated that the -230 GATA-1 site has a relatively low affinity for
GATA-1. These experiments show the presence of a strong positive-acting element, 
located between -417 and -207 bp 5' to the zeta-globin mRNA cap site, is
necessary for high-level promoter activity in K562 cells. This element requires
GATA-1 and additional unknown factors for maximal activity.

PMID: 7727787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Exp Med. 1995 May 1;181(5):1603-13.

Expression of c-MYC under the control of GATA-1 regulatory sequences causes
erythroleukemia in transgenic mice.

Skoda RC(1), Tsai SF, Orkin SH, Leder P.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

To study oncogenesis in the erythroid lineage, we have generated transgenic mice 
carrying the human c-MYC proto-oncogene under the control of mouse GATA-1
regulatory sequences. Six transgenic lines expressed the transgene and displayed 
a clear oncogenic phenotype. Of these, five developed an early onset, rapidly
progressive erythroleukemia that resulted in death of the founder animals 30-50 d
after birth. Transgenic progeny of the sixth founder, while also expressing the
transgene, remained asymptomatic for more than 8 mo, whereupon members of this
line began to develop late onset erythroleukemia. The primary leukemic cells were
transplantable into nude mice and syngeneic hosts. Cell lines were established
from five of the six leukemic animals and these lines, designated
erythroleukemia/c-MYC (EMY), displayed proerythroblast morphology and expressed
markers characteristic of the erythroid lineage, including the erythropoietin
receptor and beta-globin. Moreover, they also manifested a limited potential to
differentiate in response to erythropoietin. Studies in the surviving transgenic 
line indicated that, contrary to our expectations, the transgene was not
expressed in the mast cell lineage. That, coupled with the exclusive occurrence
of erythroleukemia in all the transgenic lines, suggests that the GATA-1 promoter
construct we have used includes regulatory sequences necessary for in vivo
erythroid expression only. Additional sequences would appear to be required for
expression in mast cells. Further, our results show that c-MYC can efficiently
transform erythroid precursors if expressed at a vulnerable stage of their
development.

PMCID: PMC2191979
PMID: 7722440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Blood. 1995 Apr 1;85(7):1805-14.

A new congenital dysmegakaryopoietic thrombocytopenia (Paris-Trousseau)
associated with giant platelet alpha-granules and chromosome 11 deletion at
11q23.

Breton-Gorius J(1), Favier R, Guichard J, Cherif D, Berger R, Debili N,
Vainchenker W, Douay L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Comment in
    Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4915-6.

This study characterizes a new congenital thrombocytopenia with mild hemorrhagic 
tendency occurring in a woman and her child with the following features. We found
a deletion of the distal part of one chromosome 11 [del(11)q23.3-->qter] that was
detected by cytogenetic analysis and confirmed by chromosome painting in the two 
patients and also an increased number of bone marrow megakaryocytes (MKs),
including numerous micromegakaryocytes (mMKs) associated with a normal platelet
life span. A normal number of MK colonies in culture was observed with one third 
of them containing a few large MKs; however, these were always associated with
mMKs identified by immunologic staining. A massive cell lysis was observed at the
end of the maturation. Fifteen percent of the platelets in the peripheral blood
showed giant alpha-granules resulting from the fusion of alpha-granules. These
giant granules, which appeared in red on giemsa stain, had a mean diameter of 1.5
microns and showed all markers (detected at electron microscopy by immunogold
method) of matrix and alpha-granule membrane, ie, von Willebrand factor,
fibrinogen, CD41, CD62P (P-selectin); however, they differed from lysosomes
because acid phosphatases were not present. These giant alpha-granules were
unable to release their contents after stimulation by thrombin, in contrast to
platelets with normal morphology. Abnormalities in bone marrow MK maturation that
were detected at the electron microscopic level and that led to lysis of numerous
MKs were responsible for thrombocytopenia and were similar in both patients. MK
abnormalities are probably the consequence of the chromosome aberration. ETS 1
and FLI, two proto-oncogenes that appear to be essential with GATA1 for the
normal expression of MK-specific genes, map to 11q23-q24 and are, thus, deleted
in this thrombocytopenia. In conclusion, the association of all these
abnormalities constitutes a new familial platelet disorder and may present a
valuable model for exploring the role of some genes involved in the regulation of
thrombopoiesis.

PMID: 7703487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mamm Genome. 1995 Apr;6(4):291-4.

Genetic analyses of tattered, an X-linked dominant, developmental mouse mutation.

Merrell K(1), Gonzales JC, Wells S, Calame K, Herman GE.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Program in Molecular Biology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

Tattered (Td) is an X-linked dominant mouse mutation that causes prenatal
lethality in affected males. To map the locus, we analyzed 199 normal male and
affected female progeny from a backcross of Td and Mus castaneus. Pedigree
analysis of these animals suggests a gene order of cen-DXWas70-(Td, DXMit26,
Gata1, Tcfe3)-(Cybb, Otc)-tel, where Tcfe3 is a transcription factor homologous
to a gene involved in the murine microphthalmia (mi) mutation [Hodgkinson et al. 
Cell 74, 395-404, 1993]. To evaluate Tcfe3 as a candidate for Td, heterozygous
tattered females were crossed to xid males to obtain females in which > 95% of B 
cells expressed genes solely from the Td X Chromosome (Chr). Fluorescent
activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis and Western blotting of isolated
splenocytes from Td/xid double heterozygotes rule out Tcfe3 as a likely candidate
for the Td mutation.

PMID: 7613037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 24;270(12):6619-27.

Erythropoietin-induced transcription at the murine beta maj-globin promoter. A
central role for GATA-1.

Taxman DJ(1), Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park 16802.

Using J2E cells and the murine beta maj-globin promoter as a model, we have
performed the first direct analyses of erythropoietin (EPO)-activated
transcription from defined templates. The -346 to +26 beta maj promoter was shown
to comprise a target for maximal activation. This included a positive role for a 
-346 to -107-base pair (bp) domain in J2E cells, but not in F-MEL cells.
Mutagenesis of a -215-bp AGATAA element within this domain showed that this
effect did not require GATA-1 binding. In contrast, a critical role for GATA-1 at
a -60-bp (G)GATAG element was defined by mutagenesis (GGg-TAG and TGATAG),
complementation with a synthetic TGATAA element, and the demonstrated specific
binding of GATA-1. Proximal CCAAT (-75) and CACCC (-90) elements also were shown 
to contribute to transcriptional activation in J2E cells, yet exerted
quantitatively distinct effects in the F-MEL system. Based on these results,
minimal [TGATAA]4-TATA and TGATAA-CACCC-TATA promoters were constructed and
assayed in each system. Remarkably, the [TGATAA]4-TATA promoter, but not the
TGATAA-CACCC-TATA promoter, was induced efficiently by EPO in J2E cells, whereas 
the TGATAA-CACCC-TATA promoter was highly induced by Me2SO in F-MEL cells. These 
findings suggest that mechanisms of EPO-induced transcription in J2E cells
involve GATA-1 and differ from chemically activated mechanisms studied previously
in F-MEL cells. Globin induction in J2E cells was not associated with effects of 
EPO on levels or nuclear translocation of GATA-1. However, hemoglobinization was 
induced by okadaic acid, 8-Br-cAMP, and forskolin, a finding consistent with
induction mechanisms that may involve modulated serine/threonine phosphorylation.

PMID: 7896801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cell. 1995 Mar 24;80(6):847-57.

The CONSTANS gene of Arabidopsis promotes flowering and encodes a protein showing
similarities to zinc finger transcription factors.

Putterill J(1), Robson F, Lee K, Simon R, Coupland G.

Author information: 
(1)John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Colney, England.

The vegetative and reproductive (flowering) phases of Arabidopsis development are
clearly separated. The onset of flowering is promoted by long photoperiods, but
the constans (co) mutant flowers later than wild type under these conditions. The
CO gene was isolated, and two zinc fingers that show a similar spacing of
cysteines, but little direct homology, to members of the GATA1 family were
identified in the amino acid sequence. co mutations were shown to affect amino
acids that are conserved in both fingers. Some transgenic plants containing extra
copies of CO flowered earlier than wild type, suggesting that CO activity is
limiting on flowering time. Double mutants were constructed containing co and
mutations affecting gibberellic acid responses, meristem identity, or phytochrome
function, and their phenotypes suggested a model for the role of CO in promoting 
flowering.

PMID: 7697715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 17;270(11):5944-9.

GATA-1 transactivates the WT1 hematopoietic specific enhancer.

Wu Y(1), Fraizer GC, Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

The Wilms' tumor gene, WT1, is believed to play a role in hematopoiesis as it is 
expressed in the spleen and in immature leukemias in addition to the developing
genitourinary system. WT1 is down-regulated in differentiated leukemia cells both
in vivo and in vitro and is up-regulated in fetal spleen and immature leukemia
cells. The modulation of WT1 expression was examined in many cell types, and a
hematopoietic-specific enhancer element has been identified. Here we describe the
transcriptional response of this enhancer to hematopoietic-specific transcription
factors. We found co-expression of WT1 and GATA-1 mRNA in K562 cells and in mouse
spleen, suggesting potential interactions between these two transcription
factors. We find that the activity of the 3' WT1 enhancer is positively
correlated with the expression of GATA-1. Gel shift competition experiments and
transactivation studies revealed that this functional activity is mediated via
binding at a GATA-binding site in the WT1 enhancer. The transactivation of the
WT1 enhancer by GATA-1 implies that GATA-1 plays a role in the regulation of WT1 
during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 7890725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4544-50.

Transcription factor GATA-1 regulates human HOXB2 gene expression in erythroid
cells.

Vieille-Grosjean I(1), Huber P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, unité 217, Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Structurale, Centre 
d'Etudes Nucléaires, Grenoble, France.

The human HOXB2 gene is a member of the vertebrate Hox gene family that contains 
genes coding for specific developmental stage DNA-binding proteins. Remarkably,
within the hematopoietic compartment, genes of the HOXB complex are expressed
specifically in erythromegakaryocytic cell lines and, for some of them, in
hematopoietic progenitors. Here, we report the study of HOXB2 gene
transcriptional regulation in hematopoietic cells, an initial step in
understanding the lineage-specific expression of the whole HOXB complex in these 
cells. We have isolated the HOXB2 5'-flanking sequence and have characterized a
promoter fragment extending 323 base pairs upstream from the transcriptional
start site, which, in transfection experiments, was sufficient to direct the
tissue-specific expression of HOXB2 in the erythroid cell line K562. In this
fragment, we have identified a potential GATA-binding site that is essential to
the promoter activity as demonstrated by point mutation experiments. Gel shift
analysis revealed the formation of a specific complex in both erythroleukemic
lines K562 and HEL that could be prevented by the addition of a specific
antiserum raised against GATA-1 protein. These findings suggest a regulatory
hierarchy in which GATA-1 is upstream of the HOXB2 gene in erythroid cells.

PMID: 7876223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mol Med. 1995 Mar;1(3):297-305.

Hemoglobin switching in humans is accompanied by changes in the ratio of the
transcription factors, GATA-1 and SP1.

Bacon ER(1), Dalyot N, Filon D, Schreiber L, Rachmilewitz EA, Oppenheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the mechanism of developmental regulation of hemoglobin
switching has scientific as well as clinical relevance because of the influence
of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production in adulthood on the clinical manifestation
of thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. We have previously found that the normal
developmental patterns of globin gene expression are recapitulated in an
experimental system of primary cultures that support differentiation of erythroid
progenitors. We further found that high activities of the transcriptional
activators, GATA-1 and SP1, are associated with normal adult erythroid
differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present work, we have studied, the activities of
GATA-1 and SP1 during differentiation of cultured erythroid progenitors derived
from cord blood and from fetal livers, as well as from beta zero-thalassemia
patients.
RESULTS: The results showed high GATA-1 binding activity and very low SP1
activity in the fetal liver cultures. This pattern was in contrast to cultures
derived from normal adult peripheral blood, in which both GATA-1 and SP1
activities were high. Cord blood cultures showed an additive combination of
"adult" and "fetal" patterns. The progenitors derived from a beta
zero-thalassemia patient with high HbF production showed "fetal" pattern. On the 
other hand, in cultures of 2 beta zero-thalassemia patients without high HbF,
"adult" pattern was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present work, we show that human fetal and adult erythroid
progenitors are distinct in their transcription factors, and that the commitment 
to fetal or adult program occurs at a very early differentiation stage. Our
studies also demonstrate that under anemic stress, recruitment of fetal
progenitors may occur in adulthood.

PMCID: PMC2229915
PMID: 8529108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Biol Chem Hoppe Seyler. 1995 Mar;376(3):187-93.

DNA-protein binding studies in the 5' flanking region of rat proacrosin gene
which is transcribed in diploid germ cells.

Kremling H(1), Nayernia K, Nieter S, Bunkowski S, Engel W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany.

The proacrosin gene is transcribed in diploid spermatogenic cells and translated 
in haploid round spermatids. In order to evaluate sequences which are involved in
proacrosin gene transcription, DNA-protein interactions were analyzed in 1.2 kb
of the 5'flanking region of the rat gene. 13 protein binding sites were
identified by DNase I footprinting using nuclear extracts from rat testis and
brain, respectively. Five footprints (F1, F3, F7, TS2, TS3) which suggest an
interaction with testis specific nuclear factors were further examined by gel
retardation assays. Three testis specific binding sites (F1, F7, TS2, located
472bp, 697bp and 1004bp upstream of ATG, respectively) could be identified with
both methods. The binding site F1 contains a motif which is similar to a testis
specific footprint found in mouse protamine 1 gene. The nucleotide sequence of F7
contains the recognition motif of an isoform of the transcription factor GATA1,
which is expressed in testis. Furthermore F1 and F7 are located in that part of
the 5'flanking region of the proacrosin gene, which can direct proacrosin gene
expression in germ cells of male transgenic mice.

PMID: 7612195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Oncogene. 1995 Feb 16;10(4):631-9.

Regulation of lineage restricted haemopoietic transcription factors in cell
hybrids.

Murrell AM(1), Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, MRC Centre, UK.

SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 encode lineage restricted haemopoietic
transcription factors. We have previously shown that SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2 are
expressed in multipotent progenitors prior to lineage commitment, but are
down-regulated during granulocyte/monocyte differentiation. The phenomenon of
gene extinction in cell hybrids may reveal negative regulatory mechanisms
operating during normal differentiation. We have therefore analysed the
regulation of SCL, GATA-1, GATA-2 and GATA-3 in cell hybrids formed by the fusion
of cell lines representing different haemopoietic lineages. Expression of GATA-3 
was extinguished in both human and murine erythroid x T cell hybrids, an
observation which suggests that erythroid cells contain factors capable of
repressing GATA-3 expression. By contrast expression of SCL, GATA-1 and GATA-2
was not extinguished in erythroid x T or in erythroid x B cell hybrids. These
data suggest that T cells and B cells do not contain trans-acting factors capable
of down-regulating expression of SCL, GATA-1 or GATA-2, and therefore raise the
possibility that a 'hit and run' mechanism may repress these genes during normal 
haemopoiesis. HpaII sites within the SCL promoter were unmethylated in erythroid 
cells but methylated in T cells. Erythroid x T and erythroid x B cell hybrids
contained both methylated and unmethylated SCL promoters, thus implicating a
heritable cis-acting mechanism in the regulation of the SCL gene in lymphoid cell
lines. These results provide the first analysis of SCL and GATA gene regulation
in stable cell hybrids.

PMID: 7862440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. EMBO J. 1995 Feb 15;14(4):801-9.

GATA1 and YY1 are developmental repressors of the human epsilon-globin gene.

Raich N(1), Clegg CH, Grofti J, Roméo PH, Stamatoyannopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

The human epsilon-globin gene is transcribed in erythroid cells only during the
embryonic stages of development. Expression of epsilon-globin gene, however, can 
be maintained in adult transgenic mice following removal of DNA positioned
between -467 and -182 bp upstream of the epsilon-globin cap site. We have
identified three protein binding regions within this silencer; a CCACC motif
around -379, two overlapping motifs for YY1 and GATA around -269 and a GATA motif
around -208 and we have analyzed their function during development by studying
several mutants in transgenic mice. Mutation of the -208 GATA motif allows high
epsilon-globin transgene expression in the adult suggesting that, in addition to 
its positive effects on transcription, GATA-1 also plays a negative role in the
regulation of globin gene expression during development. Repression of epsilon
gene expression in the adult also requires a functional YY1 binding site at
position -269. Finally, mutation of the -379 CCACC site results in a small but
detectable level of epsilon expression in adult erythroid cells. Thus, multiple
proteins, including GATA-1, participate in the formation of the epsilon gene
repressor complex that may disrupt the interaction between the proximal
epsilon-promoter and the locus control region (LCR) in definitive erythroid
cells.

PMCID: PMC398146
PMID: 7882983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):634-41.

The C-terminal zinc finger of GATA-1 or GATA-2 is sufficient to induce
megakaryocytic differentiation of an early myeloid cell line.

Visvader JE(1), Crossley M, Hill J, Orkin SH, Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

The GATA-1 and GATA-2 transcription factors, which each contain two homologous
zinc fingers, are important hematopoietic regulators expressed within the
erythroid, mast cell, and megakaryocytic lineages. Enforced expression of either 
factor in the primitive myeloid line 416B induces megakaryocytic differentiation.
The features of their structure required for this activity have been explored.
The ability of 12 GATA-1 mutants to promote 416B maturation was compared with
their DNA-binding activity and transactivation potential. Differentiation did not
require any of the seven serine residues that are phosphorylated in vivo, an
N-terminal region bearing the major transactivation domain, or a C-terminal
segment beyond the fingers. Removal of a consensus nuclear localization signal
following the second finger did not block differentiation or nuclear
translocation. The N-terminal finger was also dispensable, although its removal
attenuated differentiation. In contrast, the C-terminal finger was essential,
underscoring its distinct function. Remarkably, only 69 residues spanning the
C-terminal finger were required to induce limited megakaryocytic differentiation.
Analysis of three GATA-2 mutants led to the same conclusion. Endogenous GATA-1
mRNA was induced by most mutants and may contribute to differentiation. Because
the GATA-1 C-terminal finger could bind its target site but not transactivate a
minimal reporter, it may direct megakaryocytic maturation by derepressing
specific genes and/or by interacting with another protein which provides the
transactivation function.

PMCID: PMC231921
PMID: 7823932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):626-33.

Rescue of GATA-1-deficient embryonic stem cells by heterologous GATA-binding
proteins.

Blobel GA(1), Simon MC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Totipotent murine embryonic stem (ES) cells can be differentiated in vitro to
form embryoid bodies (EBs) containing hematopoietic cells of multiple lineages,
including erythroid cells. In vitro erythroid development parallels that which is
observed in vivo. ES cells in which the gene for the erythroid transcription
factor GATA-1 has been disrupted fail to produce mature erythroid cells either in
vivo or in vitro. With the EB in vitro differentiation assay, constructs
expressing heterologous GATA-binding proteins were tested for their abilities to 
correct the developmental defect of GATA-1-deficient ES cells. The results
presented here show that the highly divergent chicken GATA-1 can rescue GATA-1
deficiency to an extent similar to that of murine GATA-1 (mGATA-1), as determined
by size and morphology of EBs, presence of red cells, and globin gene expression.
Furthermore, GATA-3 and GATA-4, which are normally expressed in different
tissues, and a protein consisting of the zinc fingers of GATA-1 fused to the
herpes simplex virus VP16 transcription activation domain were able to compensate
for the GATA-1 defect. Chimeric molecules in which both zinc fingers of mGATA-1
were replaced with the zinc fingers of human GATA-3 or with the single finger of 
the fungal GATA factor areA, as well as a construct bearing the zinc finger
region alone, displayed rescue activity. These results suggest that neither the
transcription activation domains of mGATA-1 nor its zinc fingers impart erythroid
cell specificity for its action in vivo. Rather, it appears that specificity is
mediated through the cis-acting control regions which determine spatial and
temporal expression of the GATA-1 gene. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that
the zinc finger region may have a biological function in addition to mediating
DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC231919
PMID: 7823931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. EMBO J. 1995 Jan 3;14(1):106-16.

NF-E2 and GATA binding motifs are required for the formation of DNase I
hypersensitive site 4 of the human beta-globin locus control region.

Stamatoyannopoulos JA(1), Goodwin A, Joyce T, Lowrey CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03756.

The beta-like globin genes require the upstream locus control region (LCR) for
proper expression. The active elements of the LCR coincide with strong
erythroid-specific DNase I-hypersensitive sites (HSs). We have used 5' HS4 as a
model to study the formation of these HSs. Previously, we identified a 101 bp
element that is required for the formation of this HS. This element binds six
proteins in vitro. We now report a mutational analysis of the HS4 HS-forming
element (HSFE). This analysis indicates that binding sites for the hematopoietic 
transcription factors NF-E2 and GATA-1 are required for the formation of the
characteristic chromatin structure of the HS following stable transfection into
murine erythroleukemia cells. Similarly arranged NF-E2 and GATA binding sites are
present in the other HSs of the human LCR, as well as in the homologous mouse and
goat sequences and the chicken beta-globin enhancer. A combination of DNase I and
micrococcal nuclease sensitivity assays indicates that the characteristic
erythroid-specific hypersensitivity of HS4 to DNase I is the result of
tissue-specific alterations in both nucleosome positioning and tertiary DNA
structure.

PMCID: PMC398057
PMID: 7828582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Development. 1995 Jan;121(1):163-72.

Development of hematopoietic cells lacking transcription factor GATA-1.

Pevny L(1), Lin CS, D'Agati V, Simon MC, Orkin SH, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

GATA-1 is a zinc-finger transcription factor believed to play an important role
in gene regulation during the development of erythroid cells, megakaryocytes and 
mast cells. Other members of the GATA family, which can bind to the same DNA
sequence motif, are co-expressed in several of these hemopoietic lineages,
raising the possibility of overlap in function. To examine the specific roles of 
GATA-1 in hematopoietic cell differentiation, we have tested the ability of
embryonic stem cells, carrying a targeted mutation in the X-linked GATA-1 gene,
to contribute to various blood cell types when used to produce chimeric embryos
or mice. Previously, we reported that GATA-1- mutant cells failed to contribute
to the mature red blood cell population, indicating a requirement for this factor
at some point in the erythroid lineage (L. Pevny et al., (1991) Nature 349,
257-260). In this study, we have used in vitro colony assays to identify the
stage at which mutant erythroid cells are affected, and to examine the
requirement for GATA-1 in other lineages. We found that the development of
erythroid progenitors in embryonic yolk sacs was unaffected by the mutation, but 
that the cells failed to mature beyond the proerythroblast stage, an early point 
in terminal differentiation. GATA-1- colonies contained phenotypically normal
macrophages, neutrophils and megakaryocytes, indicating that GATA-1 is not
required for the in vitro differentiation of cells in these lineages. GATA-1-
megakaryocytes were abnormally abundant in chimeric fetal livers, suggesting an
alteration in the kinetics of their formation or turnover. The lack of a block in
terminal megakaryocyte differentiation was shown by the in vivo production of
platelets expressing the ES cell-derived GPI-1C isozyme. The role of GATA-1 in
mast cell differentiation was examined by the isolation of clonal mast cell
cultures from chimeric fetal livers. Mutant and wild-type mast cells displayed
similar growth and histochemical staining properties after culture under
conditions that promote the differentiation of cells resembling mucosal or
serosal mast cells. Thus, the mast and megakaryocyte lineages, in which GATA-1
and GATA-2 are co-expressed, can complete their maturation in the absence of
GATA-1, while erythroid cells, in which GATA-1 is the predominant GATA factor,
are blocked at a relatively early stage of maturation.

PMID: 7867497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Stem Cells. 1995 Jan;13(1):54-64.

A newly established megakaryoblastic/erythroid cell line that differentiates to
red cells in the presence of erythropoietin and produces platelet-like particles.

Tsuyuoka R(1), Takahashi T, Suzuki A, Sasaki Y, Nakamura K, Fukumoto M, Ohmori K,
Ohno Y, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

In August, 1992, we established a leukemic cell line (NS-Meg) from a patient in
megakaryoblastic transformation of Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic
myeloid leukemia. The NS-Meg cells were positive for alpha-naphthyl acetate
esterase and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining and for surface CD4, CD7, CD13, 
CD34, CD41a, and glycophorin A antigens. Ultrastructurally, the cells had
alpha-granules, demarcation membranes, and platelet peroxidase activity. The
NS-Meg cells spontaneously produced platelet-like particles which contained
alpha-granules, mitochondria and dense bodies, strongly suggesting platelet
production. Erythropoietin (Epo), granulocyte/macrophage colony stimulating
factor(GM-CSF), and interleukin 3 (IL-3) promoted the growth of NS-Meg cells.
Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate increased the expression of both CD41a and CD61
antigens. Ten-day exposure to Epo induced mature erythroblasts and red cells.
These benzidine-positive cells were positive for hemoglobin F staining. Untreated
NS-Meg cells expressed mRNA for the Epo receptor (EpoR), for GATA-1, and for
alpha 1, alpha 2 and gamma globin genes. These results indicate that NS-Meg cells
undergo terminal differentiation of both megakaryocytic and erythroid lineages.
This cell line should be a very useful tool for the investigation of both
megakaryocytic and erythroid maturation.

PMID: 7719248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1995;71(3):280-4.

Mapping the X chromosome breakpoint in two papillary renal cell carcinoma cell
lines with a t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2) and the first report of a female case.

Shipley JM(1), Birdsall S, Clark J, Crew J, Gill S, Linehan M, Gnarra J, Fisher
S, Craig IW, Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cytogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Cancer Research, Belmont,
Sutton, Surrey, UK.

A t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2) has been reported in cases of papillary renal cell tumors
arising in males. In this study two cell lines derived from this tumor type have 
been used to indicate the breakpoint region on the X chromosome. Both cell lines 
have the translocation in addition to other rearrangements and one is derived
from the first female case to be reported with the t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has been used to position YACs
belonging to contigs in the Xp11.2 region relative to the breakpoint. When
considered together with detailed mapping information from the Xp11.2 region the 
position of the breakpoint in both cell lines was suggested as follows:
Xpter-->Xp11.23-OATL1-GATA1-WAS-TFE3-SY P-t(X;1)-DXS255-CLCN5-DXS146-OATL2-
Xp11.22-->Xcen. The breakpoint was determined to lie in an uncloned region
between SYP and a YAC called FTDM/1 which extends 1 Mb distal to DXS255. These
results are contrary to the conclusion from previous FISH studies that the
breakpoint was near the OATL2 locus, but are consistent with, and considerably
refine, the position that had been established by molecular analysis.

PMID: 7587394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Dec 11;22(24):5164-72.

Direct analysis of native and chimeric GATA specific DNA binding proteins from
Aspergillus nidulans.

Peters DG(1), Caddick MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Donnan Laboratories, University of
Liverpool, UK.

In Aspergillus nidulans the regulatory gene areA is responsible for mediating
nitrogen metabolite repression. The areA product (AREA) represents an example of 
the GATA family of DNA binding proteins, which are characterised by the presence 
of a GATA domain consisting of a zinc finger within a highly conserved region of 
52 amino acids. Among the other transcription factors included in this family is 
the principal erythroid transcription factor, GATA-1, which contains two GATA
domains. In order to demonstrate high specificity binding of native AREA to DNA
containing the sequence -GATA-, and investigate the presence in A.nidulans of
other proteins with related specificities, we have used gel mobility shift
assays. Both AREA-dependent and independent complexes have been identified. Two
strains bearing chimeric genes were also characterised. In these, the region
encoding the native GATA domain of AREA was replaced by sequences from murine
GATA-1 cDNA encoding either the equivalent C-terminal domain or both the N and
C-terminal domains. Strains bearing the areA::NC-GATA construct, which includes
the sequence encoding both the N and C-terminal domains of GATA-1, leads to a
pronounced increase in one of two AREA-dependent complexes and implicates the
N-terminal domain of GATA-1 in mediating protein-protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC332055
PMID: 7816601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 9;269(49):30789-97.

A single promoter directs both housekeeping and erythroid preferential expression
of the human ferrochelatase gene.

Tugores A(1), Magness ST, Brenner DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599-7080.

We have isolated and characterized the 5'-flanking region of the gene for human
ferrochelatase (HFC), the last enzyme of the heme biosynthetic pathway. The
proximal promoter of the gene is contained within a region that structurally
resembles a CpG island and is devoid of general cis elements such as TATA and
CAAT boxes. Recognition sites for the ubiquitous Sp1 family of transcription
factors, as well as for the erythroid-specific trans-acting factors NF-E2 and
GATA-1 were found, and binding of regulatory proteins to these elements was
analyzed by in vitro DNase I protection assays. The contribution of the various
cis elements to both ubiquitous and erythroid preferential expression of the HFC 
gene was assessed by using transient transfection assays. These showed that a
minimal Sp1-driven promoter devoid of the upstream erythroid-specific elements
was sufficient for erythroid preferential expression of the HFC gene. However,
elimination of a repressor sequence lying between the minimal promoter and the
erythroid-specific elements resulted in high levels of expression in human
erythroleukemic K562 cells only when the cis elements recognized by GATA-1 and
NF-E2 were present, suggesting that the activity of these factors is regulated by
a downstream repressor in erythroid cells.

PMID: 7983009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Protein Expr Purif. 1994 Dec;5(6):587-94.

In vitro transcription of erythroid promoters using baculoviral-expressed human
GATA-1: purification, physicochemistry, and activities.

Taxman DJ(1), Sonsteby SK, Wojchowski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park 16802.

GATA-1 is a cys-2/cys-2 zinc finger transcriptional activator that is required
for erythrocyte development in chimeric mice and contributes to the expression of
all erythroid genes studied to date, including the erythropoietin receptor,
glycophorin B, and porphobilinogen deaminase genes. Transactivation by GATA-1 is 
mediated by either an amino-terminal acidic domain, R1, or an independent
adjacent domain, R2, and may involve the coordinate action of cofactors (NF-E2,
EKLF, and Sp1) which bind adjacent cis-elements. To directly assess mechanisms of
transactivation, we have developed an efficient cell-free transcription system
using recombinant human GATA-1 (rhGATA-1) expressed in SF9 cells. Levels of
baculoviral expression of GATA-1 were > or = 200-fold higher than endogenous
levels in erythroid K562 cells. Factors from each source were essentially
equivalent in molecular weight and DNA binding properties, and highly similar in 
phosphotryptic peptide composition. Notably, DNA binding was inhibited following 
treatment with alkaline phosphatase. In both SF9 and K562 cells, GATA-1 occurred 
largely as heterogeneous multimers, thus complicating its isolation by standard
procedures. However, significant purification of this factor (> or = 100-fold; > 
or = 75% purity) was accomplished via DNA affinity chromatography. In cell-free
assays, this rhGATA-1 was shown to be remarkably active in transactivating model 
erythroid promoters. This work establishes an efficient in vitro system for
direct analyses of mechanisms, cofactors, and functional domains of GATA-1 which 
regulate transcription at defined proximal promoters.

PMID: 7858429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Protein Expr Purif. 1994 Dec;5(6):541-6.

Expression, purification, and functional characterization of the two zinc-finger 
domain of the human GATA-1.

Apezteguia I(1), Calligaris R, Bottardi S, Santoro C.

Author information: 
(1)Interuniversitary Consortium for Biotechnology-National Laboratory, Trieste,
Italy.

The DNA-binding domain of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 consists of
two closely related, but distinct zinc-fingers which are highly conserved among
the members of the growing family of GATA-like factors. The DNA-binding domain of
the human GATA-1 (F1F2) was expressed as a histidine-tagged fusion protein in
Escherichia coli. The denaturated protein was purified by Ni(2+)-chelate affinity
chromatography and renaturated in situ. The active recombinant protein was
purified by DNA affinity chromatography. F1F2 displayed GATA-1 specific binding
activity toward its DNA recognition sequences within the hypersensitive site 3 of
the human locus control region and the human gamma-globin promoter. In contrast
to GATA-1 protein purified from K562 nuclei, the recombinant F1F2 bound also the 
CCAAT-box region of the human gamma-globin promoter.

PMID: 7858422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 4;269(44):27700-4.

Erythropoietin-dependent induction of hemoglobin synthesis in a
cytokine-dependent cell line M-TAT.

Minegishi N(1), Minegishi M, Tsuchiya S, Fujie H, Nagai T, Hayashi N, Yamamoto M,
Konno T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

M-TAT is a cytokine-dependent cell line with the potential to differentiate along
the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. We cultured M-TAT cells long term (> 1
year) in the continuous presence of erythropoietin (EPO), granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), or stem cell factor (SCF). These long term
cultures are referred to as M-TAT/EPO, M-TAT/GM-CSF, and M-TAT/SCF cells,
respectively. Hemoglobin concentration and gamma-globin and erythroid
delta-aminolevulinate synthase mRNA levels were significantly higher in M-TAT/EPO
cells than in M-TAT/GM-CSF cells. When the supplemented cytokine was switched
from GM-CSF to EPO, hemoglobin synthesis in M-TAT/GM-CSF cells increased rapidly 
(within 5 h), and the level of GATA-1 mRNA increased. In contrast, the addition
of GM-CSF to the M-TAT/EPO cell culture decreased the amount of hemoglobin, even 
in the presence of EPO, indicating that the EPO signal for erythroid
differentiation is suppressed by GM-CSF. Thus, erythroid development of M-TAT
cells is promoted by EPO and suppressed by GM-CSF. These results support the
hypothesis that EPO actively influences the programming of gene expression
required for erythroid progenitor cell differentiation.

PMID: 7961690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. FEBS Lett. 1994 Oct 24;353(3):269-72.

Expression of GATA-binding transcription factors in rat hepatocytes.

Matsuda K(1), Kobune Y, Noda C, Ichihara A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Enzyme Research, University of Tokushima, Japan.

Recently, we demonstrated that a DNA-binding protein(s) is involved in
transcriptional repression of the rat serine dehydratase gene in fetal liver.
Here, we report that a GAT(A/T) motif is the target sequence for the DNA-binding 
protein. By screening a fetal liver cDNA library, we isolated a rat homolog of
GATA-1. Rat GATA-1 expressed as a GST-fusion protein in E. coli bound to the
GAT(A/T) motif in the serine dehydratase gene. Northern analysis show that GATA-1
and GATA-4 mRNAs are expressed in fetal hepatocytes.

PMID: 7957872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Oct 18;1219(2):351-60.

Transcriptional activation by hypersensitive site three of the human beta-globin 
locus control region in murine erythroleukemia cells.

Pruzina S(1), Antoniou M, Hurst J, Grosveld F, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

In this paper we describe a complete deletional analysis of hypersensitive site
three (HS3) of the human beta-globin Locus Control Region (LCR). The previously
defined core fragment consists of 6 footprinted regions, with multiple binding
sites for the erythroid-specific factor GATA-1 and G-rich motifs that can
interact with ubiquitous factors such as Sp1 and TEF-2. We show in this paper
that the 5' half of this fragment is the most important for activity in murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. A fragment containing footprints 1-4 can stimulate
transcription of a linked human beta-globin gene to levels of about 40% of that
obtained with footprints 1-6. Constructs containing either footprints 1-3 or 3-6 
cannot be distinguished from the beta-globin gene alone. We further show that
binding sites for the erythroid-specific factor NF-E2 can co-operatively interact
with parts of the HS3 core fragment, and that HS3 requires elements upstream from
-103 in the human beta-globin promoter for full activity. The importance of these
results is discussed in the context of the regulation of the genes in the human
beta-globin cluster.

PMID: 7918632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. EMBO J. 1994 Oct 3;13(19):4577-86.

Immortalization of multipotent growth-factor dependent hemopoietic progenitors
from mice transgenic for GATA-1 driven SV40 tsA58 gene.

Cairns LA(1), Crotta S, Minuzzo M, Moroni E, Granucci F, Nicolis S, Schiró R,
Pozzi L, Giglioni B, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Dip. di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università di Milano, Italy.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is required for the normal development of
erythroid cells. GATA-1 is also expressed in other hemopoietic cells, suggesting 
that it might be initially activated in a multipotent progenitor. To immortalize 
GATA-1-expressing progenitors, we generated mice transgenic for a thermosensitive
SV40 T gene, driven by the GATA-1 promoter-enhancer. Immortalized marrow cells
grow in culture at 32 degrees C but not at 38 degrees C, and are dependent on
erythropoietin (Epo) or interleukin 3 (IL-3). Epo dependent cells express
hemoglobin, high levels of GATA-1, GATA-2 and NF-E2 p45 mRNAs, and are positive
for stem cell antigen 2 (Sca-2) and the early myeloid marker ER-MP12. IL-3
dependent cells can be derived from Epo dependent lines, and are hemoglobin-,
Sca-2- and ER-MP12-negative, have low GATA-1 and NF-E2 p45 mRNA levels, and
express myeloid markers Mac-1, F4/80 and Gr-1. Brief treatment of Epo dependent
cells with myeloid growth factors (plus Epo) leads to the induction of Mac-1,
F4/80 and Gr-1, concomitant with the disappearance from most cells of Sca-2,
ER-MP12 and GATA-1 driven T antigen nuclear expression. Thus, the immortalized
Epo dependent cells have the property of a progenitor capable of differentiation 
towards either the erythroid or myeloid lineages. These cells initiate
transcription of a proportion of GATA-1 RNA molecules at an upstream promoter,
previously known to be expressed only in testis cells.

PMCID: PMC395390
PMID: 7925299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mamm Genome. 1994 Oct;5(10):652-4.

The mouse scurfy (sf) mutation is tightly linked to Gata1 and Tfe3 on the
proximal X chromosome.

Blair PJ(1), Carpenter DA, Godfrey VL, Russell LB, Wilkinson JE, Rinchik EM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tennessee, Oak Ridge Graduate Program of Biomedical Science
37831-8077.

PMID: 7849405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Immunity. 1994 Oct;1(7):571-83.

Immortalized hemopoietic cells with stem cell properties.

Wong PM(1), Han XD, Ruscetti FW, Chung SW.

Author information: 
(1)Morse Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, State University of New York, Brooklyn 11203, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 1994 Oct;1(7):529-31.

We have established a hemopoietic cell line, BL3, that possesses a rearranged
retroviral genome, which we used as a genetic tag for their engraftment into
lethally irradiated mice. Analysis of recipients up to 7 months after engraftment
indicates that the marker was present in differentiated cells of various
hemopoietic organs, in colony-forming cells, pre-CFU-S-forming cells, and in
organs of secondary recipients from bone marrow cells of primary recipients. BL3 
cells are Thy-1+, Sca-1+, B220-, Mac-1-, and Gr-1-. They express GATA-1 and are
able to develop "cobblestones" with stromal cells. They do not express and
respond to several hemopoietic growth factors known to facilitate marrow
recovery. However, they are negatively regulated by TGF beta and can be
stimulated by mitogen-stimulated spleen cell-conditioned medium. We conclude that
BL3 cells possess properties of hemopoietic stem cells, including their
capability to contribute to long-term repopulation.

PMID: 7600286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Oncogene. 1994 Sep;9(9):2623-32.

GATA-and SP1-binding sites are required for the full activity of the
tissue-specific promoter of the tal-1 gene.

Lecointe N(1), Bernard O, Naert K, Joulin V, Larsen CJ, Romeo PH, Mathieu-Mahul
D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 9942, Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, France.

The tal-1 gene, which is frequently activated in human T cell acute leukemias
(T-ALLs), codes for a protein of the basic helix-loop-helix family (b-HLH) and
potentially a transcription factor. In human and murine hematopoiesis tal-1 is
expressed during the differentiation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic and
mastocytic cell lineages. The expression of tal-1 appears to be comodulated with 
that of the transcription factor GATA-1 gene, suggesting that the GATA-1 protein 
may regulate the tal-1 gene activity in these hematopoietic lineages. To get
further insights into the molecular mechanisms that control tal-1 expression, we 
have isolated 5' sequences of the murine gene and compared them to their human
counterparts. The 5' flanking sequences from the two genes show several regions
of high homology. The alignment of both sequences enabled us to predict that
similarly, to the human, the mouse gene contains two alternative first exons (Ia 
and Ib). Remarkably, in both species, the proximal region of the tissue-specific 
exon Ia (i.e. gene segment -122 to +1) contains two GATA-motifs (at -65 and -33) 
and one SP-1 consensus binding site (-59). Mobility shift assays demonstrate that
GATA proteins are able to interact with both GATA-motifs in a sequence specific
fashion, but with different efficiencies. Moreover transfection studies show that
the GATA-1 protein directly mediates tal-1 transcription by interacting with the 
-122/+1 fragment, defined as a minimal promoter in erythroid cells. Mutagenesis
of the promoter establishes that the -33 GATA-binding site present in this
fragment is critical for tal-1 expression in erythroid cells, but by itself does 
not lead to full promoter activity. Indeed, further mutations show that the
second -65 GATA-binding site and the binding motif for SP1 (-59) significantly
contribute to the overall activity of the proximal tal-1 promoter. Altogether,
our data provide evidence that GATA-1 cooperates with the transcription factor
SP1 to mediate the erythroid-specific expression of the tal-1 gene.

PMID: 8058326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 2;91(16):7737-41.

PU.1 and GATA: components of a mast cell-specific interleukin 4 intronic
enhancer.

Henkel G(1), Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Oregon Health Sciences University,
Portland 97201.

Interleukin 4 (IL-4), a critical immunoregulatory cytokine, is produced by a
subset of T lymphocytes and cells of the mast cell/basophil lineage. There are
cell-specific differences in the regulatory elements that control IL-4
transcription in these two cell types. A 683-bp Bgl II fragment, located within
the second intron of the murine IL-4 gene, was previously shown to exhibit mast
cell-specific enhancer activity. To define critical cis-acting elements that
regulate this enhancer, a series of deletions from the 5' and 3' ends of the Bgl 
II fragment were generated. Their effect on enhancer activity was assessed in
IL-4-producing mast cell lines in transient transfection assays. Two functionally
independent subregions, E1 and E2, were defined in this analysis. Both are
required for full enhancer activity. Sequences identical to previously defined
DNA-binding sites for SP1 and GATA are present within E1, and an ets binding site
is located within E2. Although mutation of the SP1 sites had no effect on
enhancer function, alteration of either the GATA or ets site reduced enhancer
activity by 50-60%. Proteins that associate with the IL-4 intronic GATA and ets
sites were detected in mast cell nuclear extracts by mobility-shift assays.
Specific antibodies identified these factors as GATA-1 and GATA-2 and the ets
family member PU.1. GATA-1, GATA-2, and PU.1 exhibit cell-specific expression,
suggesting that these proteins play a critical role in the lineage-restricted
activity of the IL-4 intronic enhancer in mast cells.

PMCID: PMC44477
PMID: 8052653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1994 Aug;34(1):85-92.

Effects of the antisense myb expression on hemin- and erythropoietin-induced
erythroid differentiation of K562 cells.

Kamano H(1), Tanaka T, Ohnishi H, Kubota Y, Ikeda K, Takahara J, Irino S,
Ottalenghi S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kagawa Medical School, Japan.

In order to elucidate the role of c-myb gene in erythroid differentiation of K562
cell induced by hemin (Hm) and erythropoietin (Epo), we constructed recombinant
plasmid that could produce antisense myb RNA after induction with dexamethasone. 
During treatment with Hm, K562 cells constitutively expressed c-myb mRNA, and 50%
of them began to synthesize hemoglobin (Hb). Expression of antisense myb RNA
reduced the amount of c-myb mRNA, and the percentage of Hb-synthesizing cells was
decreased to 20%. In the presence of Epo, c-myb mRNA declined and 20% of K562
cells synthesized Hb regardless of antisense myb RNA expression. It is suggested 
that constitutive expression of c-myb mRNA is necessary for Hm-induced
differentiation, and that a decrease in the amount of c-myb mRNA induced by
antisense myb RNA expression suppresses Hm-induced differentiation. The amount of
c-myb mRNA in K562 cells was reduced during the differentiation induced by Epo.
Expression of GATA-1 mRNA was almost constant during Hm-induced differentiation, 
but increased during Epo treatment. It is supposed that the mechanism of
Hm-induced differentiation is distinguished from that of Epo-induced
differentiation in K562 cells.

PMID: 7849628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Leukemia. 1994 Jul;8(7):1176-80.

GATA-1, GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia gene expression in acute myeloid leukemia.

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki JH, Ohyashiki K, Kawakubo K, Kimura N, Nakazawa S,
Toyama K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College, Japan.

Transcription factors play an important role in the normal developmental process 
of hematopoietic cells. However, expression of transcription factors and its
implication in various human leukemias is not well understood. We have studied
GATA-1, GATA-2, and stem cell leukemia (SCL) gene expression in 30 patients with 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by the reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction assay. In AML both GATA-1 and SCL genes were commonly expressed in M6
and M7 leukemias, and also in leukemias bearing the platelet-associated antigen. 
We found some AML patients with GATA-1, but not SCL expression. Most CD7+ AML and
t(8;21)(q22;q22)-AML were included in this group, which often demonstrated
immunoglobulin heavy chain and/or T-cell receptor gene rearrangements.
Consequently, GATA-1+ SCL- AML may originate from early myeloid progenitors.
Moreover, most AML patients of the M3, M4, or M5 groups were GATA-1- SCL-. Our
data suggest that the expression pattern of transcription factors may help to
define distinct phenotypes of AML cells.

PMID: 8035609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Development. 1994 Jul;120(7):1759-66.

Developmental stage- and spermatogenic cycle-specific expression of transcription
factor GATA-1 in mouse Sertoli cells.

Yomogida K(1), Ohtani H, Harigae H, Ito E, Nishimune Y, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Japan.

GATA-1 is an essential factor for the transcriptional activation of
erythroid-specific genes, and is also abundantly expressed in a discrete subset
of cells bordering the seminiferous epithelium in tubules of the murine testis.
In examining normal and germ-line defective mutant mice, we show here that GATA-1
is expressed only in the Sertoli cell lineage in mouse testis. GATA-1 expression 
in Sertoli cells is induced concomitantly with the first wave of spermatogenesis,
and GATA-1-positive cells are uniformly distributed among all tubules during
prepubertal testis development. However, the number of GATA-1-positive cells
declines thereafter and were found only in the peripheral zone of seminiferous
tubules in stages VII, VIII and IX of spermatogenesis in the adult mouse testis. 
In contrast, virtually every Sertoli cell in mutant W/Wv, jsd/jsd or cryptorchid 
mice (all of which lack significant numbers of germ cells) expresses GATA-1, thus
showing that the expression of this transcription factor is negatively controlled
by the maturing germ cells. These observations suggest that transcription factor 
GATA-1 is a developmental stage- and spermatogenic cycle-specific regulator of
gene expression in Sertoli cells.

PMID: 7924983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 17;269(24):16589-96.

Phosphorylation of the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1.

Crossley M(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

GATA-1 is a zinc finger DNA-binding protein thought to be involved in the
expression of the vast majority of erythroid specific genes. We have examined the
phosphorylation of GATA-1 in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells and have mapped
the sites of phosphorylation by overexpression of GATA-1 in monkey kidney COS
cells. We show that GATA-1 is phosphorylated on 6 serines within its amino
terminus in uninduced MEL cells and that a 7th site, serine 310, becomes
phosphorylated after MEL cells are induced to differentiate by exposure to
dimethyl sulfoxide. This site lies near the carboxyl boundary of the DNA-binding 
domain in a conserved region of the protein believed to be involved in DNA
bending. Detailed analyses indicate, however, that phosphorylation at this site, 
or the other sites identified, does not significantly influence DNA-binding
affinity or specificity, DNA bending, or transcriptional transactivation by
GATA-1.

PMID: 8206977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 3;269(22):15440-4.

Regulation of the erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF) gene promoter by the
erythroid transcription factor GATA-1.

Crossley M(1), Tsang AP, Bieker JJ, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

Erythroid Kruppel-like factor (EKLF) is an erythroid-specific transcription
factor that binds a CACCC motif found in the human beta-globin gene promoter. We 
have studied the promoter of the EKLF gene and identified binding sites for the
transcription factors GATA-1 and CCAAT-binding Protein 1 (CP1). We show that both
types of binding sites are required for full activity, and that the GATA motif at
-60 is essential. The EKLF promoter can be directly activated in nonerythroid
cells in cotransfection experiments by forced expression of GATA-1. These results
suggest that EKLF is dependent on GATA-1 for its expression and lies downstream
of, or coincident with, GATA-1 in a regulatory hierarchy in erythroid
development.

PMID: 8195185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Leukemia. 1994 Jun;8(6):1034-8.

Expression of GATA-1 mRNA in human myeloid leukemic cells.

Guerrasio A(1), Saglio G, Rosso C, Alfarano A, Camaschella C, Lo Coco F, Biondi
A, Rambaldi A, Nicolis S, Ottolenghi S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Oncologia Umana, Università di Torino,
Italy.

Expression of the transcription factor GATA-1, which regulates several erythroid 
specific genes and possibly also some megakaryocytic genes, has been previously
detected in normal erythroblasts, megakaryocytes, and basophils, and in some
myeloid cell lines. It has been suggested that GATA-1 may be first expressed in a
common progenitor and then further activated during erythroid-megakaryocytic and 
basophilic differentiation and repressed during myeloid maturation. We
investigated GATA-1 mRNA expression in highly purified leukemic blasts
representing different lineages and stages of myeloid differentiation and in a
recently established leukemic cell line, GF-D8, which exhibits morphological,
cytochemical and immunophenotypic characteristics of early myeloid progenitor
cells. We found GATA-1 expression in five of five myeloid and in one
megakaryocytic blast crisis of CML, in four of six cases of myelomonocytic
leukemias (M4 according to FAB classification), in one case of erythroleukemia
(M6), whereas lymphoid blast crisis of CML and all other FAB groups were
completely negative. In addition, a low level of GATA-1 mRNA was also expressed
by the GF-D8 cell line. These data further support the hypothesis that GATA-1
expression may occur not only in erythroid and megakaryocytic progenitors, but
also in early myeloid progenitors, and then be further regulated during
lineage-specific maturation.

PMID: 8207977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Genomics. 1994 May 15;21(2):431-3.

Localization and characterization of the mouse alpha-globin locus control region.

Kielman MF(1), Smits R, Bernini LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

The control of the expression of the alpha- and beta-globin gene clusters is
effected by sequences called locus control regions (LCRs). Detailed analysis of
these elements is therefore essential to the understanding of the complex
mechanisms of globin gene regulation. In this paper we describe the
characterization of the mouse alpha-globin LCR. This element is localized 26 kb
upstream of the mouse embryonic globin gene (Hba-x) and is highly conserved at
the protein binding sites. However, three of four CACC boxes and one GATA-1
binding site, identified in the human alpha-LCR, are not conserved in the mouse. 
Interestingly, we identified a highly conserved putative transcription factor
binding sequence (AAAGG) that may play an important role in LCR function. The
identification of the mouse alpha-LCR makes it now possible to analyze this
element in its natural environment and will certainly contribute to the
understanding of the alpha-globin gene expression.

PMID: 8088839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Genes Dev. 1994 May 15;8(10):1184-97.

Novel insights into erythroid development revealed through in vitro
differentiation of GATA-1 embryonic stem cells.

Weiss MJ(1), Keller G, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells lacking the transcription factor GATA-1 do not
produce mature red blood cells either in vivo or in vitro. To define the
consequences of GATA-1 loss more precisely, we used an in vitro ES cell
differentiation assay that permits enumeration of primitive (EryP) and definitive
(EryD) erythroid precursors and recovery of pure erythroid colonies. In contrast 
to normal ES cells, GATA-1- ES cells fail to generate EryP precursors. EryD
precursors, however, are normal in number but undergo developmental arrest and
death at the proerythroblast stage. Contrary to initial expectations, arrested
GATA-1(-)-definitive proerythroblasts express GATA target genes at normal levels.
Transcripts of the related factor GATA-2 are remarkably elevated in GATA-1-
proerythroblasts. These findings imply substantial interchangeability of GATA
factors in vivo and suggest that GATA-1 normally serves to repress GATA-2 during 
erythropoiesis. The approach used here is a paradigm for the phenotypic analysis 
of targeted mutations affecting hematopoietic development.

PMID: 7926723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3108-14.

Positive regulators of the lineage-specific transcription factor GATA-1 in
differentiating erythroid cells.

Baron MH(1), Farrington SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-1 is a major regulator of gene
expression in erythroid, megakaryocyte, and mast cell lineages. GATA-1 binds to
WGATAR consensus motifs in the regulatory regions of virtually all erythroid
cell-specific genes. Analyses with cultured cells and cell-free systems have
provided strong evidence that GATA-1 is involved in control of globin gene
expression during erythroid differentiation. Targeted mutagenesis of the GATA-1
gene in embryonic stem cells has demonstrated its requirement in normal erythroid
development. Efficient rescue of the defect requires an intact GATA element in
the distal promoter, suggesting autoregulatory control of GATA-1 transcription.
To examine whether GATA-1 expression involves additional regulatory factors or is
maintained entirely by an autoregulatory loop, we have used a transient
heterokaryon system to test the ability of erythroid factors to activate the
GATA-1 gene in nonerythroid nuclei. We show here that proerythroblasts and mature
erythroid cells contain a diffusible activity (TAG) capable of transcriptional
activation of GATA-1 and that this activity decreases during the terminal
differentiation of erythroid cells. Nuclei from GATA-1- mutant embryonic stem
cells can still be reprogrammed to express their globin genes in erythroid
heterokaryons, indicating that de novo induction of GATA-1 is not required for
globin gene activation following cell fusion.

PMCID: PMC358678
PMID: 8164666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Genomics. 1994 May 1;21(1):1-6.

Structure and expression of the human GATA3 gene.

Labastie MC(1), Bories D, Chabret C, Grégoire JM, Chrétien S, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

GATA3, a member of the GATA family that is abundantly expressed in the
T-lymphocyte lineage, is thought to participate in T-cell receptor gene
activation through binding to enhancers. To understand GATA3 gene regulation, we 
cloned the human gene and the 5' end of the mouse GATA3 gene. We show that the
human GATA3 gene contains six exons distributed over 17 kb of DNA. The two human 
GATA3 zinc fingers are encoded by two separate exons highly conserved with those 
of GATA1, but no other structural homologies between these two genes can be
found. The human and mouse GATA3 transcription units start at a major initiation 
site. The promoter sequence analysis of these two genes revealed that they are
embedded within a CpG island and share structural features often found in the
promoters of housekeeping genes. Finally, we show that a DNA fragment containing 
the human GATA3 transcription unit, 3 kb upstream from the initiation site and 4 
kb downstream from the polyadenylation site, displays T-cell specificity.

PMID: 8088776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1994 Apr 15;718:359-61.

GATA-1-independent regulation of the expression of the erythropoietin receptor
(EPO-R) gene in a human EPO-dependent cell line, UT-7 EPO.

Migliaccio AR(1), Jiang Y, Migliaccio G, Nicolis S, Crotta S, Ronchi A,
Ottolenghi S, Adamson JW.

Author information: 
(1)New York Blood Center, New York 10021.

PMID: 8185247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1994 Apr 15;718:245-54; discussion 254-6.

Activation of GATA-1 and EPO receptor genes by a leukemia-inducing retrovirus.

Ruscetti SK(1), Aurigemma RE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer 
Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201.

PMID: 8185231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 25;22(6):1006-11.

Multiple elements in human beta-globin locus control region 5' HS 2 are involved 
in enhancer activity and position-independent, transgene expression.

Caterina JJ(1), Ciavatta DJ, Donze D, Behringer RR, Townes TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of Alabama at Birmingham 35294.

The human beta-globin Locus Control Region (LCR) has two important activities.
First, the LCR opens a 200 kb chromosomal domain containing the human epsilon-,
gamma- and beta-globin genes and, secondly, these sequences function as a
powerful enhancer of epsilon-, gamma- and beta-globin gene expression.
Erythroid-specific, DNase I hypersensitive sites (HS) mark sequences that are
critical for LCR activity. Previous experiments demonstrated that a 1.9 kb
fragment containing the 5' HS 2 site confers position-independent expression in
transgenic mice and enhances human beta-globin gene expression 100-fold. Further 
analysis of this region demonstrates that multiple sequences are required for
maximal enhancer activity; deletion of SP1, NF-E2, GATA-1 or USF binding sites
significantly decrease beta-globin gene expression. In contrast, no single site
is required for position-independent transgene expression; all mice with
site-specific mutations in 5' HS 2 express human beta-globin mRNA regardless of
the site of transgene integration. Apparently, multiple combinations of protein
binding sites in 5' HS 2 are sufficient to prevent chromosomal position effects
that inhibit transgene expression.

PMCID: PMC307922
PMID: 8152905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Biol Chem. 1994 Mar 18;269(11):8287-95.

Genomic footprinting and sequencing of human beta-globin locus. Tissue
specificity and cell line artifact.

Reddy PM(1), Stamatoyannopoulos G, Papayannopoulou T, Shen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Davis 95616.

In order to gain further insights of the regulatory mechanisms of human beta-like
globin gene switch during erythroid development, we have studied protein-DNA
interaction in vivo at the human adult beta and fetal gamma globin promoters and 
their upstream enhancer, 5'HS-2, in purified human adult erythroblasts, in which 
the beta, but not gamma or epsilon, globin gene is actively transcribing. This
genomic footprinting analysis of adult erythroblasts was carried out in
conjunction with those of different non-erythroid human tissues, an
embryonic/fetal erythroid cell line K562, and several non-erythroid human cell
lines. Protein-DNA binding in the beta globin promoter, in particular at the two 
CACC promoter boxes and the CCAAT box, is detectable only in the adult
erythroblasts. As expected, the gamma globin promoters were bound with specific
nuclear factors in the expressing K562 cells, but not in non-erythroid tissues or
cell lines. Relatively weak protein binding could also be detected in the
vicinities of the two CCAAT boxes of the inactive gamma globin promoters in the
adult erythroblasts. Although the patterns of nuclear factor-DNA interaction in
vivo at the NF-E2/AP1, GATA-1, and GT-I motifs of 5'HS-2 enhancer in adult
erythroblasts are similar to those in K562 cells, we have identified a previously
undetected factor-binding motif of 5'HS-2 that is protected only in the adult
erythroblasts. This motif is identical in sequence to the 3'-CACC box of the
human beta globin promoter, and it is well conserved at the same location among
all mammalian 5'HS-2 enhancers, suggesting an important regulatory role of this
element in human beta globin gene transcription in adult erythroblasts. All of
the above four motifs of 5'HS-2 are free of nuclear factor binding in
non-erythroid tissues, but two of them, NF-E2/AP1 and GT-I, are bound with
factors in some non-erythroid cell lines but not in others. The functional
implications of these genomic footprinting data and the tissue-specific CpG
methylation patterns of the beta-like globin promoters we obtained by genomic
sequencing are discussed in terms of positive and negative regulation of the
human beta-like globin switch during erythroid development.

PMID: 8132552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Blood. 1994 Mar 1;83(5):1428-35.

Further characterization of cis-acting regulatory sequences in the genomic locus 
of the murine erythropoietin receptor: evidence for stage-specific regulation.

Youssoufian H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

Expression of the murine erythropoietin receptor (EpoR) gene was investigated in 
progenitor cell lines representing distinct stages of hematopoietic
differentiation. In murine erythroid cell lines, the EpoR mRNA level was fivefold
higher in the more mature murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells than in CB-5 cells
and very low in granulocyte/macrophage-like FDC-P1 cells. GATA-1 mRNA was present
in equivalent levels in both erythroid cell lines, but at a low level in FDC-P1
cells. To account for the elevated levels of EpoR mRNA, the activity of the
promoter and expression of DNase I hypersensitive sites were assessed as markers 
of transcriptional activity in various cell lines. Among a series of 5' flanking 
restriction fragments linked to a reporter gene, a 83-bp fragment that includes
binding sites for the transcription factors GATA-1 and Sp-1 gave low levels of
erythroid-specific activity, and a 256-bp fragment that includes, in addition,
two sites for the putative CACCC-binding protein gave the highest level of
erythroid-specific transcription. DNase I footprinting showed binding of a
constitutive factor to the proximal CACCC-binding site, and deletion or mutation 
of this site significantly reduced the overall expression while maintaining
tissue-specificity. Three DNase I hypersensitive sites were detected in the 5'
flanking region of the EpoR gene, two of which were unique to MEL cells. These
sites were situated over the promoter region and approximately 0.5 kb and 2.4 kb 
upstream of the transcriptional initiation sites. A 0.8-kb restriction fragment
spanning the distal site caused approximately a four-fold rise in transcription
from the endogenous or a heterologous promoter in MEL cells independent of its
orientation and up to 1.5-fold rise in CB-5 cells, but it was inactive in COS-1
cells that were cotransfected with an expression plasmid encoding GATA-1. These
results show that (1) basal activity as well as tissue specificity of the EpoR
promoter can be accounted for by its interaction with GATA-1, and (2) upstream
sites regulate the strength of the promoter. Expression of the distal DNase I
hypersensitive site and the corresponding enhancer activity in MEL cells suggests
a role for this element in stage-specific transcriptional control.

PMID: 8118044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Protein Sci. 1994 Mar;3(3):372-90.

Young Investigator Award Lecture. Structures of larger proteins, protein-ligand
and protein-DNA complexes by multidimensional heteronuclear NMR.

Clore GM(1), Gronenborn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The recent development of a whole panoply of multidimensional
heteronuclear-edited and -filtered NMR experiments has revolutionized the field
of protein structure determination by NMR, making it possible to extend the
methodology from the 10-kDa limit of conventional 2-dimensional NMR to systems up
to potentially 35-40 kDa. The basic strategy for solving 3-dimensional structures
of larger proteins and protein-ligand complexes in solution using 3- and
4-dimensional NMR spectroscopy is summarized, and the power of these methods is
illustrated using 3 examples: interleukin-1 beta, the complex of calmodulin with 
a target peptide, and the specific complex of the transcription factor GATA-1
with its cognate DNA target site.

PMCID: PMC2142707
PMID: 8019409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Blood. 1994 Feb 1;83(3):651-6.

Retinoic acid downmodulates erythroid differentiation and GATA1 expression in
purified adult-progenitor culture.

Labbaye C(1), Valtieri M, Testa U, Giampaolo A, Meccia E, Sterpetti P, Parolini
I, Pelosi E, Bulgarini D, Cayre YE, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA 19107-5541.

All-trans retinoic acid (RA) is an important morphogen in vertebrate development,
a normal constituent in human adult blood and is also involved in the control of 
cell growth and differentiation in acute promyelocytic leukemia. We have examined
the effects of RA on normal hematopoiesis by using early hematopoietic progenitor
cells (HPC) stringently purified from adult peripheral blood. In clonogenetic
fetal calf serum-supplemented (FCS+) or -nonsupplemented (FCS-) culture treated
with saturating levels of interleukin-3 (IL-3) granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and erythropoietin (Ep) (combined with c-kit
ligand in FCS(-)-culture conditions), RA induces a dramatic dose-dependent shift 
from erythroid to granulomonocytic colony formation, the latter colonies being
essentially represented by granulocytic clones. This shift is apparently not
caused by a recruitment phenomenon, because in FCS+ culture, the total number of 
colonies is not significantly modified by RA addition. In FCS- liquid-suspension 
culture supplemented with saturating Ep level and low-dose IL-3/GM-CSF, adult HPC
undergo unilineage erythropoietic differentiation: Here again, treatment with
high-dose RA induces a shift from the erythroid to granulocytic differentiation
pathway. Studies on RA time-response or pulse treatment in semisolid or liquid
culture show that early RA addition is most effective, thus indicating that early
but not late HPC are sensitive to its action. We then analyzed the expression of 
the master GATA1 gene, which encodes a finger transcription factor required for
normal erythroid development; addition of RA to HPC stimulated into unilineage
erythropoietic differentiation in liquid culture caused a virtually complete
inhibition of GATA1 mRNA induction. These results indicate that RA directly
inhibits the erythroid differentiation program at the level of early adult HPC,
and may lead to a shift from the erythroid to granulocytic differentiation
pathway. This phenomenon is correlated with inhibition of GATA1 induction in the 
early stages of erythropoietic differentiation.

PMID: 8298127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Br J Haematol. 1994 Feb;86(2):410-2.

GATA-1 is expressed in acute erythroblastic leukaemia.

Ekert H(1), Sievers EL, Tan A, Martin DI, Smith FO, Barnard D, Bernstein ID.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Previous studies have demonstrated the expression of GATA-1 (a DNA-binding
nuclear protein) in erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, eosinophils, basophils, mast
cells, early marrow progenitor cells and in mouse and human erythroid leukaemia
cell lines. We studied 31 bone marrow specimens from patients with acute myeloid 
leukaemia (AML) for GATA-1 expression by reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain
reaction (RT/PCR) analysis. GATA-1 expression was detected in all of the patients
with erythroleukaemia, and in one of nine patients with megakaryoblastic
leukaemia, but absent from 17 patients with French-American-British (FAB) M1-5
leukaemia. In AML, GATA-1 expression is indicative of differentiation to the
erythroid and possibly megakaryocytic lineages, analogous to its expression in
normal haemopoiesis.

PMID: 8199039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Genomics. 1994 Jan 15;19(2):212-20.

New insights into the man-mouse comparative map of the X chromosome.

Blair HJ(1), Reed V, Laval SH, Boyd Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, MRC Radiobiology Unit, Chilton, Didcot, England.

Two conserved loci, DXHX674h and DXHX679h, which map to Xp11.22-Xp11.21 on the
human X chromosome short arm, have been positioned between the loci for
proteolipid protein (Plp) and the E1a subunit of pyruvate dehydrogenase (Pdha1)
in the distal region of the mouse X chromosome using Mus musculus x Mus spretus
interspecific backcrosses. These data, together with previous comparative mapping
studies on another conserved locus (DXF34) and the locus that encodes the
erythroid transcription factor (GATA1), reveal that loci that map to the proximal
region of the human X chromosome short arm lie in four different regions of the
mouse X chromosome and that the human and mouse X chromosomes contain a minimum
of eight conserved segments.

PMID: 8188251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 14;269(2):883-9.

The interaction of GATA-binding proteins and basal transcription factors with
GATA box-containing core promoters. A model of tissue-specific gene expression.

Aird WC(1), Parvin JD, Sharp PA, Rosenberg RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02136.

The core promoters of the rat platelet factor 4 (PF4), mouse erythropoietin and
chicken beta globin genes contain a GATA motif in place of the consensus TATAAA
site. In the case of the PF4 gene, this site has been shown to play a critical
role in restricting transcription to the megakaryocyte lineage. In order to
understand the mechanism of tissue specificity, we investigated the function of
the GATA box-containing promoters in vitro. Our studies show that the
TATA-binding protein of TFIID is required for initiation of transcription from
the GATA box-containing promoters. GATA-1 interacts with the core promoter GATA
motif and inhibits generation of preinitiation complexes. The functional
significance of the inhibition of preinitiation complexes is supported by in
vitro transcription assays in which transcription from the PF4 and erythropoietin
core promoters is suppressed by GATA-1. We also demonstrate that GATA-2 inhibits 
initiation of transcription from the PF4 core promoter. Based on these results,
we propose a model in which repression of PF4 expression in nonmegakaryocytes is 
mediated, in part, by competition between GATA-binding proteins and basal factors
for the core promoter.

PMID: 8288642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 15;90(24):11593-7.

Induction of erythroid-specific gene expression in lymphoid cells.

Chiba T(1), Nagata Y, Kishi A, Sakamaki K, Miyajima A, Yamamoto M, Engel JD,
Todokoro K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

Erythropoietin (Epo) is a cytokine which specifically regulates differentiation
and proliferation of erythroid progenitor cells. We report here that Epo receptor
expressed in interleukin 3-dependent lymphoid Ba/F3 cells transmits both
differentiation and growth signals. Epo stimulation of these cells leads to
activation of transcription and/or translation of the erythroid-specific
transcription factors GATA-1 and SCL, followed by the accumulation of both alpha-
and beta-globin chains. These results suggest that expression and activation of
the Epo receptor regulates erythroid-specific gene expression and might play a
role in determining a cell lineage in vivo and that GATA-1 and SCL may exert
their effects after Epo binds to its receptor. It was further found that chimeric
receptors composed of extracellular domains of Epo receptor and cytoplasmic
domains of interleukin 2 or interleukin 3 receptors could also induce
erythroid-specific gene expression in Ba/F3 cells. Taking these data together
with previous observations, we conclude that interaction of the extracellular
domains of the Epo receptor with other membrane components is essential for
transmission of both the erythroid differentiation and the growth signals.

PMCID: PMC48030
PMID: 8265595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. EMBO J. 1993 Dec 15;12(13):4993-5005.

The two zinc finger-like domains of GATA-1 have different DNA binding
specificities.

Whyatt DJ(1), deBoer E, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Structure and Expression, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

The GATA-1 transcription factor has been shown to be important in the regulation 
of globin and non-globin genes in erythroid, megakaryocytic and mast cell
lineages. It is a member of a family of GATA proteins which both overlap in their
expression patterns and bind the motif (A/T)GATA(A/G). The GATA family of
proteins are also members of the superfamily of zinc finger-like domain proteins 
and have two similar domains of the type Cys-X2-Cys-X17-Cys-X2-Cys which direct
the DNA binding of the protein. A random oligonucleotide selection procedure has 
been employed to further elucidate the mechanism of GATA-1-DNA recognition. The
resulting oligonucleotides were tested for binding activity to both wild-type and
mutant GATA-1 proteins. Two classes of GATA-1-DNA interaction have been defined, 
the first requiring only the carboxy finger of GATA-1 to bind and having the
motif GAT(A/T), the second requiring both finger domains to bind and having the
core motif (T/C)AAG. By using sequence comparison and depurination analysis it is
concluded that the two finger-like domains of GATA-1 have different DNA binding
recognition motifs. Binding of GATA-1 to GAT(A/T) motifs is associated with
transcriptional activation of linked genes. The only known (T/C)AAG motif is in
the distal CAAT-box promoter region of the human A gamma-globin gene where the
binding of GATA-1 appears to regulate the correct developmental suppression of
gamma-globin expression.

PMCID: PMC413760
PMID: 8262042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Blood. 1993 Dec 15;82(12):3760-9.

Transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of the expression of the
erythropoietin receptor gene in human erythropoietin-responsive cell lines.

Migliaccio AR(1), Jiang Y, Migliaccio G, Nicolis S, Crotta S, Ronchi A,
Ottolenghi S, Adamson JW.

Author information: 
(1)New York Blood Center, NY 10021.

With erythroid differentiation, committed progenitor cells acquire the ability to
respond to erythropoietin (Epo). Epo interacts with target cells through the Epo 
receptor (Epo-R), whose expression is tightly regulated in a lineage-specific
fashion. Epo-R expression is presumed to be progressively activated or repressed 
as cells progress along the erythroid or the myeloid pathway, respectively.
Little is known of the mechanisms that underlie the erythroid-specific expression
of the Epo-R gene. GATA-1, the major known transcription factor involved in Epo-R
gene regulation, is not erythroid-specific. We have studied the regulation of the
expression of the Epo-R gene in two related human Epo-responsive cell lines, UT-7
and UT-7 Epo. These lines express Epo-R at high levels because of amplification
of the endogenous gene, which is apparently not rearranged. Treatment for 6 to 24
hours with the tumor promoter, phorbol myristate acetate (PMA), or 24 hours of
growth factor starvation (Epo or granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor
[GM-CSF]) decreased or increased the levels of Epo-R mRNA, respectively. In the
case of growth factor starvation, the increase (approximately equal to threefold)
in the level of Epo-R mRNA correlated directly with an increase in the rate of
Epo-R gene transcription as measured by run-off assay. Both increases were
observed as early as 3 hours after the growth factor was withdrawn and were
reversible; levels of mRNA and transcription rates returned to baseline 3 hours
after the cells were reexposed to growth factors. The changes in Epo-R expression
after growth factor starvation were coordinated with changes in the level of
expression of GATA-1 that were detected both at the mRNA and at the gene
transcription level under these conditions (suggesting that GATA-1 was
responsible for this upregulation). During PMA treatment, after a transient
increase in Epo-R mRNA at 1 hour, a progressive decline in the level of Epo-R
mRNA was observed; the level of Epo-R mRNA decreased by 50%, and fell below the
level of detection by 6 and 24 hours, respectively. This decrement was explained 
in part by a fourfold reduction in the rate of gene transcription as well as a
reduction (measured as levels of Epo-R mRNA in the presence of actinomycin D) in 
mRNA stability. The changes in transcription rate occurred in the absence of
changes in the level of GATA-1 binding activity.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8260713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Nov;13(11):6969-83.

Activation of the beta-globin promoter by the locus control region correlates
with binding of a novel factor to the CAAT box in murine erythroleukemia cells
but not in K562 cells.

Delvoye NL(1), Destroismaisons NM, Wall LA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut du Cancer de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Four distinct factors in extracts from murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells
interacted with the human beta-globin gene promoter CAAT box: CP1, GATA-1, and
two novel factors, denoted a and b, one of which is highly inducible in the MEL
system. GATA-1 binding to the CAAT element was very unstable (half-life < 1 min),
whereas bindings of a, b, and CP1 were comparatively stable, with half-lives of
18, 19, and 3.5 min, respectively. Stable transfections of MEL cells showed that 
in the presence of the beta-globin locus control region (LCR), the wild-type CAAT
box, a mutant which bound to GATA-1 with increased stability over the normal
sequences, and a mutant which bound a, b, and CP1 specifically could all
stimulate transcription greater than ninefold over that induced by a null CAAT
mutation in both uninduced and terminally differentiated MEL cells. A mutant
which bound the a and b factors specifically gave only a twofold stimulation of
promoter activity, and this lower activity correlated with a decrease in the
stability of binding of the b protein. On the other hand, CP1 binding alone did
not stimulate transcription. Taken together, these results suggest that in the
context of the wild-type beta-globin CAAT element the b factor stimulates
transcription directed by the LCR in MEL cells, although the LCR can also
function through more stable GATA-1-binding sequences. However, in K562 cells,
the wild-type beta-globin CAAT box alone was unable to stimulate gene expression 
directed by the LCR and high levels of transcription were obtained only upon
inclusion of more upstream beta-globin promoter sequences. In contrast, a
construct containing only the A gamma-globin CAAT box region did give high
expression levels in K562 cells. Thus, there is a fundamental difference in the
way the LCR functions in these two model systems in terms of its requirements at 
the promoter level.

PMCID: PMC364758
PMID: 8413287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 1993 Oct 15;268(29):21606-12.

The transcription factor GATA-1 regulates the promoter activity of the platelet
glycoprotein IIb gene.

Martin F(1), Prandini MH, Thevenon D, Marguerie G, Uzan G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Structurale, Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Grenoble, France.

Glycoprotein IIb (GPIIb) is an early and specific marker of the megakaryocytic
lineage. We have previously shown that a fragment extending 643 base pairs
upstream the transcription start site of the human GPIIb promoter was able to
control the tissue-specific expression of the CAT gene in transfection
experiments. Four potential GATA-binding sites, located at positions -463, -376, 
-243, and -54 are present within this fragment. Gel shift analysis revealed that 
nuclear extracts from the erythroleukemic cell line HEL contain a DNA-binding
protein that recognizes these GATA sites. Using an antiserum raised to an
hydrophilic region of the transcription factor GATA-1, the HEL GATA-binding
protein was found to be GATA-1. Point mutations of the different GATA sites
indicated that they did not equally contribute to GPIIb promoter activity. The
-463 GATA motif located in an enhancer region is essential for full transcription
activity and was found to be dominant upon the other GATA motifs. When this site 
is mutated, the -54 GATA site appears to be essential for the remaining CAT
activity. These results indicate that the transcription factor GATA-1 plays an
important role in the regulation of the transcription of the megakaryocyte
specific GPIIb gene.

PMID: 8408012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Development. 1993 Oct;119(2):519-31.

Expression of the chicken GATA factor family during early erythroid development
and differentiation.

Leonard MW(1), Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500.

The DNA motif WGATAR has been identified within transcriptional regulatory
domains of globin and other erythroid-specific genes and the activator proteins
that bind to this regulatory element, the GATA factors, belong to a multi-gene
family that is expressed in chicken erythroid cells. Here we show that, as in
chickens, multiple members of the GATA factor family are expressed in human and
murine erythroid cells. During the early stages of chicken embryogenesis (well
before blood island formation), each of the GATA family members is transcribed
with a unique temporal and spatial pattern. In the primitive erythroid lineage,
transcription of the embryonic epsilon-globin gene parallels GATA-1 expression
while the switch to beta-globin transcription in definitive erythroid cells is
directly preceded by a pronounced increase in GATA-3 accumulation. The timing and
pattern of expression of these different mRNAs during avian erythroid development
and differentiation suggests that temporally regulated changes in GATA factor
expression are required for vertebrate hematopoiesis.

PMID: 8287800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Blood. 1993 Sep 15;82(6):1900-6.

Single-copy transduction and expression of human gamma-globin in K562
erythroleukemia cells using recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors: the
effect of mutations in NF-E2 and GATA-1 binding motifs within the
hypersensitivity site 2 enhancer.

Miller JL(1), Walsh CE, Ney PA, Samulski RJ, Nienhuis AW.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Erratum in
    Blood 1995 Feb 1;85(3):862.

The use of recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors provides a new
strategy to investigate the role of specific regulatory elements and trans-acting
factors in globin gene expression. We linked hypersensitivity site 2 (HS2) from
the locus control region (LCR) to a A gamma-globin gene (A gamma*) mutationally
marked to allow its transcript to be distinguished from endogenous gamma-globin
mRNA. The vector also contains the phosphotransferase gene that confers
resistance to neomycin (NeoR). HS2 region mutations within the NF-E2 motifs
prevented NF-E2 binding while preserving AP-1 binding. Another set in the GATA-1 
motif prevented binding of the factor. Several NeoR K562 clones containing a
single unrearranged RAAV genome with the A gamma* gene linked to the native HS2
core fragment (WT), mutant NF-E2 HS2 (mut-NFE2), mutant GATA-1 HS2 (mut-GATA1),
or no HS [(-)HS] were identified. In uninduced K562 cells, mut-NFE2 clones
expressed A gamma* mRNA at the same level as the WT clones, compared with a lack 
of A gamma* signal in the (-)HS2 clones. However, hemin induction of mut-NFE2
clones did not result in an increase in the A gamma* signal above the level seen 
in uninduced cells. Mut-GATA1 clones expressed the A gamma* mRNA at the same
level as WT clones in both uninduced and induced cells. Thus, GATA-1 binding to
this site does not appear to be required for the enhancing function of HS2 in
this context. This single-copy rAAV transduction model is useful for evaluating
the effects of specific mutations in regulatory elements on the transcription of 
linked genes.

PMID: 8400240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Blood. 1993 Sep 1;82(5):1493-501.

Megakaryocytic differentiation induced in 416B myeloid cells by GATA-2 and GATA-3
transgenes or 5-azacytidine is tightly coupled to GATA-1 expression.

Visvader J(1), Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Australia.

The GATA 'zinc-finger' transcription factors are thought to have important roles 
in the control of hematopoiesis. GATA-1 and GATA-2 are found in the erythroid,
mast cell, and megakaryocytic lineages, and GATA-3 in T lymphocytes. GATA-1 is
required for erythroid development and has recently been shown by gene transfer
to direct megakaryocytic differentiation of the primitive myeloid cell line 416B.
Here we show that enforced expression in 416B cells of either the GATA-2 or
GATA-3 gene also induces megakaryocytic differentiation, as assessed by cellular 
morphology, acetylcholinesterase activity, polyploid DNA content, and loss of
Mac-1 expression. No erythroid or mast cell differentiation was found.
Unexpectedly, the level of endogenous GATA-1 mRNA had increased 20- to 30-fold
among the transfectants, whereas that of GATA-2 mRNA was unaltered and endogenous
GATA-3 transcripts remained undetectable. This finding suggests that GATA-2 and
GATA-3 lie upstream of GATA-1 in a regulatory hierarchy and that, in 416B cells, 
GATA-1 may mediate the phenotypic changes induced by GATA-2 or GATA-3.
Furthermore, 416B cells treated with the DNA demethylating agent 5-azacytidine
underwent megakaryocytic differentiation accompanied by a marked increase in the 
level of GATA-1 mRNA but not that of GATA-2 or GATA-3. These results strongly
implicate GATA factors in megakaryocytic differentiation and suggest that, at
least for 416B cells, GATA-1 is a dominant regulator of maturation along this
lineage.

PMID: 7689871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 25;21(17):4031-7.

Erythropoietin triggers a burst of GATA-1 in normal human erythroid cells
differentiating in tissue culture.

Dalyot N(1), Fibach E, Ronchi A, Rachmilewitz EA, Ottolenghi S, Oppenheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.

GATA-1 is a central transcription-activator of erythroid differentiation. In the 
present work we have studied the kinetics of its expression and activity during
development of normal human erythroid progenitors, grown in primary cultures. In 
response to the addition of erythropoietin (Epo), the cells undergo proliferation
and differentiation in a synchronized fashion. This recently developed
experimental system allows biochemical dissection of erythroid differentiation in
a physiological meaningful environment. No DNA-binding activity of GATA-1 could
be detected before the addition of Epo, although a very low level of mRNA was
observed. Following Epo addition there was a sharp parallel rise in both mRNA and
DNA-binding activity, consistent with positive autoregulation of the GATA-1 gene.
After reaching a peak on day 7-9, both mRNA and protein activity decreased. The
binding activity of the ubiquitous factor SP1 showed a biphasic pattern; its
second peak usually coincided with the GATA-1 peak, suggesting that SP1 also
plays a specific role in erythroid maturation. The highest activity of GATA-1 per
erythroid cell was found on day 6-8, immediately preceding the major rise in
globin gene mRNA and in the number of hemoglobinized cells. The results imply
that a high level of GATA-1 activity is necessary for globin gene expression and 
erythroid maturation, suggesting that a requirement for a threshold concentration
of GATA-1 is part of the mechanism that determines the final steps of erythroid
maturation.

PMCID: PMC309995
PMID: 8371977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Blood. 1993 Aug 15;82(4):1071-9.

Dynamics of GATA transcription factor expression during erythroid
differentiation.

Leonard M(1), Brice M, Engel JD, Papayannopoulou T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.

Although the formation of terminally differentiated erythroid cells has been
shown to require the presence of a functional GATA-1 gene in vivo, the role of
this transcription factor and other members of the GATA family at earlier stages 
of erythroid differentiation is unclear. In this report, the expression of
GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 has been examined in enriched peripheral blood
progenitors before and after culture in a well-characterized liquid culture
system. In addition primary leukemic cells as well as several erythroleukemic and
nonerythroid cell lines were analyzed for GATA factor expression. The results
show that the profile of GATA factor expression in erythroid cells is distinct
from that of myeloid or lymphoid lineages. Erythroleukemic cell lines express
little or no GATA-3, but high levels of GATA-1 and GATA-2. When they are induced 
to display the terminal erythroid phenotype, little change in the level of GATA-1
is detected but a significant decline in the levels of GATA-2 is observed
commensurate with the degree of maturation achieved by the cells. Enrichment of
erythroid progenitors from peripheral blood leads to selection of cells that
express both GATA-1 and GATA-2. As the enriched populations are cultured in
suspension in the presence of multiple cytokines, the levels of both GATA-1 and
GATA-2 initially increase. However, in cultures containing only erythropoietin,
which show exclusive erythroid differentiation, the levels of GATA-1 continue to 
increase, whereas GATA-2 expression declines as erythroid maturation progresses. 
In contrast, cultures lacking Epo (ie, with interleukin-3 and kit ligand) display
limited progression towards both the myeloid and erythroid pathways, and high
levels of expression of both GATA-1 and GATA-2 are maintained. Despite the
initial upregulation of GATA-1 expression in the latter cultures, terminal
erythroid differentiation does not occur in the absence of erythropoietin. These 
results indicate that GATA-1 upregulation is associated with both the initiation 
and the maintenance of the erythroid program, but that these two processes appear
to be under separate regulatory control. Thus, the dynamic changes in the levels 
of different GATA factors that occur during primary erythroid differentiation
suggest that the levels of these factors may influence the progression to
specific hematopoietic pathways.

PMID: 8353273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jul 15;90(14):6454-8.

Loss of erythropoietin responsiveness in erythroid progenitors due to expression 
of the Evi-1 myeloid-transforming gene.

Kreider BL(1), Orkin SH, Ihle JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105.

Inappropriate expression of the Evi-1 zinc-finger gene in hematopoietic cells has
been associated with acute myelogenous leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes in 
murine models and in humans. Consistent with this, previous studies have shown
that aberrant expression of the Evi-1 gene in a myeloid progenitor cell line
blocks granulocytic differentiation. Here we demonstrate that the aberrant
expression of the Evi-1 gene impairs the normal response of erythroid cells or
bone-marrow progenitors to erythropoietin. Erythroid differentiation has been
shown to require the GATA-1 transcription factor that binds to a sequence
contained within the consensus binding sequence identified for Evi-1. In the
studies presented here we also show that Evi-1 can repress GATA-1-dependent
transactivation in transient chloramphenicol acetyltransferase assays. Together
the data support the hypothesis that inappropriate expression of the Evi-1 gene
blocks erythropoiesis by repressing the transcription of a subset of GATA-1
target genes.

PMCID: PMC46950
PMID: 8341654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Oncogene. 1993 Jul;8(7):1783-90.

Transactivation of GATA-1 promoter with ETS1, ETS2 and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins:
stabilization of the ETS1 protein binding on GATA-1 promoter sequences by
monoclonal antibody.

Seth A(1), Robinson L, Thompson DM, Watson DK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Ets family proteins activate transcription via binding to the GGAA core sequence 
located in the promoter/enhancer elements of many cellular and viral genes.
GATA-1 is an erythroid-specific transcription factor. The promoter of the chicken
GATA-1 gene contains multiple ets binding sites (EBS), two of them are present in
palindromic form. The GATA-1 promoter has been shown to be activated by the E26
virus. In this study, we have analysed whether the palidromic EBS of the chicken 
GATA-1 promoter is a target for binding and activation by members of the cellular
ets gene family products. The results herein indicate that both EBS in the
palindrome are required for DNA-binding because mutations in either site reduces 
the activity by at least 95%. Moreover, DNA binding of ETS1 to the EBS palindrome
is dramatically stabilized in the presence of a specific monoclonal antibody
whose epitope maps between amino acid positions 240-260. Although each of the
single sites bind, the efficiency of binding is extremely low. Furthermore, for
efficient binding the two sites must be in an inverted configuration because of
the fact that the oligonucleotide containing the left and right EBS in the same
orientation binds 10-fold less than the oligonucleotide containing the EBS
palindrome. Additionally, we show that the transcription of a reporter gene (CAT)
either linked to the GATA-1 EBS palindrome or GATA-1 promoter can be activated by
cotransfection with ETS1, alternatively-spliced ETS1, ETS2 or ERGB/Hu-FLI-1
expression vectors.

PMID: 8510925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):3999-4010.

DNA-binding specificity of GATA family transcription factors.

Merika M(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

GATA-binding proteins constitute a family of transcription factors that recognize
a target site conforming to the consensus WGATAR (W = A or T and R = A or G).
Here we have used the method of polymerase chain reaction-mediated random site
selection to assess in an unbiased manner the DNA-binding specificity of GATA
proteins. Contrary to our expectations, we show that GATA proteins bind a variety
of motifs that deviate from the previously assigned consensus. Many of the
nonconsensus sequences bind protein with high affinity, equivalent to that of
conventional GATA motifs. By using the selected sequences as probes in the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we demonstrate overlapping, but distinct,
sequence preferences for GATA family members, specified by their respective
DNA-binding domains. Furthermore, we provide additional evidence for interaction 
of amino and carboxy fingers of GATA-1 in defining its binding site. By
performing cotransfection experiments, we also show that transactivation
parallels DNA binding. A chimeric protein containing the finger domain of areA
and the activation domains of GATA-1 is capable of activating transcription in
mammalian cells through GATA motifs. Our findings suggest a mechanism by which
GATA proteins might selectively regulate gene expression in cells in which they
are coexpressed.

PMCID: PMC359949
PMID: 8321207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Blood. 1993 Jun 15;81(12):3234-41.

Expression of mRNA for the GATA-binding proteins in human eosinophils and
basophils: potential role in gene transcription.

Zon LI(1), Yamaguchi Y, Yee K, Albee EA, Kimura A, Bennett JC, Orkin SH, Ackerman
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

The expression of the hematopoietic transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and
GATA-3 was studied in eosinophils and basophils. Eosinophils express mRNA for
GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3. Basophils express GATA-2 and GATA-3. Treatment of
HL-60 eosinophilic sublines with either interleukin-5 or butyric acid increased
the expression of GATA-1 mRNA concomitant with the expression of
eosinophil-specific genes, whereas levels of GATA-2 mRNA remained relatively
constant. The presence of mRNA for these proteins in eosinophils and basophils
suggests that gene transcription in these lineages may be regulated by
GATA-binding proteins.

PMID: 8507862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genes Dev. 1993 Jun;7(6):1097-109.

Ectopic expression of a conditional GATA-2/estrogen receptor chimera arrests
erythroid differentiation in a hormone-dependent manner.

Briegel K(1), Lim KC, Plank C, Beug H, Engel JD, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria.

The GATA factors are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins in
eukaryotes that share extensive homology in their DNA-binding domains. One
enigmatic aspect of GATA factor expression is that several GATA proteins, which
ostensibly share the same DNA-binding site specificity, are coexpressed in
erythroid cells. To elucidate the roles of individual GATA factors in
erythropoiesis, conditional alleles of GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 were prepared
by fusing each of the factors to the hormone-binding domain of the human estrogen
receptor (ER). These GATA/ER chimeric factors were shown to be hormone-inducible 
trans-activating proteins in transient transfection assays. When stably
introduced into primary erythroblasts or conditionally transformed erythroid
progenitors cells, exogenous GATA-2/ER promoted proliferation and inhibited
terminal differentiation in an estrogen-dependent manner. These phenotypic
effects are specifically attributable to the action of ectopically expressed
GATA-2/ER because erythroblasts expressing exogenous GATA-2 are constitutively
arrested in differentiation and because erythroid progenitors expressing either
Gal/ER or GATA-3/ER do not display a hormone-responsive block in differentiation.
Thus, the GATA-2 transcription factor appears to play a role in regulating the
self-renewal capacity of early erythroid progenitor cells.

PMID: 8504932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Exp Hematol. 1993 May;21(5):665-70.

Dependence for the proliferative response to erythropoietin on an established
erythroid differentiation program in a human hematopoietic cell line, UT-7.

Nicolis S(1), Ottolenghi S, Papayannopoulou T, Baiocchi M, Migliaccio G, Adamson 
J, Migliaccio AR.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università di
Milano, Italy.

Erythroid differentiation involves the activation of a number of
erythroid-specific genes, most of which, including the globin genes and the
erythropoietin receptor (Epo-R) gene, are, at least in part, regulated by the
transcription factor GATA-1. In order to understand the relationship, if any,
between expression of GATA-1, response to Epo and erythroid differentiation, we
analyzed the expression of GATA-1, Epo-R and globin genes in an Epo-dependent
human cell line, UT-7 Epo. The results were compared to those obtained with the
parental granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-dependent cell
line, UT-7, which has a predominantly megakaryoblastic phenotype and is unable to
proliferate continuously in the presence of Epo. UT-7 Epo and UT-7 expressed
similar levels of GATA-1 mRNA and binding activity. The two lines also expressed 
comparable levels of Epo-R mRNA while the number of Epo-binding sites on UT-7 Epo
cells was one-sixth the number of UT-7 cells (2400 +/- 3 vs. 13,800 +/- 300).
This difference in the number of binding sites could be due to differences in
cell surface (UT-7 cells are 20% smaller than the parental UT-7 cells) or in
receptor turnover. By Northern analysis, UT-7 cells expressed detectable levels
of beta- and gamma-globin but not alpha-globin. In comparison, UT-7 Epo cells
expressed alpha-globin and higher levels of gamma-globin (5-fold) and beta-globin
(from barely to clearly detectable). Globin chains (alpha, beta and gamma) were
clearly detectable by affinity chromatography in UT-7 Epo but not in UT-7 cells. 
The frequency of the cells which expressed beta- and gamma-globin genes in the
two cell populations was measured by immunofluorescence with beta- and
gamma-specific antibodies. The number of gamma-positive cells and their
fluorescence intensity were higher in UT-7 Epo than in UT-7 cells (0 to 17%
barely positive cells and 23 to 40% clearly positive cells, respectively),
indicating that the increase in globin mRNA observed in UT-7 Epo is due to both
an increase of gene expression per cell and an increase in numbers of cells
containing gamma-globin. The levels of GATA-1, Epo-R and globin mRNA expressed
were not affected by a 24-hour incubation of either cell line with Epo, GM-CSF or
interleukin-3 (IL-3).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8513868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Gene. 1993 Apr 30;126(2):251-5.

Cloning of a cDNA encoding a DNA-binding protein TAXREB302 that is specific for
the tax-responsive enhancer of HTLV-I.

Nyunoya H(1), Morita T, Sato T, Honma S, Tsujimoto A, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    Gene. 1994 Oct 21;148(2):371-3.

The transcriptional activator, Tax, of human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV-I) has
been considered to interact with cellular proteins to act on target enhancer
motifs. Using oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing the tax-responsive element
(TAXRE) of the HTLV-I enhancer, we have cloned multiple cDNAs coding for
TAXRE-binding proteins (TAXREB), and determined the cDNA and the deduced
200-amino-acid sequences for TAXREB302. The recombinant protein binds to the
enhancer DNA by specific interaction to the CRE-like sequence. A single 1.8-kb
species of mRNA was detected in cultured cells, as well as in normal human
tissues, especially brain and skeletal muscle. The 22-kDa native protein was
detected in the cultured-cell lysate by immunoblotting analysis. TAXREB302 does
not have structural features common to the CRE-binding protein or activating
transcription factor (CREB/ATF) family, but has homology to chicken erythroid
transcription factor (Eryf1 or GATA-1), suggesting a possible protein-protein
interaction.

PMID: 8482542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Apr;7(4):528-42.

Inhibition of mouse GATA-1 function by the glucocorticoid receptor: possible
mechanism of steroid inhibition of erythroleukemia cell differentiation.

Chang TJ(1), Scher BM, Waxman S, Scher W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, Mount Sinai Graduate School of Biological Sciences, City University of 
New York, New York 10029.

Erratum in
    Mol Endocrinol 1993 Jun;7(6):786.

Treatment of mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells with hexamethylene bisacetamide
induces a program of erythrodifferentiation, as judged by an increase in the
synthesis of globins and other erythroid-specific products. This induction can be
inhibited by glucocorticoids, e.g. dexamethasone. All globin and other
erythroid-specific genes tested contain GATA response elements (GATA-RE) and can 
be transactivated by GATA-1, a transcription factor. GATA-1 is highly expressed
in erythroid cells, including MEL cells. We noted a glucocorticoid receptor (GR) 
response element motif near a GATA-RE motif in the promoter region of the mouse
beta-major and beta-minor globin genes and about 130 bases away from a GATA-RE in
the alpha 1-globin gene promoter and, therefore, investigated the possibility
that the dexamethasone-induced inhibition of induced MEL cell differentiation may
involve effects of the GR on GATA-1 activity. Evidence obtained from transfection
assays and DNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicates that the GR binds 
GATA-1 and interferes with its function before any interaction with DNA, but that
the presence of a glucocorticoid response element near a GATA-RE augments the GR 
effect. The N-terminal 106-amino acid domain of the GR was found to be essential 
for the effect, possibly by binding to GATA-1. Since GATA-1 is autoregulatory,
i.e. it has been shown by others to bind to its own promoter and up-regulate its 
own transcription, the finding that activated GR can interfere with GATA-1
function may provide an explanation for the inhibition by glucocorticoids of the 
entire program of erythroid differentiation in MEL cells. That is, by interfering
with GATA-1 function, the GR inhibits not only the expression of erythroid
structural genes, but may also inhibit the expression of a primary erythroid
regulatory gene, GATA-1. It was also shown that the GATA-RE in each of the
beta-globin promoters responds to mouse GATA-1 in a functional transfection
assay.

PMID: 8502237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Gen Genet. 1993 Apr;238(3):309-14.

The sequence-specific nuclear matrix binding factor F6 is a chicken GATA-like
protein.

Vassetzky YS(1), De Moura Gallo CV, Bogdanova AN, Razin SV, Scherrer K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

The sequence-specific DNA-binding protein factor F6, which binds upstream of the 
cluster of the chicken alpha-globin genes, has previously been found to interact 
with a DNA fragment containing a replication origin and a nuclear matrix binding 
site. This protein has been partially characterized. Based on its molecular
weight and binding affinity, F6 belongs to a family of GATA proteins, the chicken
equivalent of transcription factor NFE-1. An oligonucleotide including the
binding site for F6 competes for binding of the above-mentioned DNA fragment to
the nuclear matrix. This indicates an involvement of this protein in the
interaction between DNA and the nuclear matrix.

PMID: 8492798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nature. 1993 Apr 1;362(6419):466-8.

Erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 is abundantly transcribed in mouse testis.

Ito E(1), Toki T, Ishihara H, Ohtani H, Gu L, Yokoyama M, Engel JD, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is a fundamental regulator of genes in
haematopoietic cell lineages and belongs to a family of factors that bind to the 
consensus sequence WGATAR. The GATA motif was originally identified in
cis-regulatory regions of globin and other erythroid-specific genes, but the
range of genes controlled by the GATA factors has since expanded. Members of the 
GATA transcription factor family share a conserved zinc-finger DNA-binding
domain, but the expression profile of each GATA factor is distinct. Here we show 
that a testis form of murine (m)GATA-1 messenger RNA is transcribed from a
promoter located 5' to the erythroid first exon, and the remaining exons (which
encode the mGATA-1 protein) are used in common by both testis and erythroid
transcripts. We use an anti-mGATA-1 monoclonal antibody to show that the factor
expressed in erythroid cells is the same as that found in the seminiferous
tubules of murine testis. The GATA-1-expressing cells in 10-week-old testis were 
found only in contact with the basement membrane of seminiferous tubules,
suggesting that GATA-1 regulates genes during the earliest stages of
spermatogenesis.

PMID: 8464479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2298-308.

Transcriptional activation of human zeta 2 globin promoter by the alpha globin
regulatory element (HS-40): functional role of specific nuclear factor-DNA
complexes.

Zhang Q(1), Reddy PM, Yu CY, Bastiani C, Higgs D, Stamatoyannopoulos G,
Papayannopoulou T, Shen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of California, Davis 95616.

We studied the functional interaction between human embryonic zeta 2 globin
promoter and the alpha globin regulatory element (HS-40) located 40 kb upstream
of the zeta 2 globin gene. It was shown by transient expression assay that HS-40 
behaved as an authentic enhancer for high-level zeta 2 globin promoter activity
in K562 cells, an erythroid cell line of embryonic and/or fetal origin. Although 
sequences located between -559 and -88 of the zeta 2 globin gene were dispensable
for its expression on enhancerless plasmids, they were required for the HS-40
enhancer-mediated activity of the zeta 2 globin promoter. Site-directed
mutagenesis demonstrated that this HS-40 enhancer-zeta 2 globin promoter
interaction is mediated by the two GATA-1 factor binding motifs located at -230
and -104, respectively. The functional domains of HS-40 were also mapped. Bal 31 
deletion mapping data suggested that one GATA-1 motif, one GT motif, and two
NF-E2/AP1 motifs together formed the functional core of HS-40 in the
erythroid-specific activation of the zeta 2 globin promoter. Site-directed
mutagenesis further demonstrated that the enhancer function of one of the two
NF-E2/AP1 motifs of HS-40 is mediated through its binding to NF-E2 but not AP1
transcription factor. Finally, we did genomic footprinting of the HS-40 enhancer 
region in K562 cells, adult nucleated erythroblasts, and different nonerythroid
cells. All sequence motifs within the functional core of HS-40, as mapped by
transient expression analysis, appeared to bind a nuclear factor(s) in living
K562 cells but not in nonerythroid cells. On the other hand, only one of the
apparently nonfunctional sequence motifs was bound with factors in vivo. In
comparison to K562, nucleated erythroblasts from adult human bone marrow
exhibited a similar but nonidentical pattern of nuclear factor binding in vivo at
the HS-40 region. These data suggest that transcriptional activation of human
embryonic zeta 2 globin gene and the fetal/adult alpha globin genes is mediated
by erythroid cell-specific and developmental stage-specific nuclear factor-DNA
complexes which form at the enhancer (HS-40) and the globin promoters.

PMCID: PMC359550
PMID: 8455611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 15;268(8):5431-7.

Transcriptional regulation of the pyruvate kinase erythroid-specific promoter.

Max-Audit I(1), Eleouet JF, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.91, Hôpital Henri 
Mondor, Créteil, France.

Mammal pyruvate kinases are encoded by two genes. The L gene produces the
erythroid (R-PK) or the hepatic (L-PK) isozymes by the alternative use of two
promoters. We report the characterization of the cis- and trans-acting elements
involved in the tissue-specific activity of the L gene erythroid promoter. A R-PK
DNA fragment extending from -870 to +54 relative to the cap site confers
erythroid specificity to a reporter gene. Within this region, we define a minimal
promoter (-62 to +54) that displays erythroid-specific activity and contains two 
DNA binding sites. One, located at -50, binds members of the CCACC/Sp1 family and
the other, located at -20, binds the erythroid factor GATA-1. Although the -20
GATA binding site (AGATAA) is also a potential TFIID binding site, it does not
bind TFIID. Furthermore, the substitution of this GATA binding site by a
canonical TFIID binding site suppresses the promoter activity. Mutations and
deletions of both sites indicate that only the association of CCACC/Sp1 and GATA 
binding sites can drive efficient and tissue-specific expression of this R-PK
minimal promoter. Finally, by co-transfection experiments, we study the elements 
involved in the hGATA-1 transactivation of the R-PK promoter in HeLa cells.

PMID: 8449904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Mar 15;212(3):763-70.

CCACC-binding or simian-virus-40-protein-1-binding proteins cooperate with human 
GATA-1 to direct erythroid-specific transcription and to mediate 5'
hypersensitive site 2 sensitivity of a TATA-less promoter.

Eleouet JF(1), Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 91, Hôpital
Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Previous studies have shown that a -112 to +78 DNA fragment from the erythroid
promoter of the human porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) gene has
erythroid-specific activity. This PBGD-(-112 to +78) promoter contains a CCACC
binding site (position -100), a GATA binding site (position -70) and an initiator
element around the cap site. Using a cotransfection assay, we find that the human
factor GATA-1 trans-activates the PBGD-(-112 to +78) promoter in non-erythroid
cells. We show that, if trans-activation is abolished by mutations that destroy
either the -100 CCACC binding or the -70 GATA binding sites, replacement of the
-100 CCACC binding site by a simian-virus-40-protein-1 (Sp1) binding site
maintains both the erythroid-specific activity of this promoter and the human
GATA-1 trans-activation. Thus, human GATA-1 acts on the PBGD promoter in
association with Sp1 or CCACC binding proteins. This PBGD-(-112 to +78) promoter 
is activated 20-fold by a cis-linked 5' hypersensitive site 2 (5'HS-2) of the
human beta-globin locus control region. This activation depends on the -70 GATA
and -100 CCACC or Sp1 binding sites. When a longer -714 to +78 fragment of the
PBGD promoter is used, the -70 GATA mutant still displays erythroid-specific
activity and is cis-activated by the 5'HS-2 enhancer, while the -100 CCACC mutant
is completely inactive in the absence or in the presence of the 5'HS-2 enhancer. 
Thus, the -100 CCACC binding site is indispensable for the correct activity and
sensitivity of the human PBGD promoter to the 5'HS-2 enhancer, whereas the -70
GATA binding site can functionally be replaced by upstream cis-acting elements.

PMID: 8385011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nihon Rinsho. 1993 Mar;51(3):741-6.

[The trend of molecular biology study on eosinophils].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaguchi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Division, Beth Israel Hospital, Harvard Medical School.

Recently, many investigators have been interested in the study on eosinophil
biology since genes association with eosinophils such as interleukin-5 or
eosinophil granule proteins (EPO, ECP, EDN, MBP, and CLC), were isolated.
However, the molecular basis for the commitment of progenitors to the eosinophil 
lineage has not been determined. The mechanism by which eosinophil-specific genes
encoding primary and secondary granule proteins (e.g. ECP, EDN, EPO, MBP, and
CLC) are expressed and regulated during eosinophilopoiesis is also unknown. In
this paper, I described the characterization of genes encoding eosinophil granule
proteins and the mRNA expression of GATA-1 binding transcription factor during
eosinophil differentiation.

PMID: 8492451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. EMBO J. 1993 Mar;12(3):1077-85.

The minimal requirements for activity in transgenic mice of hypersensitive site 3
of the beta globin locus control region.

Philipsen S(1), Pruzina S, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Structure and Expression, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, UK.

Proper expression of the human beta-like globin genes is completely dependent on 
the presence of the locus control region or LCR, a region containing four DNase
hypersensitive sites (HS1-4) situated 5' to the structural genes. Linkage of the 
LCR to a transgene results in copy number-dependent transcription, independent of
the site of integration in the host genome. We have analysed a small region of
the LCR (HS3) in transgenic animals to determine the minimal interactions that
are required for this property. The results show that a specific combination of a
G-rich sequence flanked on each side by one binding site for the transcription
factor GATA1 is essential to obtain position-independent expression of a linked
beta globin gene in erythroid cells. The overall transcriptional activity of HS3 
is achieved through synergy with other combinations of similar binding sites.

PMCID: PMC413309
PMID: 8458325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Leukemia. 1993 Mar;7(3):452-7.

Increased expression of GATA-1 and NFE-2 erythroid-specific transcription factors
during aclacinomycin-mediated differentiation of human erythroleukemic cells.

Trentesaux C(1), Nyoung MN, Aries A, Morceau F, Ronchi A, Ottolenghi S,
Jardillier JC, Jeannesson P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie, GIBSA, UFR de Pharmacie, Reims, France.

Anthracycline antitumor drugs, particularly aclacinomycin (ACM) have been shown
to be potent inducers of erythroid differentiation in human leukemic K562 cells. 
Here we report that such an event is associated with an overexpression of the
erythroid-specific transcription factors GATA-1 and NFE-2. Using the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, during differentiation over 3 days of
culture, we have observed an increase in the binding either of GATA-1 to the
promoter of the gamma-globin gene (region -201 to -156) or NFE-2 to the promotor 
of the porphobilinogen deaminase gene (region -170 to -142). Both events were
paralleled by a recruitment of hemoglobinized cells and a stimulation of heme
synthesis. Enhanced binding capacity of GATA-1 was confirmed by an increase in
its mRNAs. Moreover, GATA-1 and NFE-2 overexpression has been shown to be
specific of the differentiating effect of the drug and not of its growth
inhibitory effect. In contrast, no change was observed in the binding of the
ubiquitous factors OTF-1 and AP-1, except on day 3, where AP-1 decreased.
Although ACM is a DNA-intercalating agent, it did not directly affect
transcription factors binding to their cis-sequences as assessed by the
preincubation of the oligonucleotides probes with increasing concentrations of
ACM. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that ACM could exert their
erythroid-differentiating activity by modulating the expression of transcription 
factors which specifically regulate the transcription of erythroid genes.

PMID: 8445949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Blood. 1993 Mar 1;81(5):1214-21.

Downregulation of GATA-1 expression during phorbol myristate acetate-induced
megakaryocytic differentiation of human erythroleukemia cells.

Dai W(1), Murphy MJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hipple Cancer Research Center, Dayton, OH
45439-2092.

Phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) induces the expression of megakaryocyte and/or
platelet proteins during terminal differentiation of human erythroleukemia (HEL) 
cells. However, it is not established whether megakaryocytic differentiation is
accompanied by the downregulation of the major erythroid transcription factor
GATA-1 and the concomitant loss of the erythrocytic phenotype. Studies of the
molecular mechanism of PMA-induced differentiation in HEL cells showed that when 
HEL cells are treated with PMA, they dramatically decrease the expression of the 
erythroid-specific gene glycophorin A at the mRNA level but apparently not at the
steady-state protein level. In addition, a gel mobility shift assay was used to
demonstrate that GATA-1, a major erythroid transcription factor normally present 
at high levels in HEL cells is downregulated after treatment with PMA. In
contrast, the DNA-binding activities of transcription factors AP-1 and SP-1 are
upregulated by PMA treatment of HEL cells. Furthermore, Northern blot analysis
shows that PMA also downregulates the steady-state level of GATA-1 mRNA in HEL
cells. The coordinated negative regulation of glycophorin A mRNA and GATA-1
expression after PMA treatment suggests that downregulation of GATA-1 expression 
may be partially responsible for the loss of the erythroid phenotype during
megakaryocytic differentiation. The reported data also suggest that GATA-1
activity may not be essential for obtaining megakaryocytic phenotype during
terminal differentiation in HEL cells.

PMID: 8443382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Stem Cells. 1993 Mar;11(2):95-104.

Erythroid regulatory elements.

Raich N(1), Romeo PH.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Erythroid differentiation leads to the production of red blood cells that contain
a high level of hemoglobin. This level is mainly regulated by globin gene
transcription during development and differentiation. Although numerous
cis-acting sequences are involved in transcriptional activity of globin genes,
combinations of three motifs, CCACC, SP1 and GATA represent the core elements of 
their regulatory sequences. These combinations are also found in promoters and/or
enhancers of non-globin genes specifically expressed in the late stages of
erythroid differentiation. The CCACC and SP1 sequences bind proteins that do not 
display erythrocytic specificity, and the GATA sequences bind a family of
transacting factors recently cloned. The GATA family members are distinctive for 
a highly homologous DNA binding domain that exists in two zinc fingers
reminiscent of those of the glucocorticoid receptor. None of the GATA family
members displays only erythroid specificity, but gene disruption followed by
rescue indicates that GATA-1 is necessary for terminal erythroid differentiation 
throughout development. The GATA/SP1 and GATA/CCACC associations are present in
positive, negative or inducible regulatory sequences suggesting that other
elements control the fine tuning of erythroid gene expression. NF-E2, which is a 
major transcriptional activator, members of the ets family which are implicated
in the early stages of erythropoiesis and finally c-erbA which directly regulates
a set of erythroid-specific genes are proteins that bind these latter regulatory 
motifs.

PMID: 8096156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 1993 Feb 15;268(5):3430-7.

Protein-DNA interactions in the epsilon-globin gene silencer.

Peters B(1), Merezhinskaya N, Diffley JF, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The developmental control of expression of the human epsilon-globin gene appears 
to be mediated, at least in part, by a transcriptional silencer in the DNA 5' to 
the cap site of this gene. We have used site-directed mutagenesis and DNA-protein
binding assays to define the active motifs of this epsilon-globin silencer. DNase
I foot-printing of the silencer region with K562 cell nuclear extracts defined a 
sequence, which we designate as the epsilon-globin silencer motif or epsilon GSM 
(epsilon -278 to -258 base pairs (bp)) containing a region (epsilon -270 to -258)
with 90% homology to the yeast mating type silencer, ABF-1 (autonomous
replicating sequence binding factor one) and which also overlaps at (epsilon -269
to -262) with the human YY1 consensus sequence, an element which mediates
transcription repression and activation of viral, mouse, and human genes. The
DNase I footprint extended 5' in the silencer region to include an inverted
repeat of a six-nucleotide motif (epsilon -267 to -278 bp) which shares 5 of 6
bases with the GATA-1 consensus sequence. In gel mobility shift assays, two
specific proteins (A and B) in nuclear extracts from erythroleukemia K562 cells
bound to the DNase I-footprinted region. Protein B, associated with
epsilon-globin silencer activity in vitro, required an intact epsilon GSM
sequence for binding. Mutation of 5 bases within the epsilon GSM in an
epsilon-globin promoter-containing fragment extending upstream to 1400 bp in
transient transfection assays increased activity by 3.0-fold compared with the
native sequence, suggesting that the silencer activity was mediated by the
epsilon GSM sequence. We found that protein A could be displaced by a competitor 
containing the GATA-1 consensus sequence, suggesting that protein A is a
GATA-like protein. The region from -267 to -271 within the epsilon GSM and GATA-1
homology region was important for binding of both proteins A and B. These data
suggest that protein binding to the epsilon GSM and GATA motifs mediate the
negative effect of the silencer on transcription, possibly via direct competition
for binding to this DNA region. Recombinant yeast ABF-1 and human YY1 bound to
the epsilon GSM. Mutating three bases (epsilon -259, -262, -264) in the epsilon
GSM decreased the binding affinity of protein B and recombinant human YY1 but
increased the binding affinity of recombinant yeast ABF-1. Furthermore,
competitor containing the YY1 consensus sequence competed for protein B binding, 
whereas competitor containing a perfect yeast ABF-1 consensus sequence did
not.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8429019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1993 Feb;202(2):115-21.

Transcription factor GATA-1 and erythroid development.

Simon MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

In summary, we derived an experimental system that allows us to dissect the
function of GATA-1 in red cell development at a genetic level. We have
established the essential nature of GATA-1 during both primitive and definitive
erythropoiesis. By ablating the expression of the endogenous GATA-1 gene, we are 
in a position to introduce a variety of constructs that harbor subtle
modifications in flanking or protein-coding sequences. We can now study
regulatory regions and functional domains of the protein in the context of a true
erythroid environment, experiments that have not been possible heretofore.
Although the assay involves the dramatic loss of red cell production, it should
be possible to define important regulatory domains that can then be assayed using
less stringent systems, such as cell-free extracts for in vitro transcription.
The ideal situation would be analyses conducted in GATA-1- erythroid cells.
However, these cells have been impossible to generate given the requirement of
GATA-1 for Epo receptor expression and red cell viability (C. Simon and S. Orkin,
unpublished observations). It may be possible to produce such cells by first
expressing the Epo receptor under the influence of a constitutive promoter and
then targeting the GATA-1 gene. If GATA-1- red cells were available, the analyses
would involve the actual transcription of or chromatin structure surrounding the 
globin genes. Structure-function studies of the GATA-1 protein could be greatly
simplified and a larger number of mutants studied. However, the ES cell system
can be used as an alternative until targeted erythroleukemia cells become
available. Other applications involve the introduction of other GATA-binding
protein family members to determine whether they rescue the mutation. If they
cannot, chimeric proteins can be tested to identify which amino acids distinguish
the different family members. We feel that these experiments are vital to
understanding the function of GATA-1 during erythroid ontogeny. How does GATA-1
regulate red cell genes like globin or the Epo receptor? Once we identify the
functional domains of the GATA-binding proteins, we hope to learn what proteins
GATA-1 binds to in the basic transcription machinery or in chromatin. Is GATA-1
necessary for globin gene switching? GATA-1 may be modified differently during
development so that the locus control region can interact with different globin
promoters. We may find that one region of the protein is required for embryonic
expression and another for adult globin gene expression.

PMID: 8424101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Feb;13(2):911-7.

Enhancer-dependent transcription of the epsilon-globin promoter requires
promoter-bound GATA-1 and enhancer-bound AP-1/NF-E2.

Gong Q(1), Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We analyzed epsilon-globin transcription in erythroid cells and in erythroid
extracts to determine the requirements for enhancer-dependent expression of this 
gene. Mutations that abolished GATA-1 binding at a single position in the
promoter prevented interaction with enhancers, whereas elimination of a second
more distal promoter GATA-1 site had no effect. Deletion or mutation of the
GATA-1 sites in either the human beta-globin locus control region
DNase-hypersensitive site II enhancer or the chicken beta A/epsilon-globin
enhancer did not diminish the ability of the enhancers to interact with the
promoter. In contrast, mutation of the AP-1/NF-E2 sites in these enhancers
resulted in elimination of enhancement. In vitro transcription of these
constructs was promoter dependent and was not sensitive to abolition of GATA-1
binding in the promoter, consistent with the role of GATA-1 solely as a mediator 
of the enhancer effect. Thus, GATA-1 regulates the response of the epsilon-globin
gene to enhancers through a specific site in the promoter and requires enhancer
AP-1/NF-E2 binding to transduce the enhancer effect on transcription.

PMCID: PMC358974
PMID: 8423810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood. 1993 Feb 1;81(3):647-55.

Expression of tal-1 and GATA-binding proteins during human hematopoiesis.

Mouthon MA(1), Bernard O, Mitjavila MT, Romeo PH, Vainchenker W, Mathieu-Mahul D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Tal-1 rearrangements are associated with nearly 30% of human T acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Tal-1 gene encodes a putative transcription factor with a
basic helix-loop-helix domain and is known to be predominantly expressed in
hematopoietic cells. We investigated the pattern of tal-1 expression in purified 
human hematopoietic cells by in situ hybridization and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction analysis. Both methods demonstrated that the tal-1 gene
is expressed in megakaryocytes and erythroblasts as well as in basophilic
granulocytes. In addition, our results indicate that the tal-1 1A promoter, which
contains two consensus GATA-binding sites, is active mainly in these lineages.
Because the GATA-1 gene is known to transactivate several genes specific for the 
erythroid, megakaryocytic, and mastocytic/basophilic lineages, we studied GATA-1 
expression in these purified hematopoietic cells. We found that GATA-1 and tal-1 
genes are coexpressed in these three lineages. Remarkably, the expression of both
genes is downmodulated during erythroid and megakaryocytic terminal maturation.
In immature hematopoietic cells, tal-1 and GATA-1 genes are coexpressed in
committed progenitors cells (CD34+/CD38(2+)), whereas they are not detectable in 
the most primitive cells (CD34(2+)/CD38-). In contrast, GATA-2 is strongly
expressed in both most primitive and committed progenitors cells, whereas GATA-3 
is mostly detected in most primitive ones. Altogether our results strongly
suggest that GATA-1 modulates the transcription of tal-1 during the
differentiation of the erythroid, megakaryocytic, and basosophilic lineages.

PMID: 7678994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mamm Genome. 1993;4(2):119-23.

Partial inversion of gene order within a homologous segment on the X chromosome.

Laval SH(1), Boyd Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Medical Research Council Radiobiology Unit, Didcot, Oxon,
UK.

The locus for the erthyroid transcription factor, GATA1, has been positioned in
the small interval between DXS255 and TIMP on the proximal short arm of the human
X Chromosome (Chr) by use of a partial human cDNA clone and a well-characterized 
somatic cell hybrid panel. Analysis of selected recombinants from 108 Mus
musculus x Mus spretus backcross progeny with the same clone confirmed that the
homologous murine locus (Gf-1) lies between Otc and the centromere of the mouse X
Chr. These data imply that a partial inversion of gene order has occurred within 
the conserved segment that represents Xp21.1-Xp11.23 in human (CYBB-GATA1) and
the proximal 6 cM of the mouse X Chr (Gf-1-Timp). Furthermore, they indicate that
the mouse mutant scurfy and the human genetic disorder Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 
which have been mapped to the same regions as GATA1/Gf-1 in both species, may
indeed be homologous disorders.

PMID: 8431636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):668-76.

GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences mediate megakaryocyte-specific expression.

Lemarchandel V(1), Ghysdael J, Mignotte V, Rahuel C, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Creteil, France.

The human glycoprotein IIB (GPIIB) gene is expressed only in megakaryocytes, and 
its promoter displays cell type specificity. We show that this specificity
involved two cis-acting sequences. The first one, located at -55, contains a GATA
binding site. Point mutations that abolish protein binding on this site decrease 
the activity of the GPIIB promoter but do not affect its tissue specificity. The 
second one, located at -40, contains an Ets consensus sequence, and we show that 
Ets-1 or Ets-2 protein can interact with this -40 GPIIB sequence. Point mutations
that impair Ets binding decrease the activity of the GPIIB promoter to the same
extent as do mutations that abolish GATA binding. A GPIIB 40-bp DNA fragment
containing the GATA and Ets binding sites can confer activity to a heterologous
promoter in megakaryocytic cells. This activity is independent of the GPIIB DNA
fragment orientation, and mutations on each binding site result in decreased
activity. Using cotransfection assays, we show that c-Ets-1 and human GATA1 can
transactive the GPIIB promoter in HeLa cells and can act additively. Northern
(RNA) blot analysis indicates that the ets-1 mRNA level is increased during
megakaryocyte-induced differentiation of erythrocytic/megakaryocytic cell lines. 
Gel retardation assays show that the same GATA-Ets association is found in the
human GPIIB enhancer and the rat platelet factor 4 promoter, the other two
characterized regulatory regions of megakaryocyte-specific genes. These results
indicate that GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences are an important determinant of
megakaryocytic specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC358945
PMID: 8417360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Nov 1;89(21):10444-8.

Functional erythroid promoters created by interaction of the transcription factor
GATA-1 with CACCC and AP-1/NFE-2 elements.

Walters M(1), Martin DI.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, University of Washington, School of
Medicine, Seattle 98104.

We have investigated interactions between the erythroid transcription factor
GATA-1 and factors binding two cis-acting elements commonly linked to GATA sites 
in erythroid control elements. GATA-1 is present at all stages of erythroid
differentiation, is necessary for erythropoiesis, and binds sites in all
erythroid control elements. However, minimal promoters containing GATA-1 sites
are inactive when tested in erythroid cells. Based on this observation, two
erythroid cis elements, here termed CACCC and AP-1/NFE-2, were linked to GATA
sites in minimal promoters. None of the elements linked only to a TATA box
created an active promoter, but GATA sites linked to either CACCC or AP-1/NFE-2
elements formed strong erythroid promoters. A mutation of T to C at position -175
in the gamma-globin promoter GATA site, associated with hereditary persistence of
fetal hemoglobin (HPFH), increased expression of these promoters in both fetal
and adult cells. A construct bearing the beta-globin CACCC element was more
active in adult and less active in fetal erythroid cells, when compared with the 
gamma-globin CACCC element. These studies suggest that erythroid control elements
are formed by the interactions of at least three transcription factors, none of
which functions alone.

PMCID: PMC50355
PMID: 1438231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EMBO J. 1992 Nov;11(11):4095-102.

Erythroid-specific activity of the glycophorin B promoter requires GATA-1
mediated displacement of a repressor.

Rahuel C(1), Vinit MA, Lemarchandel V, Cartron JP, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.76, Institut National de Transfusion Sanguine, Paris, France.

We have performed a detailed analysis of the cis-acting sequences involved in the
erythroid-specific expression of the human glycophorin B (GPB) promoter and found
that this promoter could be divided into two regions. The proximal region, -1 to 
-60, contains a GATA binding sequence around -37 and an SP1 binding sequence
around -50. This region is active in erythroid and non-erythroid cells. The
distal region, -60 to -95, contains two overlapping protein binding sites around 
-75, one for hGATA-1 and one for ubiquitous proteins. This distal region
completely represses the activity of the proximal promoter in non-erythroid cells
and defines the -95 GPB construct as a GPB promoter that displays erythroid
specificity. Using site directed mutagenesis, we show that the -37 GATA and the
-50 SP1 binding sites are necessary for efficient activity of the -95 GPB
construct. Mutations that impair the -75 GATA-1 binding result in extinction of
the -95 GPB construct activity if the -75 ubiquitous binding site is not altered,
or in loss of erythroid specificity if the -75 ubiquitous binding site is also
mutated. Using a cotransfection assay, we found that hGATA-1 can efficiently
activate transcription of the -95 GPB construct in non-erythroid cells. This
transactivation is abolished by mutations that impair either the -37 GATA-1 or
the -50 SP1 binding. Mutations that impair the -75 GATA-1 binding and still allow
the -75 ubiquitous binding also abolish the transactivation of the -95 GPB
construct, indicating that hGATA-1 can remove repression of the GPB promoter by
displacement of the ubiquitous proteins.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC556919
PMID: 1396593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. EMBO J. 1992 Nov;11(11):4073-81.

The SCL gene product: a positive regulator of erythroid differentiation.

Aplan PD(1), Nakahara K, Orkin SH, Kirsch IR.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Navy Medical Branch, Bethesda, MD 20889.

The SCL (tal-1, TCL5) gene is a member of the basic domain, helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) class of putative transcription factors. We found that (i) the SCL
promoter for exon Ia contains a potential recognition site for GATA-binding
transcription factors, (ii) SCL mRNA is expressed in all erythroid tissues and
cell lines examined, and (iii) SCL mRNA increases upon induced differentiation of
murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells, and inferred that SCL may play a physiologic 
role in erythroid differentiation. We used gel shift and transfection assays to
demonstrate that the GATA motif in the SCL promoter binds GATA-1 (and GATA-2),
and also mediates transcriptional transactivation. To identify a role for SCL in 
erythroid differentiation, we generated stable transfectants of MEL and K562 (a
human chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line that can differentiate along the
erythroid pathway) cells overexpressing wild-type, antisense or mutant SCL cDNA. 
Increasing the level of SCL expression in two independent MEL lines (F4-6 and
C19, a 745 derivative) and K562 cells increased the rate of spontaneous (i.e. in 
the absence of inducer) erythroid differentiation. Conversely, induced
differentiation was inhibited in MEL transfectants expressing either antisense
SCL cDNA or a mutant SCL lacking the basic domain. Our experiments suggest that
the SCL gene can be a target for the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 and
that the SCL gene product serves as a positive regulator of erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC556917
PMID: 1396592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Blood. 1992 Sep 1;80(5):1347-51.

Delta-thalassemia caused by disruption of the site for an erythroid-specific
transcription factor, GATA-1, in the delta-globin gene promoter.

Matsuda M(1), Sakamoto N, Fukumaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory for Genetic Information, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan.

Delta-thalassemia is a complex group of inherited disorders of globin genes
characterized by impaired synthesis of the delta-globin chain. The T-C
substitution was detected at position -77 of the delta-globin gene isolated from 
three independent Japanese individuals who were homozygotes for
delta-thalassemia. To elucidate the significance of the mutation in delta-globin 
gene expression, we investigated the genotype of three delta-thalassemia
homozygotes and 58 normal individuals using dot blot hybridization of the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified DNA. The mutation was observed in six
alleles of three homozygotes, while no mutation was detected in 116 alleles of
normal individuals, thereby indicating the close association of this mutation
with the thalassemia phenotype. Since the mutation (TTATCT-TCATCT) is located
within the inverted binding motif of GATA-1 (T or A-G-A-T-A-G or A), an erythroid
cell-specific transcription factor, we did gel retardation assays using nuclear
extracts from the erythroid cells. We found that GATA-1 binds the oligonucleotide
spanning positions -61 to -90, but does not bind to the oligonucleotide with the 
mutation at position -77. Competition gel retardation assays showed that GATA-1
binding can be competed out by the fragment with the GATA-1 motif, but not with
the mutant oligonucleotide. Analysis of the transient expression of the CAT gene 
linked to the delta-globin gene promoter region demonstrated that the construct
with the mutant promoter region was expressed about 20-fold less compared with
the normal one. Thus, the mutation at position -77 impairs delta-globin gene
expression by abolishing GATA-1 binding to the AGATAA sequence of the promoter
region of the delta-globin gene. This provides a good example of involvement of
tissue-specific transacting factors in the molecular pathogenesis of hereditary
diseases.

PMID: 1515647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nature. 1992 Aug 6;358(6386):499-502.

A single point mutation is the cause of the Greek form of hereditary persistence 
of fetal haemoglobin.

Berry M(1), Grosveld F, Dillon N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Structure and Expression, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

In normal humans the fetal stage-specific gamma-globin genes are silenced after
birth and not expressed in the adult. Exceptions are seen in cases of hereditary 
persistence of fetal haemoglobin (HPFH). These are clinically important because
the elevated levels of gamma-globin can alleviate beta-thalassaemia and sickle
cell anaemia. One class of mutations is associated with point mutations in the
promoter of the gamma-globin genes (non-deletion HPFH), whereas others seem to be
caused by large deletions 3' to the gamma-globin genes. To test whether the point
mutation found in the Greek non-deletion HPFH (guanine to adenine at nucleotide
position -117) is the cause of the raised gamma-globin levels in the adult stage 
and is not just a linked polymorphism, we engineered this mutation into a
gamma-globin gene. When this gene was introduced into mice, the presence of the
-117 mutation results in persistence of gamma-globin expression at a high level
and a concomitant decrease in beta-globin expression in fetal and adult mice. We 
show that these changes correlate with the loss of binding of the transcription
factor GATA1 to the gamma-globin promoter, suggesting that it may act as a
negative regulator of the gamma-globin gene in adults.

PMID: 1379347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Aug;51(2):363-70.

Functional profile of the human fetal gamma-globin gene upstream promoter region.

Lin HJ(1), Han CY, Nienhuis AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance 90502.

We performed a systematic functional analysis of the human gamma-globin promoter 
to identify its activator domains. We used a panel of truncation and scanning
mutants as well as transfection in human K562 fetal erythroid cells. The various 
mutations produced relatively small changes in promoter function in both
transient and stable transfection assays. The CACCC region and the region
containing the binding sites for protein GATA-1 behaved as activator domains. We 
also obtained evidence for a minor activator site in the - 200 to - 190 region.
The results are consistent with the interpretation that gamma-globin gene
regulation may occur in part through multiple small effects of promoter elements.

PMCID: PMC1682667
PMID: 1642236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Jul 15;89(14):6353-7.

Cell cycle-dependent initiation and lineage-dependent abrogation of GATA-1
expression in pure differentiating hematopoietic progenitors.

Sposi NM(1), Zon LI, Carè A, Valtieri M, Testa U, Gabbianelli M, Mariani G,
Bottero L, Mather C, Orkin SH, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

The programmed activation/repression of transcription factors in early
hematopoietic differentiation has not yet been explored. The DNA-binding protein 
GATA-1 is required for normal erythroid development and regulates
erythroid-expressed genes in maturing erythroblasts. We analyzed GATA-1
expression in early human adult hematopoiesis by using an in vitro system in
which "pure" early hematopoietic progenitors are induced to gradual and
synchronized differentiation selectively along the erythroid or
granulocyte-macrophage pathway by differential treatment with hematopoietic
growth factors. The GATA-1 gene, though virtually silent in quiescent
progenitors, is activated after entrance into the cell cycle upon stimulation
with hematopoietic growth factors. Subsequently, increasing expression along the 
erythroid pathway contrasts with an abrupt downregulation in the
granulocyte-macrophage lineage. These results suggest a
microenvironment-directed, two-step model for GATA-1 expression in
differentiating hematopoietic progenitors that involves (i) cycle-dependent
initiation and (ii) lineage-dependent maintenance or suppression. Hypothetically,
on/off switches of lineage-restricted transactivators may underlie the binary
fate decisions of hematopoietic progenitors.

PMCID: PMC49499
PMID: 1631130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 1992 May 25;267(15):10370-4.

Characterization of a specific erythromegakaryocytic enhancer within the
glycoprotein IIb promoter.

Prandini MH(1), Uzan G, Martin F, Thevenon D, Marguerie G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Département de
Biologie Moléculaire et Structurale, Grenoble, France.

The gene coding for glycoprotein IIb (GPIIb), the alpha subunit of platelet
integrin GPIIb/IIIa is an early and specific marker of the megakaryocytic
lineage. Thus, studies on the regulation of this gene may provide helpful
information on the mechanisms controlling cell specificity and differentiation in
this lineage. The promoter region of this gene was isolated and analyzed to
understand its tissue-specific transcriptional activity. A region extending from 
nucleotides -414 to -554 was found to be extremely important for the promoter
function. Deletion of this region results in a 70% decrease of the promoter
activity, as measured in CAT assays. This region has the properties of an
enhancer. It is able to activate a heterologous promoter, in a distance- and
orientation-independent manner, in both megakaryocytic and erythroid cells. This 
enhancer contains binding sites for nuclear factors and mutation of these sites, 
individually or together, abolish the enhancer activity. These nuclear factors
are present in megakaryocytic and erythroid cell lineages, but they are absent in
the other tested cells. One of the sites, named domain D, contains a TTATC motif 
that may interact with the transcription factor GATA1, active in erythroid and
megakaryocytic cells. These results indicate that the promoter of a
megakaryocytic gene contains a tissue specific enhancer, active in both the
erythroid and the megakaryocytic lineages, and may implicate the erythroid factor
GATA1.

PMID: 1587823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Virol. 1992 May;66(5):3056-61.

Transactivation of erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 by a myb-ets-containing 
retrovirus.

Aurigemma RE(1), Blair DG, Ruscetti SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

ME26 virus is a recombinant mouse retrovirus construct homologous to the avian
E26 virus. Both encode a 135-kDa gag-myb-ets fusion protein which is localized in
the nucleus. We have recently shown that ME26 virus can induce erythropoietin
(Epo) responsiveness in hematopoietic cells. Mice infected with ME26 virus
develop a hyperplasia of Epo-dependent hematopoietic precursor cells from which
permanent cell lines can be established. In vitro, ME26 virus specifically
induces Epo responsiveness in the interleukin-3-dependent myeloid cell line
FDC-P2 by enhancing expression of the Epo receptor (EpoR). In the present study
we demonstrate that ME26 virus infection of FDC-P2 cells also results in enhanced
expression of beta-globin and the erythroid-specific transcription factor GATA-1,
a protein which can transactivate both the EpoR promoter and globin genes. In
addition, these cells exhibit a down-regulation of c-myb expression similar to
that seen in differentiating erythroid cells. To determine the molecular basis
for activation of erythroid genes in ME26 virus-infected cells, we carried out
transient expression assays with DNA constructs of either the EpoR promoter of
the GATA-1 promoter linked to reporter genes. Our results indicate that while
ME26 virus did not directly enhance expression from the EpoR promoter, both it
and its avian parent, E26, transactivated the GATA-1 promoter. Furthermore, ME26 
virus cooperates with the GATA-1 protein to enhance expression of the EpoR gene. 
We propose that the mechanism by which ME26 virus induces erythroleukemia
involves transactivation of the GATA-1 gene, thus positively regulating the
expression of the EpoR and leading to the proliferation of a unique population of
Epo-responsive cells. By specifically inducing Epo responsiveness in
hematopoietic cells via transactivation of a transcription factor, ME26 virus
utilizes a novel mechanism for retrovirus pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC241066
PMID: 1560536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Genet. 1992 May;1(2):92-8.

Rescue of erythroid development in gene targeted GATA-1- mouse embryonic stem
cells.

Simon MC(1), Pevny L, Wiles MV, Keller G, Costantini F, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Development of definitive (fetal liver-derived) red cells is blocked by a
targeted mutation in the gene encoding the transcription factor GATA-1. We used
in vitro differentiation of GATA-1- mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to reveal a
requirement for GATA-1 during primitive (yolk sac-derived) erythropoiesis and to 
establish a rescue assay. We show that the block to development includes
primitive, as well as definitive, erythroid cells and is complete at the level of
globin RNA expression; that the introduction of a normal GATA-1 gene restores
developmental potential both in vivo and in vitro; and that efficient rescue is
dependent on a putative autoregulatory GATA-motif in the distal promoter. Use of 
in vitro differentiated ES cells bridges a gap between conventional approaches to
gene function in cell lines and analysis of loss of function mutations in the
whole animal.

PMID: 1302015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Apr 11;20(7):1812.

Sequence of the human GATA-1 promoter.

Zon LI(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA.

PMCID: PMC312284
PMID: 1579480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Br J Haematol. 1992 Apr;80(4):561-3.

Expression of a lineage specific transcriptional factor GATA-1 in leukaemic
blasts from patients with infantile leukaemia.

Ito E(1), Toki T, Arai K, Kawauchi K, Tsuda H, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Japan.

PMID: 1581244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncogene. 1992 Apr;7(4):653-60.

SCL is coexpressed with GATA-1 in hemopoietic cells but is also expressed in
developing brain.

Green AR(1), Lints T, Visvader J, Harvey R, Begley CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge, UK.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1992 Jul;7(7):1459.

The SCL gene encodes a putative transcription factor with a basic
helix-loop-helix (B-HLH) motif and is known to be predominantly expressed in
erythroid cells. Here we also demonstrate expression of SCL mRNA in normal mast
cells, mast cell lines and megakaryocytic cell lines. SCL is therefore expressed 
in the same three lineages as GATA-1, a well-recognized hemopoietic transcription
factor. SCL and GATA-1 mRNA were also co-expressed in interleukin 3-dependent
primitive myeloid lines. In murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells SCL and GATA-1
underwent coordinated biphasic modulation during hexamethylene bisacetamide
(HMBA)-induced erythroid differentiation. The kinetics of SCL and GATA-1 mRNA
expression was inversely correlated with changes in ID, a negative regulator of
B-HLH proteins, and was distinct from changes in MYC, MYB and erythropoietin
receptor transcripts. During myeloid differentiation of K562 cells, SCL and
GATA-1 mRNA levels also underwent biphasic modulation. Thus SCL and GATA-1 are
coordinately expressed in multiple hemopoietic lineages and coordinately
regulated during induced erythroid and myeloid differentiation. In nonhemopoietic
tissues SCL was only detected in adult and developing brain where GATA-1 is
reportedly not expressed. In day 14.5 embryos analysed by in situ hybridization, 
SCL transcripts were detected in post-mitotic neurons in the metencephalon and
roof of the mesencephalon. This suggests a previously unexpected role for SCL in 
neural differentiation.

PMID: 1565464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Apr;12(4):1815-26.

The gene for erythropoietin receptor is expressed in multipotential hematopoietic
and embryonal stem cells: evidence for differentiation stage-specific regulation.

Heberlein C(1), Fischer KD, Stoffel M, Nowock J, Ford A, Tessmer U, Stocking C.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie,
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

The principal regulator of erythropoiesis is the glycoprotein erythropoietin,
which interacts with a specific cell surface receptor (EpoR). A study aimed at
analyzing EpoR gene regulation has shown that both pluripotent embryonal stem
cells and early multipotent hematopoietic cells express EpoR transcripts.
Commitment to nonerythroid lineages (e.g., macrophage or lymphocytic) results in 
the shutdown of EpoR gene expression, whereas commitment to the erythroid lineage
is concurrent with or followed by dramatic increases in EpoR transcription. To
determine whether gene activity could be correlated with chromatin alterations,
DNase-hypersensitive sites (HSS) were mapped. Two major HSS located in the
promoter region and within the first intron of the EpoR gene are present in all
embryonal stem and hematopoietic cells tested, the intensities of which correlate
well with EpoR expression levels. In addition, a third major HSS also located
within the first intron of the EpoR gene is uniquely present in erythroid cells
that express high levels of EpoR. Transfection assays show that sequences
surrounding this major HSS impart erythroid cell-specific enhancer activity to a 
heterologous promoter and that this activity is at least in part mediated by
GATA-1. These data, together with concordant expression levels of GATA-1 and EpoR
in both early multipotent hematopoietic and committed erythroid cells, support a 
regulatory role of the erythroid cell-specific transcription factor GATA-1 in
EpoR transcription in these cells. However, the lack of significant levels of
GATA-1 expression in embryonal stem cells implies an alternative regulatory
mechanism of EpoR transcription in cells not committed to the hematopoietic
lineage.

PMCID: PMC369625
PMID: 1312671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Blood. 1992 Jan 15;79(2):512-6.

Delta-thalassemia due to a mutation in an erythroid-specific binding protein
sequence 3' to the delta-globin gene.

Moi P(1), Loudianos G, Lavinha J, Murru S, Cossu P, Casu R, Oggiano L, Longinotti
M, Cao A, Pirastu M.

Author information: 
(1)Ospedale Regionale per le Microcitemie, USL 21, Cagliari, Italy.

We have previously described a family of Northern Sardinian descent in which the 
propositus was affected by thalassemia major resulting from compound
heterozygosity for codon 39 nonsense mutation and the beta +IVS II nt 745
mutation and in which all heterozygotes for the beta +IVS II nt 745 mutation had 
normal hemoglobin (Hb) A2 levels. To define the reasons for normal HbA2 levels in
otherwise typical beta-thalassemia heterozygotes, we cloned and sequenced the
delta-thalassemia gene in cis to the beta +IVS II nt 745 mutation. The sequence
analysis showed a single nucleotide substitution (G----A) at position 69 nts
(delta +69) downstream to the polyA addition site. Dot blot analysis with an
oligonucleotide probe complementary to the delta +69 mutation detected this
mutation in several heterozygotes for the beta +IVS II nt 745 mutation from the
proband's family, but failed to show it either in a group of normal individuals
of the same origin or in nonrelated heterozygotes for the beta +IVS II nt 745
mutation of the same or different descent from the proband. The delta +69
(G----A) mutation may be responsible for the low delta-globin output from the
beta +IVS II nt 745 chromosome or could be a silent polymorphism not affecting
the function of the delta-globin gene. The normal G at position 69 is part of a
sequence very similar to the core DNA (A/T)GATA(A/G) motif (GATA box) that is a
binding site for the GATA-1 protein. Gel-retardation assay has shown that a DNA
fragment containing the GATA motif with the G----A at position +69 has increased 
binding affinity for erythroid-specific DNA binding protein(s) as compared with
the wild-type sequence. These findings may suggest that the delta +69 mutation is
responsible for the deficient function of the in cis delta-globin gene.

PMID: 1309671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Acta Haematol. 1992;87(3):136-44.

Identification of GATA-1 and NF-E2 binding sites in the flanking regions of the
human alpha-globin genes.

Gourdon G(1), Morlé F, Roche J, Tourneur N, Joulain V, Godet J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 106, Villeurbanne,
France.

Some of the elements involved in the erythroid-specific transcriptional
regulation of the human gamma- and beta-globin genes and located inside or in the
immediate proximity of these genes have been identified as sequences which bind
erythroid-specific factors. In the present study, we found two regions located
within 1 kb in 5' to the alpha 2- and in 3' to the alpha 1-globin genes which
contribute to the induction of human alpha-globin genes following erythroid
differentiation in stable MEL transformants. By DNAse I footprinting and gel
mobility shift assays, we identified several GATA-1 and one AP-1/NF-E2-binding
sites located inside these regions. These results strengthen the idea that, like 
for all other globin genes, flanking regions contribute in vivo to the regulation
of human alpha-globin gene expression.

PMID: 1642094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Dec 15;88(24):11086-90.

Response to erythropoietin in erythroid subclones of the factor-dependent cell
line 32D is determined by translocation of the erythropoietin receptor to the
cell surface.

Migliaccio AR(1), Migliaccio G, D'Andrea A, Baiocchi M, Crotta S, Nicolis S,
Ottolenghi S, Adamson JW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematopoietic Growth Factors, New York Blood Center, NY 10021.

Regulation of the expression of the erythropoietin (Epo) receptor (EpoR) gene is 
under the control of transcriptional regulatory factor GATA-1. GATA-1 is
expressed widely among the nonerythroid, factor-dependent subclones of the
interleukin 3-dependent mouse cell line 32D. Consequently, to determine whether
GATA-1 and EpoR gene expression are linked even in nonerythroid cells, we have
studied the correlation of GATA-1 expression with expression and function of EpoR
in these cell lines. EpoR mRNA (by RNase protection analysis) and EpoR protein
(by specific antibody immunoprecipitation of metabolically labeled EpoR protein) 
were detectable not only in 32D and 32D Epo (an Epo-dependent subclone) but also 
in 32D GM, a subclone dependent for growth on granulocyte/macrophage
colony-stimulating factor. EpoR mRNA also was detectable by PCR in 32D G, a
subclone dependent for growth on granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. However, 
only 32D Epo cells bound 125I-labeled Epo and expressed EpoR protein on the cell 
surface, as determined by immunoprecipitation of surface-labeled proteins. These 
results indicate that, in these factor-dependent cell lines, the major regulatory
step determining the erythroid-specific response to Epo is the efficiency of EpoR
protein translocation to the cell surface. Mechanisms that could affect
lineage-specific translocation are the presence of a chaperone protein,
erythroid-specific editing of EpoR mRNA, or altered processing of the EpoR
protein to the cell surface. In this model, lineage-restricted responses to
growth factors such as Epo are determined not by expression of the genes for
growth factor receptors but, rather, by appropriate processing of the receptor
protein.

PMCID: PMC53078
PMID: 1722318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 5;266(34):22948-53.

GATA-binding transcription factors in mast cells regulate the promoter of the
mast cell carboxypeptidase A gene.

Zon LI(1), Gurish MF, Stevens RL, Mather C, Reynolds DS, Austen KF, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115.

The transcription factors GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 were found to be expressed
in several mouse and rat mast cell lines that contain mast cell carboxypeptidase 
A (MC-CPA) and other proteases in their cytoplasmic granules. GATA-1 mRNA was not
detected in P815 cells, an immature mouse mastocytoma-derived cell line that
lacks electron-dense granules and has low levels of secretory granule proteases. 
Because the 5'-flanking regions of the mouse and human MC-CPA genes contained a
conserved GATA-binding motif 51 base pairs upstream of their translation
initiation sites, the ability of GATA-binding proteins to regulate the promoter
activity of the MC-CPA gene was examined in rat basophilic leukemia cells, mouse 
P815 cells, and transfected mouse P815 cells that expressed GATA-1. In all three 
mast cell lines, the promoter activity of the MC-CPA gene depended on the GATA
binding site. GATA-1, GATA-2, and GATA-3 are thus the first DNA-binding proteins 
identified in mast cells which regulate the promoter activity of a gene that
encodes a secretory granule protease.

PMID: 1744088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Dec 1;88(23):10638-41.

Activation of the erythropoietin receptor promoter by transcription factor
GATA-1.

Zon LI(1), Youssoufian H, Mather C, Lodish HF, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA.

Erythropoietin, a glycoprotein produced by the kidneys in response to anemia and 
hypoxia, is a major growth factor for cells of the erythroid lineage.
Erythropoietin interacts with high-affinity cell surface receptors (EpoR) present
on developing progenitors and is required for their survival. Previously we
characterized the gene for EpoR and demonstrated that its promoter acts in a
cell-specific manner. Here we show that the hematopoietic-specific transcription 
factor GATA-1 is necessary, and indeed is sufficient as the sole cell-restricted 
regulator, for activation of the EpoR promoter in fibroblast transfection assays.
Hence, GATA-1, which participates in transcriptional control of the majority of
erythroid-expressed genes, also acts on the promoter of an essential
lineage-restricted receptor (EpoR). This central contribution of GATA-1 to EpoR
promoter function provides a mechanism whereby a cell-restricted regulator may
ensure the viability and subsequent maturation of progenitor cells during
hematopoietic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC52985
PMID: 1660143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Oct 11;19(19):5285-91.

An erythroid specific enhancer upstream to the gene encoding the cell-type
specific transcription factor GATA-1.

Nicolis S(1), Bertini C, Ronchi A, Crotta S, Lanfranco L, Moroni E, Giglioni B,
Ottolenghi S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università di
Milano, Italy.

The transcription factor GATA-1 is expressed in a subset of hemopoietic cells,
where it mediates the cell-type specific expression of several genes. We have
cloned the mouse and human GATA-1 genes. A region upstream to the first exon, and
highly conserved between mouse and man, acts as an erythroid specific enhancer in
transient assays, if linked to the GATA-1 or to the SV40 promoter. The activity
of the enhancer is almost completely dependent on the integrity of a dimeric
GATA-1 binding site.

PMCID: PMC328889
PMID: 1656391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Oct 1;88(19):8676-80.

Protein-DNA interactions in vivo of an erythroid-specific, human beta-globin
locus enhancer.

Reddy PM(1), Shen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of California, Davis 95616.

The 5' DNase I-hypersensitive site 2 (5' HS-2) is an erythroid-specific enhancer 
located 11 kilobases (kb) upstream of the human beta-globin gene cluster.
Presence in cis of 5' HS-2 confers a high level of erythroid cell-specific and
developmentally regulated promoter activities of human globin genes in
transfected cell cultures and in transgenic mice. Combining the use of the
methylation protection assay and polymerase chain reaction, we have studied
nuclear factor-DNA interactions of the 5' HS-2 enhancer in vitro and in vivo. The
data from analyses of three different sequence motifs within 5' HS-2 represent
three different modes of protein-DNA interaction with respect to cell-type
specificities and in vivo vs. in vitro differences. First, a GATA-1 motif was
found to bind nuclear factor(s), presumably the GATA-1 factor, present in K-562
cell extracts and in living K-562 cells. No such binding was seen in nonerythroid
HeLa cells or extract. A second motif, NF-E2/AP1 (nuclear factor-erythroid
2/activator protein 1), consists of tandemly arranged dimers of AP1 binding
consensus. The presence of either HeLa extract or K-562 extract protects the
NF-E2/AP1 motif from methylation, but the footprints are different. This is most 
likely due to different protein-DNA contacts of the AP1-DNA complex formed in
HeLa extract and the NF-E2-DNA complex in K-562 extract. In vivo methylation
protection patterns of this motif parallel those observed in vitro, suggesting
that it is also bound by NF-E2 in K-562 cells and by AP1 in HeLa cells. Finally, 
a GT-I motif binds apparently to one or more similar factors in both types of
nuclear extracts, but the in vivo methylation protection patterns are not
identical between living HeLa and K-562 cells. These data provide direct evidence
that specific nuclear factor-DNA complexes form in vivo at functionally important
sequence motifs of the 5' HS-2 enhancer in erythroid cells. The detection of
conformationally different nuclear factor-DNA complexes at the same sequence
motifs in HeLa and Raji cell lines also raises interesting questions regarding
the origin and function of these complexes in nonerythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC52572
PMID: 1924329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 25;19(14):3843-8.

GATA-1 transactivates erythropoietin receptor gene, and erythropoietin
receptor-mediated signals enhance GATA-1 gene expression.

Chiba T(1), Ikawa Y, Todokoro K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

Erythropoietin is a cytokine which specifically regulates the proliferation and
differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells. The expression of erythropoietin
receptor on the cell membrane of the progenitor cells is a critical event during 
the erythroid differentiation process. In order to clarify the tissue-specific
and differentiation stage-specific expression of the erythropoietin receptor
gene, its transcriptional regulation was examined by transient expression assay, 
gel mobility shift assay and DNase I footprinting. The results clearly showed
that GATA-1 transactivates the gene expression through a single GATA motif
located around -200 bp upstream from the ATG codon in a dose dependent manner.
Furthermore, Northern blot analysis revealed that erythropoietin
receptor-mediated signals strongly enhanced GATA-1 gene expression in accordance 
with the appearance of hemoglobin-positive cells. Taken together with other
observations, these results suggested the following scheme of erythroid
differentiation: 1)GATA-1 is expressed in the early stage of blood cell
development; 2) GATA-1 transactivates the erythropoietin receptor gene; 3)
erythropoietin binds its receptor and the receptor-mediated signals enhance
GATA-1 gene expression in erythroid progenitor cells; and 4) GATA-1 finally
transactivates hemoglobin synthesis-related genes and globin genes in relatively 
matured erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC328472
PMID: 1650452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. EMBO J. 1991 Jul;10(7):1891-902.

Human erythroid 5-aminolevulinate synthase: promoter analysis and identification 
of an iron-responsive element in the mRNA.

Cox TC(1), Bawden MJ, Martin A, May BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, Australia.

5-Aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS) catalyzes the first step of the heme
biosynthetic pathway. cDNA clones for the human erythroid ALAS isozyme were
isolated from a fetal liver library. It can be deduced that the erythroid ALAS
precursor protein has a molecular weight of 64.6 kd, and is similar in size to
the previously isolated human housekeeping ALAS precursor of molecular weight
70.6 kd. The mature mitochondrial forms of the erythroid and housekeeping ALAS
isozymes are predicted to have molecular weights of 59.5 kd and 64.6 kd,
respectively. The two isozymes show little amino acid identity in their
N-terminal signal sequences but have considerable sequence identity in the
C-terminal two-thirds of their proteins. An analysis of the immediate promoter of
the human erythroid ALAS gene revealed several putative erythroid-specific
cis-acting elements including both a GATA-1 and an NF-E2 binding site. An
iron-responsive element (IRE) motif has been identified in the 5'-untranslated
region of the human erythroid ALAS mRNA, but is not present in the housekeeping
ALAS mRNA. Gel retardation experiments established that this IRE motif formed a
protein - RNA complex with cytosolic extracts from human K562 cells and this
binding was strongly competed with IRE transcripts from ferritin or transferrin
receptor mRNAs. A transcript of the ALAS IRE, mutated in the conserved loop of
the IRE, did not readily form this protein - RNA complex. These results suggest
that the IRE motif in the ALAS mRNA is functional and imply that translation of
the mRNA is controlled by cellular iron availability during erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC452864
PMID: 2050125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO J. 1991 Jul;10(7):1809-16.

A T-cell specific TCR delta DNA binding protein is a member of the human GATA
family.

Joulin V(1), Bories D, Eléouet JF, Labastie MC, Chrétien S, Mattéi MG, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

The human GATA1, hGATA1 (previously called NF-E1, GF-1 or Eryf-1), a major
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein of the erythrocytic lineage, is a member of
a zinc-finger family of DNA-binding proteins. We report here the cloning of a
human cDNA for a new member of this family. This member, called hGATA3, has 85%
amino acid homology with hGATA1 in the DNA-binding domain and no homology
elsewhere in the protein. Unlike hGATA1, hGATA3 is not localized on the X
chromosome and we map it to the 10p15 band of the human genome. Northern blot
analysis indicates that this factor is a T-cell specific transcription factor,
present before activation and up-regulated during T-cell activation. The encoded 
hGATA3 protein, made in an in vitro transcription-translation assay, binds the
WGATAR motif present in the human T-cell receptor (TCR) delta gene enhancer and, 
by transfection in HeLa cells, we show that hGATA3 can transactivate this TCR
delta gene enhancer. Interestingly this enhancer binds and is also transactivated
by hGATA1. Conversely, the promoter of the human glycophorin B (GPB), which is
erythroid-specific and contains two WGATAR motifs, binds and is transactivated by
hGATA1 and, to a lesser extent, by hGATA3. These results indicate that the
activation of specific genes by hGATA1 or hGATA3 is partly governed by the
lineage expression of these two factors during haematopoiesis and that, in the
T-cell lineage, hGATA3 binds the human TCR delta gene enhancer and is involved in
its expression.

PMCID: PMC452855
PMID: 2050118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Genes Dev. 1991 Jun;5(6):919-31.

Functional analysis and in vivo footprinting implicate the erythroid
transcription factor GATA-1 as a positive regulator of its own promoter.

Tsai SF(1), Strauss E, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Transcription of erythroid-expressed genes and normal erythroid development in
vivo are dependent on a regulatory protein (GATA-1) that recognizes a consensus
GATA motif. GATA-1 expression is itself restricted to erythroid progenitors and
to two related hematopoietic lineages, megakaryocytes and mast cells. During
cellular maturation the levels of GATA-1 RNA and protein increase progressively. 
In an effort to delineate mechanisms by which this pivotal transcription factor
is itself regulated we have characterized the mouse GATA-1 gene and cis-elements 
within its promoter. We find that the isolated promoter retains cell specificity 
exhibited by the intact gene. Full promoter activity requires the presence of
proximal CACCC box sequences and an upstream, double GATA motif that binds a
single GATA-1 molecule in an asymmetric fashion. Using in vivo footprinting of
mouse erythroleukemic cells we detect protein binding in vivo to both
cis-elements. On the basis of these findings we propose that a positive feedback 
loop mediated through GATA-1 serves two complementary functions: maintenance of
the differentiated state by locking the promoter into an "on" state, and
programming the progressive increase in protein content throughout cellular
maturation.

PMID: 2044960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 May;11(5):2558-66.

Transcriptional role of a conserved GATA-1 site in the human epsilon-globin gene 
promoter.

Gong QH(1), Stern J, Dean A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The epsilon-globin gene is the first of the human beta-like globin genes to be
expressed during development. We have analyzed protein-DNA interactions in the
epsilon-globin promoter region by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic
mobility shift experiments using nuclear extracts from K562 human erythroid cells
and from nonerythroid HeLa cells. A restricted set of ubiquitous proteins,
including Sp1, bound to regions of the promoter including the CACCC and CCAAT
sites. Three interactions, at positions -213, -165, and +3 relative to the
transcription start site, were erythroid specific and corresponded to binding of 
GATA-1, a transcription factor highly restricted to the erythroid lineage.
Interestingly, the GATA-1 site at -165 has been conserved in the promoters of 10 
mammalian embryonic globin genes. Point mutations demonstrate that GATA-1 binding
to this site is necessary for interaction with an erythroid-specific enhancer but
that in the absence of an enhancer, GATA-1 does not increase transcription.

PMCID: PMC360025
PMID: 2017165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. EMBO J. 1991 May;10(5):1187-92.

Human GATA-3: a lineage-restricted transcription factor that regulates the
expression of the T cell receptor alpha gene.

Ho IC(1), Vorhees P, Marin N, Oakley BK, Tsai SF, Orkin SH, Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109.

In addition to its role in the recognition of foreign antigens, the T cell
receptor (TCR) alpha gene serves as a model system for studies of
developmentally-regulated, lineage-specific gene expression in T cells. TCR alpha
gene expression is restricted to cells of the TCR alpha/beta+ lineage, and is
controlled by a T cell-specific transcriptional enhancer located 4.5 kb 3' to the
C alpha gene segment. The TCR alpha enhancer contains four nuclear protein
binding sites called T alpha 1-T alpha 4. In this report we describe the
identification and characterization of a novel human cDNA, hGATA-3 that binds to 
the T alpha 3 element of the human TCR alpha enhancer. hGATA-3 contains a zinc
finger domain that is highly related to the DNA-binding domain of the
erythroid-specific transcription factor, GATA-1, and binds to a region of T alpha
3 that contains a consensus GATA binding site (AGATAG). Northern blot analyses of
hematopoietic cell lines demonstrate that hGATA-3 is expressed exclusively in T
cells. Overexpression of hGATA-3 in HeLa cells or human B cells specifically
activated transcription from a co-transfected reporter plasmid containing two
copies of the T alpha 3 binding site located upstream of the minimal SV40
promoter. Taken together these results demonstrate that hGATA-3 is a novel
lineage-specific hematopoietic transcription factor that appears to play an
important role in regulating the T cell-specific expression of the TCR alpha
gene.

PMCID: PMC452772
PMID: 1827068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Apr 11;19(7):1413-9.

Hypersensitive site 4 of the human beta globin locus control region.

Pruzina S(1), Hanscombe O, Whyatt D, Grosveld F, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

The Locus Control Region (LCR) of the human beta globin gene domain is defined by
four erythroid-specific DNasel hypersensitive sites (HSS) located upstream of
this multigene cluster. The LCR confers copy number dependent high levels of
erythroid specific expression to a linked transgene, independent of the site of
integration. To assess the role of the individual hypersensitive sites of the
LCR, we have localized HSS4 to a 280bp fragment that is functional both in murine
erythroleukaemia (MEL) cells and in transgenic mice. This fragment coincides with
the major area of hypersensitivity 'in vivo' and contains a number of DNasel
footprints. Bandshift analysis shows that these footprints correspond to binding 
sites for the erythroid specific proteins GATA1 and NF-E2 and a number of
ubiquitous proteins, including jun/fos, Sp1 and TEF2.

PMCID: PMC333894
PMID: 2027748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nature. 1991 Jan 17;349(6306):257-60.

Erythroid differentiation in chimaeric mice blocked by a targeted mutation in the
gene for transcription factor GATA-1.

Pevny L(1), Simon MC, Robertson E, Klein WH, Tsai SF, D'Agati V, Orkin SH,
Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GATA-1 (previously known as GF-1, NF-E1 or
Eryf 1 binds to GATA consensus elements in regulatory regions of the alpha- and
beta-globin gene clusters and other erythroid cell-specific genes. Analysis of
the effects of mutations in GATA-binding sites in cell culture and in binding
assays in vitro, as well as transactivation studies with GATA-1 expression
vectors in heterologous cells, have provided indirect evidence that this factor
is involved in the activation of globin and other genes during erythroid cell
maturation. GATA-1 is also expressed in megakaryocytes and mast cells, but not in
other blood cell lineages or in non-haemopoietic cells. To investigate the role
of this factor in haematopoiesis in vivo, we disrupted the X-linked GATA-1 gene
by homologous recombination in a male (XY) murine embryonic stem cell line and
tested the GATA-1-deficient cells for their ability to contribute to different
tissues in chimaeric mice. The mutant embryonic stem cells contributed to all
non-haemopoietic tissues tested and to a white blood cell fraction, but failed to
give rise to mature red blood cells. This demonstrates that GATA-1 is required
for the normal differentiation of erythroid cells, and that other GATA-binding
proteins cannot compensate for its absence.

PMID: 1987478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Dec 11;18(23):6863-9.

Progressive inactivation of the expression of an erythroid transcriptional factor
in GM- and G-CSF-dependent myeloid cell lines.

Crotta S(1), Nicolis S, Ronchi A, Ottolenghi S, Ruzzi L, Shimada Y, Migliaccio
AR, Migliaccio G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Università di
Milano, Italy.

The transcriptional binding protein NFE-1 (also called GF-1 and Ery-f1) is
thought to play a necessary, but not sufficient, role in the regulation of
differentiation-related gene expression in a subset of hematopoietic lineages
(erythroid, megakaryocytic, and basophil-mast cell). In order to clarify the
mechanism which underlies the lineage-specificity of the NFE-1 expression, as
well as the relationship between the expression of this factor and growth factor 
responsiveness, we have evaluated the capacity of erythropoietin (Epo)-,
granulomonocytic (GM)-colony stimulating factor (CSF)-, and granulocyte
(G)-CSF-dependent subclones derived from the interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent cell 
line 32D, to express 1) NFE-1 mRNA, 2) NFE-1-related nuclear proteins, and 3)
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) activity when transfected with a CAT
gene under the control of NFE-1 cognate sequences. NFE-1 mRNA was found to be
expressed not only in cells with mast cell (IL-3-dependent 32D) and erythroid
(Epo-dependent 32D Epo1) phenotypes, but also in cells with predominantly
granulocyte/macrophage properties, such as the GM-CSF- (early myelomonocytic) and
G-CSF- (myelocytic) dependent subclones of 32D. However, a gradient of
expression, correlating with the lineage, the stage of differentiation, and the
growth factor responsiveness of the cell lines, was found among the different
subclones: Epo greater than or equal to IL-3 greater than GM-CSF greater than
G-CSF. Binding experiments demonstrated NFE-1 activity in all cell lines except
the G-CSF-dependent line. Function of the NFE-1 protein was assessed by the
expression of the CAT gene linked to the SV40 promoter and a mutant (-175 T----C)
HPFH gamma-globin promoter. High level CAT expression was seen only in the Epo1
cells although low level expression was also seen in the parent 32D. These
results demonstrate that the specificity of the expression of NFE-1 for the
erythroid--megakaryocytic--mast cell lineages is obtained by progressive
inactivation of its expression in alternative lineages.

PMCID: PMC332743
PMID: 1702202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 1990 Oct 5;265(28):16729-32.

Characterization of a new erythroid/megakaryocyte-specific nuclear factor that
binds the promoter of the housekeeping human glycophorin C gene.

Colin Y(1), Joulin V, Le Van Kim C, Roméo PH, Cartron JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U76, Institut 
National de Transfusion Sanguine, Paris, France.

Human glycophorin C (GPC) is an integral membrane protein found in many cell
types but which exhibits increased expression in red cells. We have investigated 
the in vitro binding of nuclear protein factors to the GPC gene 5'-flanking
region which was transcriptionally active when transfected into erythroid and
non-erythroid cells. We found that in addition to known ubiquitous or erythroid
trans-acting factors, a presently uncharacterized
erythroid/megakaryocyte-specific protein binds the GPC promoter. This factor,
that we called NFE-6, is present in embryonic, fetal, or adult-like human or
mouse erythroleukemic cell lines, in a megakaryoblastic cell line, but not in
lymphoid or non-hematopoietic cell lines. These data suggest that NFE-6, like the
well characterized NFE-1 factor, is tissue- but not stage-specific and is
conserved across species. It is proposed that NFE-6 might be involved in the
quantitative change in the expression of the house-keeping GPC gene related to
red cell specialization.

PMID: 2211589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Apr 25;18(8):1977-82.

Protein-DNA interactions upstream from the human A gamma globin gene.

O'Neill D(1), Kaysen J, Donovan-Peluso M, Castle M, Bank A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

We have used DNAase I footprinting and the gel mobility shift assay to study
proteins which bind to promoter elements located between -140 and -382 upstream
of the human A gamma globin gene. Footprints are found with both erythroid and
nonerythroid nuclear extracts at three sites: from -294 to -264, -242 to -227,
and -189 to -172 from the transcription initiation site. An erythroid-specific
footprint is identified from -194 to -189. We demonstrate that two known
transcription factors, the ubiquitous octamer-binding protein OTF-1 and the
erythroid regulatory factor NFE-1, bind to the -194 to -172 region and that their
footprints overlap. Binding of OTF-1 to this region is reduced by a mutation at
-175 associated with a form of non-deletion hereditary persistence of fetal
hemoglobin. We conclude that OTF-1 may compete with NFE-1 for the -175 binding
site, possibly functioning as a repressor of gamma globin transcription.

PMCID: PMC330671
PMID: 2336386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


