
1. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):861-869. Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Loss of GATA5 expression due to gene promoter methylation induces growth and
colony formation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Xia L(1), Gong Y(2), Zhang A(3), Cai S(3), Zeng Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Security, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China. (2)Health Management Institute, Chinese
People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Chinese People's Liberation Army General 
Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China.

GATA5 is a transcription factor that is capable of suppressing the development of
various types of human cancer. The present study investigated the expression of
GATA5 and GATA4, and examined their roles in the proliferation and colony
formation ability of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and cells. The GATA4 
and GATA5 expression levels and gene promoter methylation of HCC tissue samples
from 38 patients and HCC cell lines were analyzed using reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and methylation-specific PCR
(MSP), respectively. The effects of GATA4 and GATA5 overexpression on the
proliferation and colony forming ability of HCC cells were also assessed using
cell viability and colony formation assays. A luciferase reporter assay was
utilized to investigate the transcriptional interaction of GATA4 and GATA5 with
canonical Wnt signaling. The results indicated that the expression levels of
GATA4 and GATA5 were lost or reduced following methylation of gene promoters in
HCC tissues and cell lines. Treatment with a demethylating agent,
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-AZA), restored GATA4 and GATA5 expression in HCC cell
lines. Furthermore, methylation of the GATA5 promoter was observed to be
associated with the age of patients exhibiting HCC. Restoration of GATA4 and
GATA5 expression inhibited colony formation and induced apoptosis of HCC cells in
vitro. The present study concluded that the expression levels of GATA4 and GATA5 
were reduced in HCC tissues and cell lines. Treatment with 5-AZA restored GATA4
and GATA5 expression in HCC cell lines, suppressing tumor cell growth and colony 
formation, as well as inducing apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4727174
PMID: 26870297  [PubMed]


2. Am J Cardiol. 2016 Feb 1;117(3):420-6. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.10.058. Epub
2015 Nov 19.

Identification of Gender-Specific Genetic Variants in Patients With Bicuspid
Aortic Valve.

Dargis N(1), Lamontagne M(1), Gaudreault N(1), Sbarra L(1), Henry C(1), Pibarot
P(1), Mathieu P(1), Bossé Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche de l'Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de
pneumologie de Québec (CRIUCPQ), Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. (2)Centre de
recherche de l'Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Québec 
(CRIUCPQ), Quebec City, Quebec, Canada; Department of Molecular Medicine, Laval
University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address:
yohan.bosse@criucpq.ulaval.ca.

Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most frequent congenital heart defect and has 
a male predominance of 3 to 1. A large proportion of patients develop valvular
and aortic complications. Despite the high prevalence of BAV, its cause and
genetic origins remain elusive. The goal of this study was to identify genetic
variants associated with BAV. Nine genes previously associated with BAV (NOTCH1, 
AXIN1, EGFR, ENG, GATA5, NKX2-5, NOS3, PDIA2, and TGFBR2) were sequenced in 48
patients with BAV using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine. Pathogenicity of
genetic variants was evaluated with the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion
framework. A selection of 89 variants identified by sequencing or in previous BAV
genetic studies was genotyped, and allele frequencies were compared in 323
patients with BAV confirmed at surgery and 584 controls. Analyses were also
performed by gender. Nine novel and 19 potentially pathogenic variants were
identified by next-generation sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, but 
they were not associated with BAV in the case-control population. A significant
association was observed between an in silico-predicted benign EGFR intronic
variant (rs17290301) and BAV. Analyses performed by gender revealed different
variants associated with BAV in men (EGFR rs533525993 and TEX26 rs12857479) and
women (NOTCH1 rs61751489, TGFBR2 rs1155705, and NKX2-5 rs2277923). In conclusion,
these results constitute the first association between EGFR genetic variants and 
BAV in humans and support a possible role of gender-specific polymorphisms in the
development of BAV.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26708639  [PubMed - in process]


3. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Dec 21;7:131. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0165-2. eCollection 
2015.

Aberrant DNA methylation profiles of inherited and sporadic colorectal cancer.

Sahnane N(1), Magnoli F(1), Bernasconi B(1), Tibiletti MG(2), Romualdi C(3),
Pedroni M(4), Ponz de Leon M(4), Magnani G(4), Reggiani-Bonetti L(5), Bertario
L(6), Signoroni S(6), Capella C(1), Sessa F(1), Furlan D(1); AIFEG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical and Morphological Sciences, Section of Anatomic
Pathology, University of Insubria, Via O. Rossi, 9, 21100 Varese, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy. (3)CRIBI
Biotechnology Center, University of Padova, Padua, Italy. (4)Department of
Diagnostic Medicine, Clinical and Public Health, University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia, Modena, Italy. (5)Department of Pathology, Policlinico di Modena, Modena,
Italy. (6)Unit of Hereditary Digestive Tract Tumours, Fondazione IRCCS-Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori Milan, Modena, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation has been widely investigated in sporadic
colorectal carcinomas (CRCs), and extensive work has been performed to
characterize different methylation profiles of CRC. Less information is available
about the role of epigenetics in hereditary CRC and about the possible clinical
use of epigenetic biomarkers in CRC, regardless of the etiopathogenesis. Long
interspersed nucleotide element 1 (LINE-1) hypomethylation and gene-specific
hypermethylation of 38 promoters were analyzed in multicenter series of 220 CRCs 
including 71 Lynch (Lynch colorectal cancer with microsatellite instability
(LS-MSI)), 23 CRCs of patients under 40 years in which the main inherited CRC
syndromes had been excluded (early-onset colorectal cancer with microsatellite
stability (EO-MSS)), and 126 sporadic CRCs, comprising 28 cases with
microsatellite instability (S-MSI) and 98 that were microsatellite stable
(S-MSS). All tumor methylation patterns were integrated with clinico-pathological
and genetic characteristics, namely chromosomal instability (CIN), TP53 loss,
BRAF, and KRAS mutations.
RESULTS: LS-MSI mainly showed absence of extensive DNA hypo- and
hypermethylation. LINE-1 hypomethylation was observed in a subset of LS-MSI that 
were associated with the worse prognosis. Genetically, they commonly displayed
G:A transition in the KRAS gene and absence of a CIN phenotype and of TP53 loss. 
S-MSI exhibited a specific epigenetic profile showing low rates of LINE-1
hypomethylation and extensive gene hypermethylation. S-MSI were mainly
characterized by MLH1 methylation, BRAF mutation, and absence of a CIN phenotype 
and of TP53 loss. By contrast, S-MSS showed a high frequency of LINE-1
hypomethylation and of CIN, and they were associated with a worse prognosis.
EO-MSS were a genetically and epigenetically heterogeneous group of CRCs. Like
LS-MSI, some EO-MSS displayed low rates of DNA hypo- or hypermethylation and
frequent G:A transitions in the KRAS gene, suggesting that a genetic syndrome
might still be unrevealed in these patients. By contrast, some EO-MSS showed
similar features to those observed in S-MSS, such as LINE-1 hypomethylation, CIN,
and TP53 deletion. In all four classes, hypermethylation of ESR1, GATA5, and WT1 
was very common.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant DNA methylation analysis allows the identification of
different subsets of CRCs. This study confirms the potential utility of
methylation tests for early detection of CRC and suggests that LINE-1
hypomethylation may be a useful prognostic marker in both sporadic and inherited 
CRCs.

PMCID: PMC4687378
PMID: 26697123  [PubMed]


4. Gene. 2016 Feb 15;577(2):265-74. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.12.013. Epub 2015 Dec
9.

Characterization of the zebrafish cx36.7 gene promoter: Its regulation of
cardiac-specific expression and skeletal muscle-specific repression.

Miyagi H(1), Nag K(2), Sultana N(3), Munakata K(4), Hirose S(5), Nakamura N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
miyagi.h.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute
of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.
Electronic address: kakon@fais.or.jp. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. Electronic address: sultana.n.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (4)Department of
Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho,
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
munakata.k.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (5)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. Electronic address: shirose@bio.titech.ac.jp. (6)Department of Biological 
Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku,
Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address: nnakamur@bio.titech.ac.jp.

Zebrafish connexin 36.7 (cx36.7/ecx) has been identified as a key molecule in the
early stages of heart development in this species. A defect in cx36.7 causes
severe heart malformation due to the downregulation of nkx2.5 expression, a
result which resembles congenital heart disease in humans. It has been shown that
cx36.7 is expressed specifically in early developing heart cardiomyocytes.
However, the regulatory mechanism for the cardiac-restricted expression of cx36.7
remains to be elucidated. In this study we isolated the 5'-flanking promoter
region of the cx36.7 gene and characterized its promoter activity in zebrafish
embryos. Deletion analysis showed that a 316-bp upstream region is essential for 
cardiac-restricted expression. This region contains four GATA elements, the
proximal two of which are responsible for promoter activation in the embryonic
heart and serve as binding sites for gata4. When gata4, gata5 and gata6 were
simultaneously knocked down, the promoter activity was significantly decreased.
Moreover, the deletion of the region between -316 and -133bp led to EGFP
expression in the embryonic trunk muscle. The distal two GATA and A/T-rich
elements in this region act as repressors of promoter activity in skeletal
muscle. These results suggest that cx36.7 expression is directed by cardiac
promoter activation via the two proximal GATA elements as well as by skeletal
muscle-specific promoter repression via the two distal GATA elements.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26692140  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 30;6:8835. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9835.

Endothelial Gata5 transcription factor regulates blood pressure.

Messaoudi S(1), He Y(2), Gutsol A(2), Wight A(1), Hébert RL(2), Vilmundarson
RO(3), Makrigiannis AP(1), Chalmers J(4), Hamet P(5), Tremblay J(3), McPherson
R(3), Stewart AF(3), Touyz RM(6), Nemer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, 
University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H8M5. (2)Kidney
Research Center, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1H8M5. (3)University of Ottawa Heart Institute, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth 
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H8M5. (4)The George Institute for Global Health, 
The University of Sydney, The Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, 83-117 Missenden
Road, Camperdown, New South Wales 2050, Australia. (5)Centre de Recherche du
Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, 900 rue St-Denis, Montréal,
Québec, Canada H2X 0A9. (6)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, BHF 
Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of Glasgow, 126 University
Place, Glasgow G128TA, UK.

Despite its high prevalence and economic burden, the aetiology of human
hypertension remains incompletely understood. Here we identify the transcription 
factor GATA5, as a new regulator of blood pressure (BP). GATA5 is expressed in
microvascular endothelial cells and its genetic inactivation in mice (Gata5-null)
leads to vascular endothelial dysfunction and hypertension. Endothelial-specific 
inactivation of Gata5 mimics the hypertensive phenotype of the Gata5-null mice,
suggestive of an important role for GATA5 in endothelial homeostasis.
Transcriptomic analysis of human microvascular endothelial cells with GATA5
knockdown reveals that GATA5 affects several genes and pathways critical for
proper endothelial function, such as PKA and nitric oxide pathways. Consistent
with a role in human hypertension, we report genetic association of variants at
the GATA5 locus with hypertension traits in two large independent cohorts. Our
results unveil an unsuspected link between GATA5 and a prominent human condition,
and provide a new animal model for hypertension.

PMCID: PMC4696516
PMID: 26617239  [PubMed - in process]


6. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2015;2015:132190. doi: 10.1155/2015/132190. Epub 2015
Oct 19.

Molecular Features and Methylation Status in Early Onset (=40 Years) Colorectal
Cancer: A Population Based, Case-Control Study.

Magnani G(1), Furlan D(2), Sahnane N(2), Reggiani Bonetti L(3), Domati F(1),
Pedroni M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Diagnostica, Clinica e Sanità Pubblica, Università di
Modena e Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Chirurgia e
Scienze Morfologiche, Università dell'Insubria, 21100 Varese, Italy. (3)Divisione
di Anatomia Patologica, Policlinico di Modena, 41124 Modena, Italy.

Colorectal cancer is usually considered a disease of the elderly. However, a
small fraction of patients develops colorectal cancer earlier. The aim of our
study was to define the frequency of known hereditary colorectal syndromes and to
characterise genetic and epigenetic features of early nonhereditary tumors.
Thirty-three patients =40 years with diagnosis of colorectal cancer and 41
patients with disease at >60 years of age were investigated for MSI, Mismatch
Repair proteins expression, KRAS and BRAF mutations, hypermethylation, and LINE-1
hypomethylation. Detection of germline mutations was performed in Mismatch
Repair, APC and MUTYH genes. Early onset colorectal cancer showed a high
incidence of hereditary forms (18%). KRAS mutations were detected in 36% of early
nonhereditary tumors. Early onset colorectal cancer disclosed an average number
of methylated genes significantly lower when compared to the controls (p = 0.02).
Finally both of the two groups were highly methylated in ESR1, GATA5, and WT1
genes and were similar for LINE-1 hypomethylation. The genetic make-up of
carcinomas differs from young to elderly patients. Early onset tumors showed more
frequently a constitutional defective of Mismatch Repair System and a minor
number of methylated genes. Hypermethylation of ESR1, GATA5, and WT1 genes
suggests possible markers in the earlier diagnosis of colorectal tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4629034
PMID: 26557847  [PubMed]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 6;10(11):e0142528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142528.
eCollection 2015.

Still Heart Encodes a Structural HMT, SMYD1b, with Chaperone-Like Function during
Fast Muscle Sarcomere Assembly.

Prill K(1), Windsor Reid P(1), Wohlgemuth SL(1), Pilgrim DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(1):e0148027.

The vertebrate sarcomere is a complex and highly organized contractile structure 
whose assembly and function requires the coordination of hundreds of proteins.
Proteins require proper folding and incorporation into the sarcomere by assembly 
factors, and they must also be maintained and replaced due to the constant
physical stress of muscle contraction. Zebrafish mutants affecting muscle
assembly and maintenance have proven to be an ideal tool for identification and
analysis of factors necessary for these processes. The still heart mutant was
identified due to motility defects and a nonfunctional heart. The cognate gene
for the mutant was shown to be smyd1b and the still heart mutation results in an 
early nonsense codon. SMYD1 mutants show a lack of heart looping and chamber
definition due to a lack of expression of heart morphogenesis factors gata4,
gata5 and hand2. On a cellular level, fast muscle fibers in homozygous mutants do
not form mature sarcomeres due to the lack of fast muscle myosin incorporation by
SMYD1b when sarcomeres are first being assembled (19hpf), supporting SMYD1b as an
assembly protein during sarcomere formation.

PMCID: PMC4636364
PMID: 26544721  [PubMed - in process]


8. Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 1;408(1):56-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.002. Epub 2015
Oct 13.

PTEN regulates lung endodermal morphogenesis through MEK/ERK pathway.

Xing Y(1), Wang R(2), Li C(3), Minoo P(3).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory for Agro-biotechnology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100191, PR China. Electronic address: ymxing@cau.edu.cn.
(2)The State Key Laboratory for Agro-biotechnology, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100191, PR China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Neonatology, University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, United States.

Pten is a multifunctional tumor suppressor. Deletions and mutations in the Pten
gene have been associated with multiple forms of human cancers. Pten is a central
regulator of several signaling pathways that influences multiple cellular
functions. One such function is in cell motility and migration, although the
precise mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we deleted Pten in the
embryonic lung epithelium using Gata5-cre mice. Absence of Pten blocked branching
morphogenesis and ERK and AKT phosphorylation at E12.5. In an explant model,
Pten(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) mesenchyme-free embryonic lung endoderm failed to branch. Inhibition of
budding in Pten(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) explants was associated with major changes in cell
migration, while cell proliferation was not affected. We further examined the
role of ERK and AKT in branching morphogenesis by conditional,
endodermal-specific mutants which blocked ERK or AKT phosphorylation. MEK(DM/+); 
Gata5-cre (blocking of ERK phosphorylation) lung showed more severe phenotype in 
branching morphogenesis. The inhibition of budding was also associated with
disruption of cell migration. Thus, the mechanisms by which Pten is required for 
early endodermal morphogenesis may involve ERK, but not AKT, mediated cell
migration.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4688060 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26460096  [PubMed - in process]


9. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(20):3306-17. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1087621.

Autophagy is involved in ethanol-induced cardia bifida during chick
cardiogenesis.

Li S(1), Wang G(1), Gao LR(1), Lu WH(1), Wang XY(1), Chuai M(2), Lee KK(3), Cao
L(4), Yang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Histology and Embryology ; Key Laboratory for Regenerative
Medicine of the Ministry of Education, Medical College, Jinan University ;
Guangzhou , China. (2)b Division of Cell and Developmental Biology ; University
of Dundee ; Dundee , UK. (3)d Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of the
Ministry of Education, School of Biomedical Sciences, Chinese University of Hong 
Kong ; Shatin , Hong Kong. (4)c Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, China
Medical University ; Shenyang , China.

Excess alcohol consumption during pregnancy has been acknowledged to increase the
incidence of congenital disorders, especially the cardiovascular system. However,
the mechanism involved in ethanol-induced cardiac malformation in prenatal fetus 
is still unknown. We demonstrated that ethanol exposure during gastrulation in
the chick embryo increased the incidence of cardia bifida. Previously, we
reported that autophagy was involved in heart tube formation. In this context, we
demonstrated that ethanol exposure increased ATG7 and LC3 expression. mTOR was
found to be inhibited by ethanol exposure. We activated autophagy using exogenous
rapamycin (RAPA) and observed that it induced cardiac bifida and increased GATA5 
expression. RAPA beads implantation experiments revealed that RAPA restricted
ventricular myosin heavy chain (VMHC) expression. In vitro explant cultures of
anterior primitive streak demonstrated that both ethanol and RAPA treatments
could reduce cell differentiation and the spontaneous beating of cardiac
precursor cells. In addition, the bead experiments showed that RAPA inhibited
GATA5 expression during heart tube formation. Semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis
indicated that BMP2 expression was increased while GATA4 expression was
suppressed. In the embryos exposed to excess ethanol, BMP2, GATA4 and FGF8
expression was repressed. These genes are associated with cardiomyocyte
differentiation, while heart tube fusion is associated with increased Wnt3a but
reduced VEGF and Slit2 expression. Furthermore, the ethanol exposure also caused 
the production of excess ROS, which might damage the cardiac precursor cells of
developing embryos. In sum, our results revealed that disrupting autophagy and
excess ROS generation are responsible for inducing abnormal cardiogenesis in
ethanol-treated chick embryos.

PMID: 26317250  [PubMed - in process]


10. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Sep 1;309(5):E487-99. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00121.2015. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

ASK1 mediates the teratogenicity of diabetes in the developing heart by inducing 
ER stress and inhibiting critical factors essential for cardiac development.

Wang F(1), Wu Y(1), Quon MJ(2), Li X(1), Yang P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences. (2)Department
of Medicine, and. (3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive
Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland pyang@fpi.umaryland.edu.

Maternal diabetes in mice induces heart defects similar to those observed in
human diabetic pregnancies. Diabetes enhances apoptosis and suppresses cell
proliferation in the developing heart, yet the underlying mechanism remains
elusive. Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) activates the proapoptotic
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 1/2 (JNK1/2) leading to apoptosis, suggesting a
possible role of ASK1 in diabetes-induced heart defects. We aimed to investigate 
whether ASK1 is activated in the heart and whether deleting the Ask1 gene blocks 
diabetes-induced adverse events and heart defect formation. The ASK1-JNK1/2
pathway was activated by diabetes. Deleting Ask1 gene significantly reduced the
rate of heart defects, including ventricular septal defects (VSDs) and persistent
truncus arteriosus (PTA). Additionally, Ask1 deletion diminished diabetes-induced
JNK1/2 phosphorylation and its downstream transcription factors and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress markers. Consistent with this, caspase activation and
apoptosis were blunted. Ask1 deletion blocked the increase in cell cycle
inhibitors (p21 and p27) and the decrease in cyclin D1 and D3 and reversed
diabetes-repressed cell proliferation. Ask1 deletion also restored the expression
of BMP4, NKX2.5, and GATA5, Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation, whose mutations or
deletion result in reduced cell proliferation, VSD, and PTA formation. We
conclude that ASK1 may mediate the teratogenicity of diabetes through activating 
the JNK1/2-ER stress pathway and inhibiting cell cycle progression, thereby
impeding the cardiogenesis pathways essential for ventricular septation and
outflow tract development.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4556884 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26173459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jul 15;107(2):287-94. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv167. Epub 2015 Jun
8.

Developmental origin of age-related coronary artery disease.

Wei K(1), Díaz-Trelles R(1), Liu Q(2), Diez-Cuñado M(3), Scimia MC(4), Cai W(1), 
Sawada J(4), Komatsu M(4), Boyle JJ(5), Zhou B(2), Ruiz-Lozano P(6), Mercola
M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 6400 Sanger
Road, Orlando, FL 32827, USA Department of Bioengineering, Jacobs School of
Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (3)Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 6400 Sanger Road, Orlando, FL 32827, 
USA Department of Bioengineering, Jacobs School of Engineering, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA Stanford University School of
Medicine, 300 Pasteur Dr, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (4)Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 6400 Sanger Road, Orlando, FL 32827, 
USA. (5)Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental Medicine, Imperial
College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK. (6)Stanford University School
of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Dr, Stanford, CA 94305, USA prlozano@stanford.edu
mmercola@ucsd.edu. (7)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 N. Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute,
6400 Sanger Road, Orlando, FL 32827, USA Department of Bioengineering, Jacobs
School of Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA prlozano@stanford.edu mmercola@ucsd.edu.

AIM: Age and injury cause structural and functional changes in coronary artery
smooth muscle cells (caSMCs) that influence the pathogenesis of coronary artery
disease. Although paracrine signalling is widely believed to drive phenotypic
changes in caSMCs, here we show that developmental origin within the fetal
epicardium can have a profound effect as well.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Fluorescent dye and transgene pulse-labelling techniques in 
mice revealed that the majority of caSMCs are derived from Wt1(+), Gata5-Cre(+)
cells that migrate before E12.5, whereas a minority of cells are derived from a
later-emigrating, Wt1(+), Gata5-Cre(-) population. We functionally evaluated the 
influence of early emigrating cells on coronary artery development and disease by
Gata5-Cre excision of Rbpj, which prevents their contribution to coronary artery 
smooth muscle cells. Ablation of the Gata5-Cre(+) population resulted in coronary
arteries consisting solely of Gata5-Cre(-) caSMCs. These coronary arteries
appeared normal into early adulthood; however, by 5-8 months of age, they became 
progressively fibrotic, lost the adventitial outer elastin layer, were
dysfunctional and leaky, and animals showed early mortality.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data reveal heterogeneity in the fetal
epicardium that is linked to coronary artery integrity, and that distortion of
the coronaries epicardial origin predisposes to adult onset disease.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4565989 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26054850  [PubMed - in process]


12. Nat Commun. 2015 May 18;6:6930. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7930.

PDGFRa demarcates the cardiogenic clonogenic Sca1+ stem/progenitor cell in adult 
murine myocardium.

Noseda M(1), Harada M(1), McSweeney S(1), Leja T(1), Belian E(1), Stuckey DJ(2), 
Abreu Paiva MS(1), Habib J(3), Macaulay I(4), de Smith AJ(5), al-Beidh F(1),
Sampson R(1), Lumbers RT(1), Rao P(6), Harding SE(1), Blakemore AI(7), Jacobsen
SE(4), Barahona M(8), Schneider MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (2)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of
Research Excellence, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National
Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Centre 
for Advanced Biomedical Imaging (CABI), University College London, London WC1E
6DD, UK. (3)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Department of Biomedical
Engineering, King's College London, London SE1 7EH, UK. (4)Haematopoietic Stem
Cell Biology, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (5)1] Department of Medicine, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(6)1] Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (7)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London SW7 
2AZ, UK. (8)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult hearts represent an attractive therapeutic
target for heart regeneration, though (inter)-relationships among reported cells 
remain obscure. Using single-cell qRT-PCR and clonal analyses, here we define
four subpopulations of cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult mouse myocardium
all sharing stem cell antigen-1 (Sca1), based on side population (SP) phenotype, 
PECAM-1 (CD31) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a (PDGFRa) expression.
SP status predicts clonogenicity and cardiogenic gene expression (Gata4/6, Hand2 
and Tbx5/20), properties segregating more specifically to PDGFRa(+) cells. Clonal
progeny of single Sca1(+) SP cells show cardiomyocyte, endothelial and smooth
muscle lineage potential after cardiac grafting, augmenting cardiac function
although durable engraftment is rare. PDGFRa(-) cells are characterized by
Kdr/Flk1, Cdh5, CD31 and lack of clonogenicity. PDGFRa(+)/CD31(-) cells derive
from cells formerly expressing Mesp1, Nkx2-5, Isl1, Gata5 and Wt1, distinct from 
PDGFRa(-)/CD31(+) cells (Gata5 low; Flk1 and Tie2 high). Thus, PDGFRa demarcates 
the clonogenic cardiogenic Sca1(+) stem/progenitor cell.

PMCID: PMC4479024
PMID: 25980517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Mar 7;21(9):2629-37. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i9.2629.

Combined detection of plasma GATA5 and SFRP2 methylation is a valid noninvasive
biomarker for colorectal cancer and adenomas.

Zhang X(1), Song YF(1), Lu HN(1), Wang DP(1), Zhang XS(1), Huang SL(1), Sun
BL(1), Huang ZG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Xie Zhang, Yu-Fei Song, Hong-Na Lu, Xue-Song Zhang, Shi-Liang Huang, Bei-Lei
Sun, Department of Gastroenterology, Ningbo Medical Treatment Center Li Huili
Hospital, Ningbo 315040, Zhejiang Province, China.

AIM: To investigate GATA5, SFRP2, and ITGA4 methylation in plasma DNA as
noninvasive biomarkers for colorectal cancer (CRC) or adenomas.
METHODS: There were 57 CRC patients, 30 adenomas patients, and 47 control
patients enrolled in this study. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
was used to determine the promoter methylation status of GATA5, SFRP2, and ITGA4 
genes in plasma DNA, and their association with clinical outcome in CRC. The
predictive ability of GATA5, SFRP2, and ITGA4 methylation, individually or in
combination, to detect CRC or adenomas was further analyzed.
RESULTS: Hypermethylated GATA5 was detected in plasma in 61.4% (35/57) of CRC
cases, 43.33% (13/30) of adenoma cases, and 21.28% (10/47) of control cases. The 
hypermethylation of SFRP2 was detected in 54.39% (31/57), 40.00% (12/30), and
27.66% (13/47) in plasma samples from CRC, adenomas, and controls, respectively. 
ITGA4 methylation was detected in 36.84% (21/57) of plasma samples of CRC
patients and in 30.00% (9/30) of plasma samples from patients with colorectal
adenomas, and the specificity of this individual biomarker was 80.85% (9/47).
Moreover, GATA5 methylation in the plasma was significantly correlated with
larger tumor size (P = 0.019), differentiation status (P = 0.038), TNM stage (P =
0.008), and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.008). SFRP2 and ITGA4 methylation in
plasma significantly correlated with differentiation status (SFRP2, P = 0.012;
ITGA4, P = 0.007), TNM stage (SFRP2, P = 0.034; ITGA4, P = 0.021), and lymph node
metastasis (SFRP2, P = 0.034; ITGA4, P = 0.021). From the perspective of
predictive power and cost-performance, using GATA5 and SFRP2 together as
methylation markers seemed the most favorable predictor for CRC (OR = 8.06;
95%CI: 2.54-25.5; P < 0.01) and adenomas (OR = 3.35; 95%CI: 1.29-8.71; P =
0.012).
CONCLUSION: A combination of GATA5 and SFRP2 methylation could be promising as a 
marker for the detection and diagnosis of CRC and adenomas.

PMCID: PMC4351212
PMID: 25759530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Mar;35(3):763-70. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.2050. Epub 2014 Dec 
29.

GATA5 loss-of-function mutation in familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Zhang XL(1), Dai N(1), Tang K(1), Chen YQ(2), Chen W(1), Wang J(3), Zhao CM(3),
Yuan F(4), Qiu XB(4), Qu XK(4), Yang YQ(4), Xu YW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, P.R. China. (2)Department of Emergency
Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, P.R. China. (3)Department of Cardiology,
Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, P.R.
China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), the most common form of primary myocardial disease,
is an important cause of sudden cardiac death and heart failure and is the
leading indication for heart transplantation in children and adults worldwide.
Recent studies have revealed a strong genetic basis for idiopathic DCM, with many
distinct genes causally implicated. Nevertheless, DCM is a genetically
heterogeneous disorder and the genetic determinants underlying DCM in a
substantial proportion of patients remain unclear. In this study, the whole
coding exons and flanking introns of the GATA binding protein 5 (GATA5) gene,
which codes for a zinc-finger transcription factor essential for cardiovascular
development and structural remodeling, were sequenced in 130 unrelated patients
with idiopathic DCM. The available relatives of the index patient carrying an
identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy individuals used
as the controls were genotyped for GATA5. The functional characteristics of the
mutant GATA5 were analyzed in contrast to its wild-type counterpart by using a
dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous GATA5
mutation, p.G240D, was identified in a family with DCM inherited in an autosomal 
dominant pattern, which co-segregated with DCM in the family with complete
penetrance. The missense mutation was absent in 400 reference chromosomes and the
altered amino acid was completely conserved evolutionarily across species.
Functional analyses revealed that the GATA5 mutant was associated with
significantly diminished transcriptional activity. This study firstly links GATA5
mutation to DCM, which provides novel insight into the molecular mechanisms of
DCM, suggesting a potential molecular target for the prenatal prophylaxis and
allele-specific treatment of DCM.

PMID: 25543888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2015 Feb;8(2):157-64. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-14-0198. Epub 2014 Dec 23.

Spectrin repeat containing nuclear envelope 1 and forkhead box protein E1 are
promising markers for the detection of colorectal cancer in blood.

Melotte V(1), Yi JM(2), Lentjes MH(1), Smits KM(3), Van Neste L(4), Niessen
HE(1), Wouters KA(1), Louwagie J(5), Schuebel KE(6), Herman JG(6), Baylin SB(6), 
van Criekinge W(5), Meijer GA(7), Ahuja N(8), van Engeland M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. (2)Dongnam
Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences (DIRAMS), Busan, South Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. Department of 
Radiation Oncology (MAASTRO), GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. (4)Department 
of Pathology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. MDxHealth, Herstal,
Belgium. (5)MDxHealth, Herstal, Belgium. (6)Department of Oncology, The Sidney
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (7)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (8)Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. Department of Surgery, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland. Department of Urology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
manon.van.engeland@mumc.nl nahuja@jhmi.edu. (9)Department of Pathology,
GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical
Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. manon.van.engeland@mumc.nl nahuja@jhmi.edu.

Identifying biomarkers in body fluids may improve the noninvasive detection of
colorectal cancer. Previously, we identified N-Myc downstream-regulated gene 4
(NDRG4) and GATA binding protein 5 (GATA5) methylation as promising biomarkers
for colorectal cancer in stool DNA. Here, we examined the utility of NDRG4,
GATA5, and two additional markers [Forkhead box protein E1 (FOXE1) and spectrin
repeat containing nuclear envelope 1 (SYNE1)] promoter methylation as biomarkers 
in plasma DNA. Quantitative methylation-specific PCR was performed on plasma DNA 
from 220 patients with colorectal cancer and 684 noncancer controls, divided in a
training set and a test set. Receiver operating characteristic analysis was
performed to measure the area under the curve of GATA5, NDRG4, SYNE1, and FOXE1
methylation. Functional assays were performed in SYNE1 and FOXE1 stably
transfected cell lines. The sensitivity of NDRG4, GATA5, FOXE1, and SYNE1
methylation in all stages of colorectal cancer (154 cases, 444 controls) was 27% 
[95% confidence interval (CI), 20%-34%), 18% (95% CI, 12%-24%), 46% (95% CI,
38%-54%), and 47% (95% CI, 39%-55%), with a specificity of 95% (95% CI, 93%-97%),
99% (95% CI, 98%-100%), 93% (95% CI, 91%-95%), and 96% (95% CI, 94%-98%),
respectively. Combining SYNE1 and FOXE1, increased the sensitivity to 56% (95%
CI, 48%-64%), while the specificity decreased to 90% (95% CI, 87%-93%) in the
training set and to 58% sensitivity (95% CI, 46%-70%) and 91% specificity (95%
CI, 80%-100%) in a test set (66 cases, 240 controls). SYNE1 overexpression showed
no major differences in cell proliferation, migration, and invasion compared with
controls. Overexpression of FOXE1 significantly decreased the number of colonies 
in SW480 and HCT116 cell lines. Overall, our data suggest that SYNE1 and FOXE1
are promising markers for colorectal cancer detection.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4316751
PMID: 25538088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. World J Pediatr. 2014 Nov;10(4):348-53. doi: 10.1007/s12519-014-0511-z. Epub 2014
Dec 17.

Novel and functional DNA sequence variants within the GATA5 gene promoter in
ventricular septal defects.

Shan JP(1), Wang XL, Qiao YG, Wan Yan HX, Huang WH, Pang SC, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common human birth defect.
Genetic causes for CHD remain largely unknown. GATA transcription factor 5 (GATA 
5) is an essential regulator for the heart development. Mutations in the GATA5
gene have been reported in patients with a variety of CHD. Since misregulation of
gene expression have been associated with human diseases, we speculated that
changed levels of cardiac transcription factors, GATA5, may mediate the
development of CHD.
METHODS: In this study, GATA5 gene promoter was genetically and functionally
analyzed in large cohorts of patients with ventricular septal defect (VSD)
(n=343) and ethnic-matched healthy controls (n=348).
RESULTS: Two novel and heterozygous DNA sequence variants (DSVs), g.61051165A>G
and g.61051463delC, were identified in three VSD patients, but not in the
controls. In cultured cardiomyocytes, GATA5 gene promoter activities were
significantly decreased by DSV g.61051165A>G and increased by DSV g.61051463delC.
Moreover, fathers of the VSD patients carrying the same DSVs had reduced
diastolic function of left ventricles. Three SNPs, g.61051279C>T (rs77067995),
g.61051327A>C (rs145936691) and g.61051373G>A (rs80197101), and one novel
heterozygous DSV, g.61051227C>T, were found in both VSD patients and controls
with similar frequencies.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested that the DSVs in the GATA5 gene promoter may
increase the susceptibility to the development of VSD as a risk factor.

PMID: 25515806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Dec 20;177(3):1105. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.09.132. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

Bicuspid aortic valve syndrome: a heterogeneous and still unknown condition.

Martín M(1), Alonso-Montes C(2), Flórez JP(1), Pichel IA(1), Rozado J(1), Andía
JB(2), Morís C(1), Rodríguez I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo,
Asturias, Spain. (2)Bone and Mineral Research Unit, Instituto Reina Sofía de
Investigacion, REDinTEN, Hosptila Universitarcio Central de Asturais, Oviedo,
Asturias, Spain.

PMID: 25449525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Cardiol. 2014 Dec 15;114(12):1891-5. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.09.028.
Epub 2014 Sep 28.

A novel NKX2.5 loss-of-function mutation associated with congenital bicuspid
aortic valve.

Qu XK(1), Qiu XB(1), Yuan F(1), Wang J(2), Zhao CM(2), Liu XY(3), Zhang XL(4), Li
RG(1), Xu YJ(1), Hou XM(1), Fang WY(1), Liu X(1), Yang YQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Pediatrics,
Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Department of
Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, China; Department of Central Laboratory, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
dryyq@tongji.edu.cn.

Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common form of congenital cardiovascular 
defect in humans and is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality.
Emerging evidence demonstrates that genetic risk factors play an important role
in the pathogenesis of BAV. However, BAV is a genetically heterogenous disorder, 
and the genetic defects underpinning BAV in most patients remain to be
identified. In the present study, the coding exons and flanking introns of the
NKX2.5 gene, which encodes a homeodomain-containing transcription factor
essential for the normal development of the aortic valve, were sequenced in 142
unrelated patients with BAV. The available relatives of the mutation carrier and 
200 unrelated healthy subjects used as controls were also genotyped for NKX2.5.
The functional characteristics of the mutation were delineated by using a
dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous NKX2.5
mutation, p.K192X, was identified in a family with BAV transmitted in an
autosomal dominant pattern. The nonsense mutation was absent in 400 control
chromosomes. Functional analyses revealed that the mutant NKX2.5 had no
transcriptional activity compared with its wild-type counterpart. Furthermore,
the mutation abolished the synergistic transcriptional activation between NKX2.5 
and GATA5, another transcription factor crucial for the aortic valvular
morphogenesis. In conclusion, this study is the first to link an NKX2.5
loss-of-function mutation to enhanced susceptibility to human BAV, providing
novel insight into the molecular mechanism of BAV and suggesting potential
implications for genetic counseling and clinical care of families presenting with
BAV.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25438918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Development. 2014 Oct;141(20):3978-87. doi: 10.1242/dev.111906.

BMP-mediated induction of GATA4/5/6 blocks somitic responsiveness to SHH.

Daoud G(1), Kempf H(1), Kumar D(1), Kozhemyakina E(1), Holowacz T(1), Kim DW(1), 
Ionescu A(1), Lassar AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Bldg C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department
of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Bldg 
C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA
andrew_lassar@hms.harvard.edu.

The relative timing of SHH and BMP signals controls whether presomitic mesoderm
(PSM) cells will adopt either a chondrogenic or lateral plate mesoderm fate. Here
we document that SHH-mediated induction of Nkx3.2 maintains the competence of
somitic cells to initiate chondrogenesis in response to subsequent BMP signals by
repressing BMP-dependent induction of GATA genes. Conversely, administration of
BMP signals to PSM or forced expression of GATA family members in chick PSM
explants blocks induction of hedgehog-dependent gene expression. We demonstrate
that GATA factors can interact with Gli factors and can recruit the
transcriptional co-factor FOG1 (ZFPM1) to the regulatory region of the mouse Gli1
gene, repressing the induction of Gli1 by SHH by binding to both GATA and Gli
binding sites. Knockdown of FOG1 reverses the ability of GATA factors to repress 
Gli1 expression. Our findings uncover a novel role for GATA transcription factors
as repressors of hedgehog signaling, and document that NKX3.2 maintains the
ability of sclerotomal cells to express SHH transcriptional targets in the
presence of BMP signals by repressing the induction of Gata4/5/6.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197703
PMID: 25294942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. BMC Med Genomics. 2014 Sep 26;7:56. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-56.

Use of a targeted, combinatorial next-generation sequencing approach for the
study of bicuspid aortic valve.

Bonachea EM, Zender G, White P, Corsmeier D, Newsom D, Fitzgerald-Butt S, Garg V,
McBride KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
kim.mcbride@nationwidechildrens.org.

BACKGROUND: Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common type of congenital
heart disease with a population prevalence of 1-2%. While BAV is known to be
highly heritable, mutations in single genes (such as GATA5 and NOTCH1) have been 
reported in few human BAV cases. Traditional gene sequencing methods are time and
labor intensive, while next-generation high throughput sequencing remains costly 
for large patient cohorts and requires extensive bioinformatics processing. Here 
we describe an approach to targeted multi-gene sequencing with combinatorial
pooling of samples from BAV patients.
METHODS: We studied a previously described cohort of 78 unrelated subjects with
echocardiogram-identified BAV. Subjects were identified as having isolated BAV or
BAV associated with coarctation of aorta (BAV-CoA). BAV cusp fusion morphology
was defined as right-left cusp fusion, right non-coronary cusp fusion, or left
non-coronary cusp fusion. Samples were combined into 19 pools using a uniquely
overlapping combinatorial design; a given mutation could be attributed to a
single individual on the basis of which pools contained the mutation. A custom
gene capture of 97 candidate genes was sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000.
Multistep bioinformatics processing was performed for base calling, variant
identification, and in-silico analysis of putative disease-causing variants.
RESULTS: Targeted capture identified 42 rare, non-synonymous, exonic variants
involving 35 of the 97 candidate genes. Among these variants, in-silico analysis 
classified 33 of these variants as putative disease-causing changes. Sanger
sequencing confirmed thirty-one of these variants, found among 16 individuals.
There were no significant differences in variant burden among BAV fusion
phenotypes or isolated BAV versus BAV-CoA. Pathway analysis suggests a role for
the WNT signaling pathway in human BAV.
CONCLUSION: We successfully developed a pooling and targeted capture strategy
that enabled rapid and cost effective next generation sequencing of target genes 
in a large patient cohort. This approach identified a large number of putative
disease-causing variants in a cohort of patients with BAV, including variants in 
26 genes not previously associated with human BAV. The data suggest that BAV
heritability is complex and polygenic. Our pooling approach saved over $39,350
compared to an unpooled, targeted capture sequencing strategy.

PMCID: PMC4181662
PMID: 25260786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Nov;396(1-2):67-77. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2143-y. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Promoter hypermethylation may be an important mechanism of the transcriptional
inactivation of ARRDC3, GATA5, and ELP3 in invasive ductal breast carcinoma.

Wang D(1), Yang PN, Chen J, Zhou XY, Liu QJ, Li HJ, Li CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Preclinical and
Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, 3-17 Renmin South Road, Chengdu, 610041,
Sichuan, People's Republic of China.

Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands represents an alternative mechanism to
inactivate tumor suppressor genes. This study was to detect promoter methylation 
status and mRNA expression levels of ARRDC3, ELP3, GATA5, and PAX6, and to
explore the association between methylation and expression in invasive ductal
carcinomas (IDCs) and matched normal tissues (MNTs) from breast cancer patients. 
Aberrant gene methylation was observed as follows: ARRDC3 in 38.5 %, ELP3 in 73.1
%, GATA5 in 48.1 %, and PAX6 in 50.0 % of IDCs. mRNA expression of ARRDC3, ELP3, 
and GATA5 in IDCs showed a lower level than that in MNTs (P < 0.001, P = 0.001
and P < 0.001, respectively). For ARRDC3, both methylated and unmethylated IDCs
showed significantly lower expression values compared to MNTs (P = 0.001 and P = 
0.007, respectively). For ELP3 and GATA5, methylated tumors only showed
significantly lower expression values compared to MNTs (P = 0.001 and P < 0.001, 
respectively). For ARRDC3 and GATA5, methylation was associated with their less
fold change in IDCs (P = 0.049 and P = 0.020, respectively). Methylation of
ARRDC3 was significantly associated with grades and lymph node status of IDCs (P 
= 0.036 and P = 0.002, respectively). Methylation frequency of ELP3 was higher in
lymph node positive versus lymph node negative tumors (P = 0.020); whereas
methylation frequency of PAX6 was lower in tumors with the ER negative samples (P
= 0.025). Our data suggested that promoter hypermethylation may be an important
mechanism of the transcriptional inactivation of ARRDC3, GATA5, and ELP3 in IDCs.

PMID: 25148870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Mol Diagn. 2014 Sep;16(5):564-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2014.04.007. Epub 2014 
Jul 3.

Molecular classification of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (pTa low-grade,
pT1 low-grade, and pT1 high-grade subgroups) using methylation of
tumor-suppressor genes.

Sacristan R(1), Gonzalez C(2), Fernández-Gómez JM(3), Fresno F(4), Escaf S(3),
Sánchez-Carbayo M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bladder Cancer Group, Proteomics Unit, CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain; Department
of Urology, Central Hospital of Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. (2)Tumor Markers Group, 
Molecular Pathology Program, Spanish National Cancer Center, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Urology, Central Hospital of Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.
(4)Department of Pathology, Central Hospital of Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.
(5)Bladder Cancer Group, Proteomics Unit, CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain; Tumor
Markers Group, Molecular Pathology Program, Spanish National Cancer Center,
Madrid, Spain; Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
Electronic address: mscarbayo@cicbiogune.es.

The role of epigenetics in distinguishing pathological and clinical subgroups in 
bladder cancer is not fully characterized. We evaluated whether methylation of
tumor-suppressor genes (TSGs) would classify non-muscle-invasive (NMI) bladder
cancer subgroups and predict outcome. A retrospective design included the
following paraffin-embedded primary NMI tumor types (n = 251): pTa low grade (LG)
(n = 79), pT1LG (n = 81), and pT1 high grade (HG) (n = 91). Methylation of 25
TSGs was measured using methylation-specific, multiplex, ligation-dependent probe
amplification. The TSGs most frequently methylated in the overall series were
STK11 (96.8%), MGMT2 (64.5%), RARB (63.0%), and GATA5 (63.0%). TSG methylation
correlated to clinicopathological variables in each subgroup and in the overall
NMI series. Methylation of RARB, CD44, PAX5A, GSTP1, IGSF4 (CADM1), PYCARD,
CDH13, TP53, and GATA5 classified pTa versus pT1 tumors whereas RARB, CD44,
GSTP1, IGSF4, CHFR, PYCARD, TP53, STK11, and GATA5 distinguished LG versus HG
tumors. Multivariate analyses indicated that PAX5A, WT1, and BRCA1 methylation
independently predicted recurrence in pTaLG, PAX6, ATM, CHFR, and RB1 in pT1LG
disease; PYCARD, in pT1HG disease; and PAX5A and RB1, in the overall series.
Methylation of TSGs provided a molecular classification of NMI disease according 
to clinicopathological factors. Furthermore, TSG methylation predicted recurrence
in NMI subgroups.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24998186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Biol Markers. 2015 Jan-Mar;30(1):e81-7.

Comparative detection of aberrantly methylated DNA in preoperative and
postoperative stool from patients with colorectal cancers.

Nishioka Y, Ueki T, Hokazono K, Nagayoshi K, Tanaka M.

BACKGROUND: Early detection of colorectal cancer (CRC) is crucial to reducing
tumor-related mortality. Evaluating aberrantly methylated DNA in stool is
promising for CRC screening. However, DNA methylation in the colonic epithelium
of background mucosa may compromise stool DNA (sDNA) test results. Thus, we
compared aberrant methylation of cancer-related genes in preoperative and
postoperative sDNA, with the aim of demonstrating that a cancer-specific
methylated allele in sDNA originates from CRCs.
METHODS: Patients who were to undergo CRC resection in Kyushu University Hospital
during 2003-2010 were prospectively enrolled. Preoperative (pre) stool samples
from 54 patients, postoperative (post) samples from 52 of the patients and tumor 
samples were collected. Aberrant promoter methylation of CDH4 and GATA5 was
assessed in the primary tumors by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction 
(MSP) and in stool samples by real-time MSP.
REULTS: Aberrant methylation of CDH4 and/or GATA5 was detected in 45 of CRC
tissue samples (83.3%) and identified in 23 pre sDNA samples (42.3%) from CRC
patients. Aberrant methylation was not found in pre sDNA obtained from CRC
patients without aberrant methylation of these genes or in post sDNA in any
patient. The detection rate of methylated alleles did not correlate with depth of
invasion or tumor stage.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that aberrantly methylated alleles
identified in sDNA originate from CRCs. Although tumor-specific aberrant
methylation is found in sDNA from patients harboring early and advanced CRC
throughout the colon and rectum, the sensitivity of this test needs to be
improved for early detection of CRC.

PMID: 24980446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Jun;97(6):2025-6. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.03.033.

Invited commentary.

Thistlethwaite PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of California, San Diego, 9300 
Campus Point Dr, La Jolla, CA92037-7982. Electronic address:
pthistlethwaite@ucsd.edu.

Comment on
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Jun;97(6):2019-25.

PMID: 24882285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Pediatr Res. 2014 Aug;76(2):211-6. doi: 10.1038/pr.2014.67. Epub 2014 May 5.

Rare GATA5 sequence variants identified in individuals with bicuspid aortic
valve.

Bonachea EM(1), Chang SW(2), Zender G(2), LaHaye S(3), Fitzgerald-Butt S(4),
McBride KL(4), Garg V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio. (2)1]
Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, Ohio [2] The Heart Center, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio. (3)1] Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio [2] The Heart Center, Nationwide Children's
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio [3] Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio. (4)1] Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio [2] Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio [3] The Heart Center, Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio. (5)1] Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio [2] Center for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Research, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio [3] The Heart Center,
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio [4] Department of Molecular
Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common type of congenital
heart disease (CHD) and has a proposed genetic etiology. BAV is categorized by
cusp fusion, with right-left (R-L) cusp fusion being associated with additional
CHD, and right-noncoronary cusp (R-NC) fusion being associated with aortic valve 
dysfunction. Loss of murine Gata5, which encodes a cardiac transcription factor, 
results in a partially penetrant R-NC BAV, and we hypothesize that mutations in
GATA5 are associated with R-NC BAV in humans.
METHODS: A cohort of 78 BAV patients (50 with isolated BAV and 28 with associated
aortic coarctation) was analyzed using Sanger sequencing to identify GATA5
sequence variants. Biochemical assays were performed to identify functional
deficits of identified sequence variants.
RESULTS: We identified two rare heterozygous nonsynonymous variants, p.Gln3Arg
and p.Leu233Pro, for a frequency of 2.6% (2/78). Both individuals with
nonsynonymous variants had BAV and aortic coarctation, one R-L and one R-NC
subtype. Of the nonsynonymous variants, only p.Gln3Arg demonstrated decreased
transcriptional activity in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Rare sequence variants in GATA5 are associated with human BAV. Our
findings suggest a genotype-phenotype correlation in regards to associated CHD
but not cusp fusion.

PMID: 24796370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Jun;97(6):2019-25. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.02.050.
Epub 2014 Apr 22.

GATA5 and endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression in the ascending aorta is 
related to aortic size and valve morphology.

Henn D(1), Perttunen H(2), Gauer S(2), Schmied W(2), Porras C(3), Such M(3),
Schäfers HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Saarland University Medical
Center, Homburg/Saar, Germany. Electronic address: dominichenn@fastmail.jp.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Saarland University Medical
Center, Homburg/Saar, Germany. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Hospital 
Virgen de la Victoria, Campus de Teatinos, Málaga, Spain.

Comment in
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Jun;97(6):2025-6.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of aortic dilatation in patients with congenital
aortic valve anomalies is poorly understood. Recent studies suggest that
alterations of gene expression may be related to ascending aortic aneurysm
formation in these patients. Knockout of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)
and GATA5 is associated with bicuspid aortic valves in mice. To study the role of
eNOS and GATA5 in human congenital aortic valve disease and aortic dilatation, we
investigated their gene expression in aortic tissue from patients with unicuspid,
bicuspid, and tricuspid aortic valves.
METHODS: Samples from 84 patients (33 tricuspid, 32 bicuspid, and 19 unicuspid)
were harvested intraoperatively from the ascending aorta. GATA5 and eNOS
expression was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: GATA5 and eNOS expression in the aortic wall from patients with
unicuspid aortic valves (GATA5: mean [M], 2.14; standard deviation [SD], 1.72;
eNOS: M, 3.40; SD, 3.83) was significantly higher than in tricuspid aortic valves
(GATA5: M, 1.12; SD, 0.80; eNOS: M, 1.00; SD, 0.74; each p < 0.05). Patients with
bicuspid aortic valves (GATA5: M, 1.29, SD, 1.33; eNOS: M, 1.66; SD, 1.31) had a 
significantly higher eNOS expression than patients with tricuspid aortic valves
(p < 0.05). The expression levels of eNOS and GATA5 correlated positively with
each other and negatively with the ascending aortic diameter.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that GATA5, possibly through upregulation of eNOS, 
plays a role in the development of aortic dilatation in patients with unicuspid
and bicuspid aortic valves. The differential gene expression in patients with
unicuspid compared with bicuspid aortic valves suggests that the pathogenesis of 
both aortic valve anomalies may be different.

Copyright © 2014 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24766859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Mol Med. 2014 May;33(5):1219-26. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1700. Epub 2014 Mar
14.

GATA5 loss-of-function mutations associated with congenital bicuspid aortic
valve.

Shi LM(1), Tao JW(1), Qiu XB(2), Wang J(3), Yuan F(2), Xu L(2), Liu H(2), Li
RG(2), Xu YJ(2), Wang Q(2), Zheng HZ(2), Li X(4), Wang XZ(5), Zhang M(2), Qu
XK(2), Yang YQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ultrasonics, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology,
Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R.
China. (3)Department of Cardiology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200120, P.R. China. (4)Department of Extracorporeal
Circulation, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200030, P.R. China. (5)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common form of congenital cardiovascular 
defect in humans worldwide and is responsible for substantial morbidity and
mortality. Accumulating evidence has demonstated that genetic risk factors are
involved in the pathogenesis of BAV. However, BAV is genetically heterogeneous
and the genetic basis underlying BAV in a large number of patients remains
unknown. In the present study, the coding regions and splice junction sites of
the GATA5 gene, which codes for a zinc-finger transcription factor crucial for
the normal development of the aortic valve, was sequenced initially in 110
unrelated patients with BAV. The available relatives of the mutation carriers and
200 unrelated healthy individuals used as controls were subsequently genotyped
for GATA5. The functional effect of the mutations was characterized by using a
luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, two novel heterozygous GATA5
mutations, p.Y16D and p.T252P, were identified in two families with autosomal
dominant inheritance of BAV, respectively. The variations were absent in 400
control chromosomes and the altered amino acids were completely conserved
evolutionarily. Functional assays revealed that the two GATA5 mutants were
associated with significantly reduced transcriptional activity compared with
their wild-type counterpart. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study on the association of GATA5 loss-of-function mutations with enhanced
susceptibility to BAV, providing novel insight into the molecular mechanism
involved in human BAV and suggesting a potential role for the early prophylaxis
and personalized treatment of this common congenital heart disease.

PMID: 24638895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Mol Med. 2014 May;33(5):1227-35. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1674. Epub 2014 Feb
26.

Somatic GATA5 mutations in sporadic tetralogy of Fallot.

Huang RT(1), Xue S(1), Xu YJ(2), Zhou M(1), Yang YQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200030, P.R. China.

Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most common form of cyanotic congenital heart
disease, with high morbidity and mortality rates. Accumulating evidence has
demonstrated that genetic defects play an important role in the pathogenesis of
TOF. However, the molecular basis of TOF in the majority of patients remains to
be determined. In the present study, sequence analysis of the coding exons and
exon-intron boundaries of GATA5, a gene encoding a zinc finger-containing
transcriptional factor crucial for cardiogenesis, was performed on genomic DNA
isolated from resected cardiac tissue and matched blood samples of 85 unrelated
patients who underwent surgical repair of TOF. Genotyping was performed on the
cardiac tissue and matched blood samples from 63 unrelated patients who underwent
cardiac valve replacement due to rheumatic heart disease as well as the blood
samples obtained from 200 unrelated healthy individuals. The functional effect of
the mutations was evaluated by using a luciferase reporter assay system. As a
result, the novel heterozygous GATA5 mutations, p.D203E and p.Y208X, were found
in the cardiac tissues of two TOF patients, respectively. There were no mutations
in the cardiac tissues obtained from 63 patients with rheumatic heart disease nor
in the blood samples obtained from the 348 subjects. Functional analysis revealed
that the GATA5 mutants were consistently associated with significantly decreased 
transcriptional activity compared with their wild-type counterpart. Thus, results
of this study showed an association of somatic GATA5 mutations with TOF,
providing further insight into the underlying molecular mechanism of TOF.

PMID: 24573614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Neurooncol. 2014 Apr;117(2):243-51. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1372-y. Epub 2014
Feb 20.

Methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification identifies 
promoter methylation events associated with survival in glioblastoma.

Rankeillor KL(1), Cairns DA, Loughrey C, Short SC, Chumas P, Ismail A,
Chakrabarty A, Lawler SE, Roberts P.

Author information: 
(1)Yorkshire Regional Cytogenetics Unit, St James's University Hospital, Leeds,
LS9 7TF, UK, kate.rankeillor@leedsth.nhs.uk.

DNA methylation plays an important role in cancer biology and methylation events 
are important prognostic and predictive markers in many tumor types. We have used
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification to survey
the methylation status of MGMT and 25 tumor suppressor genes in 73 glioblastoma
cases. The data obtained was correlated with overall survival and response to
treatment. The study revealed that methylation of promoter regions in TP73 (seven
patients), THBS1 (eight patients) and PYCARD (nine patients) was associated with 
improved outcome, whereas GATA5 (21 patients) and WT1 (24 patients) promoter
methylation were associated with poor outcome. In patients treated with
temozolomide and radiation MGMT and PYCARD promoter methylation events remained
associated with improved survival whereas GATA5 was associated with a poor
outcome. The identification of GATA5 promoter methylation in glioblastoma has not
previously been reported. Furthermore, a cumulative methylation score separated
patients into survival groups better than any single methylation event. In
conclusion, we have identified specific methylation events associated with
patient outcome and treatment response in glioblastoma, and these may be of
functional and predictive/prognostic significance. This study therefore provides 
novel candidates and approaches for future prospective validation.

PMID: 24554053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Oncol Rep. 2014 Apr;31(4):1523-30. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3030. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

GATA5 CpG island hypermethylation is an independent predictor for poor clinical
outcome in renal cell carcinoma.

Peters I(1), Gebauer K(1), Dubrowinskaja N(1), Atschekzei F(1), Kramer MW(1),
Hennenlotter J(2), Tezval H(1), Abbas M(3), Scherer R(4), Merseburger AS(1),
Stenzl A(2), Kuczyk MA(1), Serth J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School, D-30625 
Hannover, Germany. (2)Department of Urology, Eberhard-Karls University, D-72076
Tuebingen, Germany. (3)Department of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, D-30625 
Hannover, Germany. (4)Department of Biometry, Hannover Medical School, D-30625
Hannover, Germany.

Transcriptional inactivation and CpG island (CGI) methylation of GATA
transcription factor family members GATA3 and GATA5 have been reported for a few 
types of human cancer. Whether high-density CGI methylation of GATA3 or GATA5 is 
associated with the clinical course of patients with renal cell cancer (RCC) has 
not been clarified. Quantitative methylation-specific PCR assays were carried out
to analyze 25 tumor cell lines including 6 RCC lines and 119 RCC and 87 adjacent 
normal tissues for the presence of densely methylated sequences. Methylation
values were statistically compared with clinicopathological and recurrence-free
survival (RFS) data for patients. Comparison of GATA3 and GATA5 methylation in
different tumor cell lines revealed a marker-specific methylation characteristic 
with high and frequent signals for both methylation marks in RCC lines. GATA3 and
GATA5 CGI relative methylation levels were found to be strongly associated with
the state of metastasis (P=0.003 and P<0.001, respectively) and advanced disease 
(P=0.024 and P<0.001, respectively). Moreover, an independent decrease in RFS in 
Cox proportional hazard analysis was found for tumors exhibiting high GATA5
methylation (P<0.001, hazard ratio, 19.3; 95% confidence interval, 4.58-81.6).
Epigenetic alterations in GATA family members may be associated with aggressive
tumor phenotypes in RCC, and in the case of GATA5, may serve as a new independent
molecular marker for aggressiveness and disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3975988
PMID: 24549248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 17;14:101. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-101.

Decreased GATA5 mRNA expression associates with CpG island methylation and
shortened recurrence-free survival in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Peters I, Dubrowinskaja N, Kogosov M, Abbas M, Hennenlotter J, von Klot C,
Merseburger AS, Stenzl A, Scherer R, Kuczyk MA, Serth J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str,1, Hannover 30625, Germany. serth.juergen@mh-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND: GATA-5, a zinc-finger transcription factor and member of the GATA
family proteins 1-6, is known to be involved in cellular differentiation. We
recently found that tumor-specific hypermethylation of the GATA5 CpG island (CGI)
occurs in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and is associated with an adverse clinical
outcome. In this study, we investigated whether epigenetic GATA5 alterations may 
result in changes in GATA5 mRNA expression levels and correlate with the observed
prognostic impact of epigenetic changes in GATA5 in RCC.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction was
applied to measure relative GATA5 mRNA expression levels in 135 kidney tissue
samples, including 77 clear cell RCC (ccRCC) tissues and 58 paired adjacent
normal renal tissue samples. Relative GATA5 expression levels were determined
using the <U+0394><U+0394>Ct method and detection of three endogenous control genes then
compared to previously measured values of relative methylation.
RESULTS: The mean relative GATA5 mRNA expression level exhibited an approximately
31-fold reduction in tumor specimens compared with corresponding normal tissues
(p < 0.001, paired t-test). Decreased GATA5 mRNA expression was inversely
correlated with increased GATA5 CGI methylation (p < 0.001) and was associated
with shortened recurrence-free survival in ccRCC patients (p = 0.023, hazard
ratio = 0.25).
CONCLUSION: GATA5 mRNA expression is decreased in ccRCC, likely due to gene
silencing by methylation of the GATA5 CGI. Moreover, reduced GATA5 mRNA levels
were associated with a poor clinical outcome, indicating a possible role of GATA5
for the development of aggressive ccRCC phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3930894
PMID: 24533449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2014 Feb 18;13:46. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-13-46.

N-Acetylcysteine prevents congenital heart defects induced by pregestational
diabetes.

Moazzen H, Lu X, Ma NL, Velenosi TJ, Urquhart BL, Wisse LJ, Gittenberger-de Groot
AC, Feng Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada. qfeng@uwo.ca.

BACKGROUND: Pregestational diabetes is a major risk factor of congenital heart
defects (CHDs). Glutathione is depleted and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production is elevated in diabetes. In the present study, we aimed to examine
whether treatment with N-acetylcysteine (NAC), which increases glutathione
synthesis and inhibits ROS production, prevents CHDs induced by pregestational
diabetes.
METHODS: Female mice were treated with streptozotocin (STZ) to induce
pregestational diabetes prior to breeding with normal males to produce offspring.
Some diabetic mice were treated with N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in drinking water
from E0.5 to the end of gestation or harvesting of the embryos. CHDs were
identified by histology. ROS levels, cell proliferation and gene expression in
the fetal heart were analyzed.
RESULTS: Our data show that pregestational diabetes resulted in CHDs in 58% of
the offspring, including ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrial septal defect
(ASD), atrioventricular septal defects (AVSD), transposition of great arteries
(TGA), double outlet right ventricle (DORV) and tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
Treatment with NAC in drinking water in pregestational diabetic mice completely
eliminated the incidence of AVSD, TGA, TOF and significantly diminished the
incidence of ASD and VSD. Furthermore, pregestational diabetes increased ROS,
impaired cell proliferation, and altered Gata4, Gata5 and Vegf-a expression in
the fetal heart of diabetic offspring, which were all prevented by NAC treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with NAC increases GSH levels, decreases ROS levels in the
fetal heart and prevents the development of CHDs in the offspring of
pregestational diabetes. Our study suggests that NAC may have therapeutic
potential in the prevention of CHDs induced by pregestational diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3942143
PMID: 24533448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Anim Sci J. 2014 Apr;85(4):388-94. doi: 10.1111/asj.12156. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Expression and in situ localization of GATA4, 5 and 6 mRNAs in ovine conceptuses 
and uterine endometria during the peri-implantation period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In vertebrates, six GATA transcription factors, GATA1 through GATA6, have been
identified and GATA1-3 is known to be involved in hematopoietic developments,
while GATA4-6 play roles in cardiac and endoderm developments. Recently, we and
others have found that GATA2 and GATA3 found in the trophectoderm plays a role in
gene expression specific to this cell type, but GATA4-6 have not been well
characterized in early embryonic developments. Using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and in situ hybridization, we examined the expression of
GATA4, 5 and 6 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in ovine conceptuses and uteri during the
peri-implantation period. In ovine conceptuses, GATA4, 5 and 6 transcripts were
present on days 15, 17 and 21 (day 0<U+2009>=<U+2009>day of mating), and high GATA5 and 6 mRNAs
were found on day 21, most of which were localized in the trophectoderm and
endoderm. Moreover, minute and substantial GATA4 and 5 mRNAs were found in days
15 and 21 uterine endometria, respectively. Increase in GATA4-6 transcripts in
day 21 uteri indicates that in addition to GATA1-3, GATA4-6 may also play a
potentially novel role in the development of ovine trophectoderm, endoderm and/or
uterine endometria following conceptus attachment to the uterine epithelium.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 24329758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Cell. 2013 Dec 23;27(6):672-80. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.11.002. Epub 2013 
Dec 5.

ELABELA: a hormone essential for heart development signals via the apelin
receptor.

Chng SC(1), Ho L(1), Tian J(1), Reversade B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Human Genetics and Embryology Laboratory,
A(*)STAR, Singapore 138648, Singapore. (2)Institute of Medical Biology, Human
Genetics and Embryology Laboratory, A(*)STAR, Singapore 138648, Singapore;
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, A(*)STAR, Singapore 138673,
Singapore; Department of Pediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 
119260, Singapore. Electronic address: bruno@reversade.com.

We report here the discovery and characterization of a gene, ELABELA (ELA),
encoding a conserved hormone of 32 amino acids. Present in human embryonic stem
cells, ELA is expressed at the onset of zebrafish zygotic transcription and is
ubiquitous in the naive ectodermal cells of the embryo. Using
zinc-finger-nuclease-mediated gene inactivation in zebrafish, we created an
allelic series of ela mutants. ela null embryos have impaired endoderm
differentiation potential marked by reduced gata5 and sox17 expression. Loss of
Ela causes embryos to develop with a rudimentary heart or no heart at all,
surprisingly phenocopying the loss of the apelin receptor (aplnr), which we show 
serves as Ela's cognate G protein-coupled receptor. Our results reveal the
existence of a peptide hormone, ELA, which, together with APLNR, forms an
essential signaling axis for early cardiovascular development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Apr;50(4):787-95. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0294OC.

Gata5 deficiency causes airway constrictor hyperresponsiveness in mice.

Chen B(1), Moore TV, Li Z, Sperling AI, Zhang C, Andrade J, Rodriguez A, Bahroos 
N, Huang Y, Morrisey EE, Gruber PJ, Solway J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medicine and.

Gata5 is a transcription factor expressed in the lung, but its physiological role
is unknown. To test whether and how Gata5 regulates airway constrictor
responsiveness, we studied Gata5(-/-), Gata5(+/-), and wild-type mice on the
C57BL/6J background. Cholinergic airway constrictor responsiveness was assessed
invasively in mice without and with induction of allergic airway inflammation
through ovalbumin sensitization and aerosol exposure. Gata5-deficient mice
displayed native airway constrictor hyperresponsiveness (AHR) in the absence of
allergen-induced inflammation. Gata5-deficient mice retained their relatively
greater constrictor responsiveness even in ovalbumin-induced experimental asthma.
Gata5 deficiency did not alter the distribution of cell types in bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid, but bronchial epithelial mucus metaplasia was more prominent in
Gata5(-/-) mice after allergen challenge. Gene expression profiles revealed that 
apolipoprotein E (apoE) was the fifth most down-regulated transcript in
Gata5-deficient lungs, and quantitative RT-PCR and immunostaining confirmed
reduced apoE expression in Gata5(-/-) mice. Quantitative RT-PCR also revealed
increased IL-13 mRNA in the lungs of Gata5-deficient mice. These findings for the
first time show that Gata5 regulates apoE and IL-13 expression in vivo and that
its deletion causes AHR. Gata5-deficient mice exhibit an airway phenotype that
closely resembles that previously reported for apoE(-/-) mice: both exhibit
cholinergic AHR in native and experimental asthma states, and there is excessive 
goblet cell metaplasia after allergen sensitization and challenge. The
Gata5-deficient phenotype also shares features that were previously reported for 
IL-13-treated mice. Together, these results indicate that Gata5 deficiency
induces AHR, at least in part, by blunting apoE and increasing IL-13 expression.

PMCID: PMC4068924
PMID: 24199649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Neurooncol. 2014 Jan;116(2):213-20. doi: 10.1007/s11060-013-1286-0. Epub 2013
Oct 27.

Methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and its
impact on clinical findings in medulloblastoma.

Feierabend D(1), Walter J, Grube S, Herbold C, Beetz C, Kalff R, Ewald C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Jena University Hospital,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Erlanger Allee 101, 07747, Jena, Germany,
denise.feierabend@med.uni-jena.de.

Gain of (proto-)oncogenes and loss or promoter hypermethylation of tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) play essential roles in tumorigenesis.
Methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
allows simultaneous detection of both these alterations. MS-MLPA was performed on
20 medulloblastoma samples (n = 12 cryoconserved; n = 8 formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded, FFPE) in order to screen for copy number changes in 77
unselected TSGs and (proto-)oncogenes as well as for promoter hypermethylation in
a subset of 33 TSGs. In all specimens, determination of promoter methylation
status was possible, whereas robust data concerning copy number changes could be 
obtained on cryopreserved material only. We found a median of 1.5 deletions and
6.5 amplifications in the 12 cryopreserved medulloblastoma and a median of 5
promoter hypermethylation per tumor. Frequent copy number changes included
amplification of ASC on 16p12 (5/12) and amplification of several adjacent genes 
on 17q (3/12) including IGFBP4. Hypermethylation of MSH6 on 2p16 was found in 16 
samples. MS-MLPA findings were also correlated with clinical and histological
characteristics. The number of promoter hypermethylation was significantly
associated with presence of necrosis (p = 0.004). Tumors which recurred within 1 
year were more likely to show amplification of the GATA5 gene (p = 0.038), while 
hypermethylation of CASP8 was associated with a lower tumor recurrence rate (p = 
0.036). There was also a trend towards a correlation between total number of
aberrations and CSF dissemination (p = 0.055). Our findings confirm frequent
presence of certain aberrations and reveal novel candidates for improving
prognosis based on genetic and epigenetic tumor features. A
medulloblastoma-specific MS-MLPA probe set seems a potentially valuable tool for 
further investigations on larger sample series.

PMID: 24162828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Sep 3;14(9):18009-23. doi: 10.3390/ijms140918009.

Celf1 is required for formation of endoderm-derived organs in zebrafish.

Tahara N(1), Bessho Y, Matsui T.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Research, Nara Institute Science and Technology, 8916-5
Takayama, Nara 630-0101, Japan. n-tahara@bs.naist.jp

We recently reported that an RNA binding protein called Cugbp Elav-like family
member 1 (Celf1) regulates somite symmetry and left-right patterning in
zebrafish. In this report, we show additional roles of Celf1 in zebrafish
organogenesis. When celf1 is knocked down by using an antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides (MO), liver buds fail to form, and pancreas buds do not form a
cluster, suggesting earlier defects in endoderm organogenesis. As expected, we
found failures in endoderm cell growth and migration during gastrulation in
embryos injected with celf1-MOs. RNA immunoprecipitation revealed that Celf1
binds to gata5 and cdc42 mRNAs which are known to be involved in cell growth and 
migration, respectively. Our results therefore suggest that Celf1 regulates
proper organogenesis of endoderm-derived tissues by regulating the expression of 
such targets.

PMCID: PMC3794766
PMID: 24005864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 26;8(7):e69788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069788. Print 2013.

Low temperature mitigates cardia bifida in zebrafish embryos.

Lin CY(1), Huang CC, Wang WD, Hsiao CD, Cheng CF, Wu YT, Lu YF, Hwang SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung, Taiwan.

The coordinated migration of bilateral cardiomyocytes and the formation of the
cardiac cone are essential for heart tube formation. We investigated gene
regulatory mechanisms involved in myocardial migration, and regulation of the
timing of cardiac cone formation in zebrafish embryos. Through screening of
zebrafish treated with ethylnitrosourea, we isolated a mutant with a hypomorphic 
allele of mil (s1pr2)/edg5, called s1pr2(as10) (as10). Mutant embryos with this
allele expressed less mil/edg5 mRNA and exhibited cardia bifida prior to 28 hours
post-fertilization. Although the bilateral hearts of the mutants gradually fused 
together, the resulting formation of two atria and one tightly-packed ventricle
failed to support normal blood circulation. Interestingly, cardia bifida of
s1pr2(as10) embryos could be rescued and normal circulation could be restored by 
incubating the embryos at low temperature (22.5°C). Rescue was also observed in
gata5 and bon cardia bifida morphants raised at 22.5 °C. The use of DNA
microarrays, digital gene expression analyses, loss-of-function, as well as mRNA 
and protein rescue experiments, revealed that low temperature mitigates cardia
bifida by regulating the expression of genes encoding components of the
extracellular matrix (fibronectin 1, tenascin-c, tenascin-w). Furthermore, the
addition of N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), a reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger,
significantly decreased the effect of low temperature on mitigating cardia bifida
in s1pr2(as10) embryos. Our study reveals that temperature coordinates the
development of the heart tube and somitogenesis, and that extracellular matrix
genes (fibronectin 1, tenascin-c and tenascin-w) are involved.

PMCID: PMC3724881
PMID: 23922799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2013 Sep;140(18):3787-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.093567. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

Tmem88a mediates GATA-dependent specification of cardiomyocyte progenitors by
restricting WNT signaling.

Novikov N(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 1300
York Ave., LC-708, New York, NY, USA.

Biphasic control of WNT signaling is essential during cardiogenesis, but how the 
pathway switches from promoting cardiac mesoderm to restricting cardiomyocyte
progenitor fate is unknown. We identified genes expressed in lateral mesoderm
that are dysregulated in zebrafish when both gata5 and gata6 are depleted,
causing a block to cardiomyocyte specification. This screen identified tmem88a,
which is expressed in the early cardiac progenitor field and was previously
implicated in WNT modulation by overexpression studies. Depletion of tmem88a
results in a profound cardiomyopathy, secondary to impaired cardiomyocyte
specification. In tmem88a morphants, activation of the WNT pathway exacerbates
the cardiomyocyte deficiency, whereas WNT inhibition rescues progenitor cells and
cardiogenesis. We conclude that specification of cardiac fate downstream of
gata5/6 involves activation of the tmem88a gene to constrain WNT signaling and
expand the number of cardiac progenitors. Tmem88a is a novel component of the
regulatory mechanism controlling the second phase of biphasic WNT activity
essential for embryonic cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3754477
PMID: 23903195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013 Dec;157(4):298-303.
doi: 10.5507/bp.2013.035. Epub 2013 May 29.

Methylation analysis of tumor suppressor genes in endometroid carcinoma of
endometrium using MS-MLPA.

Dvorakova E(1), Chmelarova M, Laco J, Palicka V, Spacek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec
Kralove, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Hradec Kralove,
Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic changes are considered to be a frequent event during tumor
development. Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands represents an alternative
mechanism for inactivation of tumor suppressor genes, DNA repair genes, cell
cycle regulators and transcription factors. The aim of this study was to
investigate promoter methylation of specific genes in endometrial cancer by
comparison with normal endometrial tissue.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used MS-MLPA (Methylation-specific Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification) to compare the methylation status of 59
tissue samples of endometroid type of endometrial carcinoma with 20 control
samples of non-neoplastic endometrium.
RESULTS: Using 15% cut-off for methylation, we observed significantly higher
methylation in the CDH13 gene in endometrial cancer group. We observed
significantly higher methylation in both WT1 and GATA5 genes in IB stage of
endometroid carcinoma. We also observed significantly higher methylation in GATA5
gene in the group of poorly differentiated endometroid carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest the importance of hypermethylation of CDH13, WT1
and GATA5 genes in endometrial carcinogenesis and could have implications for
future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies of endometrial cancer based on
epigenetic changes.

PMID: 23736679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun;29(6):603-7. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2013.788632.

High-resolution array-comparative genomic hybridization profiling reveals
20q13.33 alterations associated with ovarian endometriosis.

Yang W(1), Zhang Y, Fu F, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to investigate the potential genetic
alterations at DNA level in patients with ovarian endometriosis by
high-resolution array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH)
analysis.
METHODS: Following the laparoscopic surgical and the post-operative pathological 
examination, genomic DNA was extracted from endometriomas of 11 women with
endometriosis and endometrial tissue of the controls and analyzed by array-CGH.
Real-time PCR was used for confirmation the result of array-CGH analysis and
detected the DNA copy number variations of the eutopic endometrium from the five 
patients with the duplication in 20q13.33 region.
RESULTS: All 11 patients with ovarian endometriosis were diagnosed through the
laparoscopic surgical and the post-operative pathological examination. We found
occurrence of genomic duplication at 20q13.33 chromosomal region with gain of
GATA5 and SLCO4A1 genes in 5 of 11 endometriomas from patients.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study suggest that there was 20q13.33
duplication in women with ovarian endometriosis. This effect might be due to the 
alterations of GATA5 and SLCO4A1 genes in the gain region, through involving the 
metabolism of the steroid hormone.

PMID: 23656391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Apr 11;14:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-44.

Sequencing of NOTCH1, GATA5, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genes in familial cases of
bicuspid aortic valve.

Foffa I(1), Ait Alì L, Panesi P, Mariani M, Festa P, Botto N, Vecoli C, Andreassi
MG.

Author information: 
(1)CNR Istituto di Fisiologia Clinica, Via Moruzzi 1, Pisa 56124, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of our study was to investigate the potential
contribution of germline mutations in NOTCH1, GATA5 and TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genes
in a cohort of Italian patients with familial Bicuspid Aortic Valve (BAV).
METHODS: All the coding exons including adjacent intronic as well as 5' and 3'
untranslated (UTR) sequences of NOTCH1, GATA5, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genes were
screened by direct gene sequencing in 11 index patients (8 males;
age<U+2009>=<U+2009>42<U+2009>±<U+2009>19<U+2009>years) with familial BAV defined as two or more affected members.
RESULTS: Two novel mutations, a missense and a nonsense mutation (Exon 5,
p.P284L; Exon 26, p.Y1619X), were found in the NOTCH1 gene in two unrelated
families. The mutations segregated with the disease in these families, and they
were not found on 200 unrelated chromosomes from ethnically matched controls. No 
pathogenetic mutation was identified in GATA5, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel NOTCH1 mutations were identified in two Italian families
with BAV, highlighting the role of a NOTCH1 signaling pathway in BAV and its
aortic complications. These findings are of relevance for genetic counseling and 
clinical care of families presenting with BAV. Future studies are needed in order
to unravel the still largely unknown genetics of BAV.

PMCID: PMC3637327
PMID: 23578328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):465-72. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.45. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Genome editing with RNA-guided Cas9 nuclease in zebrafish embryos.

Chang N(1), Sun C, Gao L, Zhu D, Xu X, Zhu X, Xiong JW, Xi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Recent advances with the type II clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats (CRISPR) system promise an improved approach to genome
editing. However, the applicability and efficiency of this system in model
organisms, such as zebrafish, are little studied. Here, we report that RNA-guided
Cas9 nuclease efficiently facilitates genome editing in both mammalian cells and 
zebrafish embryos in a simple and robust manner. Over 35% of site-specific
somatic mutations were found when specific Cas/gRNA was used to target either
etsrp, gata4 or gata5 in zebrafish embryos in vivo. The Cas9/gRNA efficiently
induced biallelic conversion of etsrp or gata5 in the resulting somatic cells,
recapitulating their respective vessel phenotypes in etsrp(y11) mutant embryos or
cardia bifida phenotypes in fau(tm236a) mutant embryos. Finally, we successfully 
achieved site-specific insertion of mloxP sequence induced by Cas9/gRNA system in
zebrafish embryos. These results demonstrate that the Cas9/gRNA system has the
potential of becoming a simple, robust and efficient reverse genetic tool for
zebrafish and other model organisms. Together with other genome-engineering
technologies, the Cas9 system is promising for applications in biology,
agriculture, environmental studies and medicine.

PMCID: PMC3616424
PMID: 23528705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2013 Apr;140(8):1639-44. doi: 10.1242/dev.093260. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

GATA factors efficiently direct cardiac fate from embryonic stem cells.

Turbendian HK(1), Gordillo M, Tsai SY, Lu J, Kang G, Liu TC, Tang A, Liu S,
Fishman GI, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The GATA4 transcription factor is implicated in promoting cardiogenesis in
combination with other factors, including TBX5, MEF2C and BAF60C. However, when
expressed in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), GATA4 was shown to promote endoderm,
not cardiac mesoderm. The capacity of related GATA factors to promote
cardiogenesis is untested. We found that expression of the highly related gene,
Gata5, very efficiently promotes cardiomyocyte fate from murine ESCs. Gata5
directs development of beating sheets of cells that express cardiac troponin T
and show a full range of action potential morphologies that are responsive to
pharmacological stimulation. We discovered that by removing serum from the
culture conditions, GATA4 and GATA6 are each also able to efficiently promote
cardiogenesis in ESC derivatives, with some distinctions. Thus, GATA factors can 
function in ESC derivatives upstream of other cardiac transcription factors to
direct the efficient generation of cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3621482
PMID: 23487308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Folia Biol (Praha). 2012;58(6):246-50.

Methylation analysis of tumour suppressor genes in ovarian cancer using MS-MLPA.

Chmelarová M(1), Krepinská E, Spacek J, Laco J, Nekvindová J, Palicka V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Faculty Hospital, Faculty
of Medicine Hradec Králové, Charles University-Prague, Hradec Králové, Czech
Republic. ChmelarovaMarcela@seznam.cz

Epigenetic changes are considered to be a frequent event during tumour
development. Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands represents an alternative
mechanism for inactivation of tumour suppressor genes, DNA repair genes, cell
cycle regulators and transcription factors. The aim of this study was to
investigate promoter methylation of specific genes in ovarian cancer by
comparison with normal ovarian tissue. To search for epigenetic events we used
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
to compare the methylation status of 69 tissue samples of ovarian cancer with 40 
control samples. Using a 15% cut-off for methylation, we observed significantly
higher methylation in genes MGMT, PAX5, CDH13, WT1, THBS1, GATA5 in the ovarian
cancer group, while in the ESR1 gene we observed significantly higher methylation
in the control group compared with the ovarian cancer group. These findings could
potentially be used in screening of ovarian cancer and may have implications for 
future chemotherapy based on epigenetic changes.

PMID: 23438850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2012 Dec;67(12):1393-9.

Novel GATA5 loss-of-function mutations underlie familial atrial fibrillation.

Gu JY(1), Xu JH, Yu H, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Tongji University School of Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Department of
Cardiology, Shanghai/China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to identify novel GATA5 mutations that underlie
familial atrial fibrillation.
METHODS: A total of 110 unrelated patients with familial atrial fibrillation and 
200 unrelated, ethnically matched healthy controls were recruited. The entire
coding region of the GATA5 gene was sequenced in 110 atrial fibrillation
probands. The available relatives of the mutation carriers and 200 controls were 
subsequently genotyped for the identified mutations. The functional effect of the
mutated GATA5 was characterized using a luciferase reporter assay system.
RESULTS: Two novel heterozygous GATA5 mutations (p.Y138F and p.C210G) were
identified in two of the 110 unrelated atrial fibrillation families. These
missense mutations cosegregated with AF in the families and were absent in the
400 control chromosomes. A cross-species alignment of GATA5 protein sequence
showed that the altered amino acids were completely conserved evolutionarily. A
functional analysis revealed that the mutant GATA5 proteins were associated with 
significantly decreased transcriptional activation when compared with their
wild-type counterpart.
CONCLUSION: The findings expand the spectrum of GATA5 mutations linked to AF and 
provide novel insights into the molecular mechanism involved in the pathogenesis 
of atrial fibrillation, suggesting potential implications for the early
prophylaxis and personalized treatment of this common arrhythmia.

PMCID: PMC3521801
PMID: 23295592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Med Sci. 2013;10(1):34-42. doi: 10.7150/ijms.5270. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

GATA5 loss-of-function mutations underlie tetralogy of fallot.

Wei D(1), Bao H, Liu XY, Zhou N, Wang Q, Li RG, Xu YJ, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Tetraology of Fallot (TOF) is the most common form of cyanotic congenital heart
disease and is a major cause of significant morbidity and mortality. Emerging
evidence demonstrates that genetic risk factors are involved in the pathogenesis 
of TOF. However, TOF is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic defects
responsible for TOF remain largely unclear. In the present study, the whole
coding region of the GATA5 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor
essential for cardiogenesis, was sequenced in 130 unrelated patients with TOF.
The relatives of the index patients harboring the identified mutations and 200
unrelated control individuals were subsequently genotyped. The functional
characteristics of the mutations were analyzed using a luciferase reporter assay 
system. As a result, 2 novel heterozygous GATA5 mutations, p.R187G and p.H207R,
were identified in 2 families with autosomal dominantly inherited TOF,
respectively. The variations were absent in 400 control alleles and the altered
amino acids were completely conserved evolutionarily. Functional analysis showed 
that the GATA5 mutants were associated with significantly decreased
transcriptional activation compared with their wild-type counterpart. To our
knowledge, this is the first report on the association of GATA5 loss-of-function 
mutations with TOF, suggesting potential implications for the early prophylaxis
and allele-specific therapy of human TOF.

PMCID: PMC3534875
PMID: 23289003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biol Open. 2012 Mar 15;1(3):275-85. doi: 10.1242/bio.2012380. Epub 2012 Jan 19.

The Aplnr GPCR regulates myocardial progenitor development via a novel
cell-non-autonomous, Ga(i/o) protein-independent pathway.

Paskaradevan S(1), Scott IC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Avenue , Toronto, ON M5G 1X8 , Canada ; Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto , Toronto, ON M5S 1A8 , Canada.

Myocardial progenitor development involves the migration of cells to the anterior
lateral plate mesoderm (ALPM) where they are exposed to the necessary signals for
heart development to proceed. Whether the arrival of cells to this location is
sufficient, or whether earlier signaling events are required, for progenitor
development is poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that in the absence of
Aplnr signaling, cells fail to migrate to the heart-forming region of the ALPM.
Our work uncovers a previously uncharacterized cell-non-autonomous function for
Aplnr signaling in cardiac development. Furthermore, we show that both the single
known Aplnr ligand, Apelin, and the canonical Ga(i/o) proteins that signal
downstream of Aplnr are dispensable for Aplnr function in the context of
myocardial progenitor development. This novel Aplnr signal can be substituted for
by activation of Gata5/Smarcd3 in myocardial progenitors, suggesting a novel
mechanism for Aplnr signaling in the establishment of a niche required for the
proper migration/development of myocardial progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3507289
PMID: 23213418  [PubMed]


49. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Jan;31(1):43-50. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1189. Epub 2012 Nov
20.

A novel GATA5 loss-of-function mutation underlies lone atrial fibrillation.

Wang XH(1), Huang CX, Wang Q, Li RG, Xu YJ, Liu X, Fang WY, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei
430060, PR China.

Atrial fibrillation (AF), the most common sustained cardiac arrhythmia, is
associated with significantly increased morbidity and mortality. Cumulative
evidence highlights the importance of genetic defects in the pathogenesis of AF. 
However, AF is of remarkable heterogeneity and the genetic determinants of AF in 
a vast majority of patients remain illusive. In this study, the coding exons and 
splice junctions of the GATA5 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription
factor essential for normal cardiogenesis, were sequenced in 118 unrelated
patients with lone AF. The available relatives of the index patient carrying an
identified mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically-matched healthy individuals used
as controls were genotyped. The functional effect of the mutant GATA5 was
characterized in contrast to its wild-type counterpart using a luciferase
reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous GATA5 mutation, p.W200G,
was identified in a family with AF inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. The 
mutation was absent in 200 control individuals and the altered amino acid was
completely conserved evolutionarily across species. Functional analysis showed
that the mutation of GATA5 was associated with a significantly decreased
transcriptional activity. These findings provide novel insight into the molecular
mechanism involved in AF, suggesting potential implications for the early
prophylaxis and gene-specific therapy of AF.

PMID: 23175127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Epigenomics. 2012 Oct;4(5):491-501. doi: 10.2217/epi.12.40.

Epigenetic profile in chronic lymphocytic leukemia using methylation-specific
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification.

Cosialls AM(1), Santidrián AF, Coll-Mulet L, Iglesias-Serret D, González-Gironès 
DM, Pérez-Perarnau A, Rubio-Patiño C, González-Barca E, Alonso E, Pons G, Gil J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques II, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de
Bellvitge (IDIBELL)-Universitat de Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Barcelona, Spain.

AIM: To analyze the methylation status of 35 tumor suppressor genes using
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
MATERIALS & METHODS: The DNA of 37 samples from patients with CLL, six healthy
donors, and Jurkat and Ramos cell lines was analyzed by MS-MLPA.
RESULTS: Our results confirm that hypermethylation is a common and not randomly
distributed event in CLL, and some genes, such as WT1, CDH13, IGSF4/TSLC1, GATA5,
DAPK1 and RARB, are hypermethylated in more than 25% of the analyzed samples.
Importantly, MS-MLPA also detected hypermethylation of some genes not reported
previously in CLL, and their methylation status was confirmed by bisulfite
sequencing.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that MS-MLPA is a useful technique for the
detection of methylation in CLL samples. Selecting CLL-specific methylation
targets in order to generate a CLL-specific MS-MLPA probe set could enhance its
usefulness as a tool in studies of risk stratification and guiding the best
therapeutic decision.

PMID: 23130831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Oct 5;91(4):646-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.017.

An excess of deleterious variants in VEGF-A pathway genes in
Down-syndrome-associated atrioventricular septal defects.

Ackerman C(1), Locke AE, Feingold E, Reshey B, Espana K, Thusberg J, Mooney S,
Bean LJ, Dooley KJ, Cua CL, Reeves RH, Sherman SL, Maslen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine and the Heart Research Center, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

About half of people with trisomy 21 have a congenital heart defect (CHD),
whereas the remainder have a structurally normal heart, demonstrating that
trisomy 21 is a significant risk factor but is not causal for abnormal heart
development. Atrioventricular septal defects (AVSD) are the most commonly
occurring heart defects in Down syndrome (DS), and ~65% of all AVSD is associated
with DS. We used a candidate-gene approach among individuals with DS and complete
AVSD (cases = 141) and DS with no CHD (controls = 141) to determine whether rare 
genetic variants in genes involved in atrioventricular valvuloseptal
morphogenesis contribute to AVSD in this sensitized population. We found a
significant excess (p < 0.0001) of variants predicted to be deleterious in cases 
compared to controls. At the most stringent level of filtering, we found
potentially damaging variants in nearly 20% of cases but fewer than 3% of
controls. The variants with the highest probability of being damaging in cases
only were found in six genes: COL6A1, COL6A2, CRELD1, FBLN2, FRZB, and GATA5.
Several of the case-specific variants were recurrent in unrelated individuals,
occurring in 10% of cases studied. No variants with an equal probability of being
damaging were found in controls, demonstrating a highly specific association with
AVSD. Of note, all of these genes are in the VEGF-A pathway, even though the
candidate genes analyzed in this study represented numerous biochemical and
developmental pathways, suggesting that rare variants in the VEGF-A pathway might
contribute to the genetic underpinnings of AVSD in humans.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3484504
PMID: 23040494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Cardiol. 2013 May 25;165(3):570-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.09.039. Epub 
2012 Sep 30.

Prevalence and spectrum of GATA5 mutations associated with congenital heart
disease.

Jiang JQ, Li RG, Wang J, Liu XY, Xu YJ, Fang WY, Chen XZ, Zhang W, Wang XZ, Yang 
YQ.

PMID: 23031282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013 Mar;34(3):504-11. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0482-6. Epub 2012
Sep 9.

GATA5 loss-of-function mutation responsible for the congenital ventriculoseptal
defect.

Wei D(1), Bao H, Zhou N, Zheng GF, Liu XY, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, 200065, China.

The ventriculoseptal defect (VSD) is the most common form of congenital heart
disease and a leading noninfectious cause of infant mortality. Growing evidence
demonstrates that genetic defects are associated with congenital VSD.
Nevertheless, VSD is genetically heterogeneous, and the molecular basis for VSD
in an overwhelming majority of patients remains unknown. In this study, the whole
coding region of GATA5, a gene encoding a zinc finger transcription factor
crucial for normal cardiogenesis, was sequenced in 120 unrelated patients with
VSD. The available relatives of the patient harboring the identified mutation and
200 unrelated individuals used as controls were subsequently genotyped. The
causative potential of a sequence variation was evaluated by MutationTaster, and 
the functional effect of the mutation was characterized using a luciferase
reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous GATA5 mutation, p.L199V,
was identified in a patient with VSD, which was absent in 400 control
chromosomes. Genetic analysis of the mutation carrier's available family members 
showed that the substitution co-segregated with VSD transmitted in an autosomal
dominant pattern. The p.L199V variation was automatically predicted to be disease
causing, and the functional analysis showed that the GATA5 p.L199V mutant protein
was associated with significantly reduced transcriptional activation compared
with its wild-type counterpart. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is
the first report on the link of functionally compromised GATA5 to human VSD,
suggesting potential implications for the early prophylaxis and personalized
treatment of VSD.

PMID: 22961344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 5;14(4):R101. doi: 10.1186/bcr3220.

Promoter hypermethylation in male breast cancer: analysis by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification.

Kornegoor R, Moelans CB, Verschuur-Maes AH, Hogenes MCh, de Bruin PC, Oudejans
JJ, van Diest PJ.

INTRODUCTION: Epigenetic events are, along with genetic alteration, important in 
the development and progression of cancer. Promoter hypermethylation causes gene 
silencing and is thought to be an early event in carcinogenesis. The role of
promoter hypermethylation in male breast cancer has not yet been studied.
METHODS: In a group of 108 male breast cancers, the methylation status of 25
genes was studied using methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. Methylation of more than 15% was regarded indicative for promoter 
hypermethylation. Methylation status was correlated with clinicopathological
features, with patients' outcome and with 28 female breast cancer cases.
RESULTS: Promoter hypermethylation of the genes MSH6, WT1, PAX5, CDH13, GATA5 and
PAX6 was seen in more than 50% of the cases, but was uncommon or absent in normal
male breast tissue. High overall methylation status was correlated with high
grade (P = 0.003) and was an independent predictor of poor survival (P = 0.048;
hazard ratio 2.5). ESR1 and GSTP1 hypermethylation were associated with high
mitotic count (P = 0.037 and P = 0.002, respectively) and high grade (both P =
0.001). No correlation with survival was seen for individual genes. Compared with
female breast cancers (logistic regression), promoter hypermethylation was less
common in a variety of genes, particularly ESR1 (P = 0.005), BRCA1 (P = 0.010)
and BRCA2 (P < 0.001). The most frequently hypermethylated genes (MSH6, CDH13,
PAX5, PAX6 and WT1) were similar for male and female breast cancer.
CONCLUSION: Promoter hypermethylation is common in male breast cancer and high
methylation status correlates with aggressive phenotype and poor survival. ESR1
and GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation seem to be involved in development and/or
progression of high-grade male breast cancer. Although female and male breast
cancer share a set of commonly methylated genes, many of the studied genes are
less frequently methylated in male breast cancer, pointing towards possible
differences between male and female breast carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3680933
PMID: 22765268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Aug;53(2):277-81. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.05.009. Epub
2012 May 26.

Rare non-synonymous variations in the transcriptional activation domains of GATA5
in bicuspid aortic valve disease.

Padang R(1), Bagnall RD, Richmond DR, Bannon PG, Semsarian C.

Author information: 
(1)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Australia.

Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the commonest congenital heart disease and a
highly heritable trait; however, only the NOTCH1 gene has been linked to limited 
cases of BAV in humans. Recently, the transcription factor GATA5 has been shown
to have an essential role in aortic valve development, and targeted deletion of
Gata5 in mice is associated with partially penetrant BAV formation. Here, we
investigated the relationship between GATA5 gene variants and BAV with its
associated aortopathy. One hundred unrelated individuals with confirmed BAV were 
prospectively recruited. Following collection of clinical information and DNA
extraction, the coding regions and splice signal sequences of the GATA5 gene were
screened for sequence variations. The clinical characteristics of the cohort
included a male predominance (77%), mean age of diagnosis 29 ± 22 years,
associated aortopathy in 59% and positive family history for BAV in 13%. Genetic 
analysis identified the presence of 4 rare non-synonymous variations within the
GATA5 transcriptional activation domains, namely Gln3Arg, Ser19Trp, Tyr142His and
Gly166Ser, occurring in one patient each. Gln3Arg and Tyr142His substitutions
affect highly conserved and functionally relevant residues, and are likely to
impact on the transcriptional activation of GATA5 target regions. A novel
Ser19Trp variation was identified at a highly conserved amino acid residue in one
patient, while the Gly166Ser variant was found in a familial case of BAV and
associated aortopathy. Rare non-synonymous variations in the functionally
important GATA5 transcriptional activation domains may be important in the
pathogenesis of BAV disease in humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22641149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochem J. 2012 Aug 15;446(1):89-98. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111942.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 activates GATA5 expression through an E-box motif.

Chen B(1), Hsu R, Li Z, Kogut PC, Du Q, Rouser K, Camoretti-Mercado B, Solway J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Medicine, Department of Medicine, University
of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
bchen@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Silencing of GATA5 gene expression as a result of promoter hypermethylation has
been observed in lung, gastrointestinal and ovarian cancers. However, the
regulation of GATA5 gene expression has been poorly understood. In the present
study, we have demonstrated that an E (enhancer)-box in the GATA5 promoter (bp
-118 to -113 in mice; bp -164 to -159 in humans) positively regulates GATA5
transcription by binding USF1 (upstream stimulatory factor 1). Using
site-directed mutagenesis, EMSA (electrophoretic mobility-shift analysis) and
affinity chromatography, we found that USF1 specifically binds to the E-box
sequence (5'-CACGTG-3'), but not to a mutated E-box. CpG methylation of this
E-box significantly diminished its binding of transcription factors. Mutation of 
the E-box within a GATA5 promoter fragment significantly decreased promoter
activity in a luciferase reporter assay. Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified
that USF1 physiologically interacts with the GATA5 promoter E-box in mouse
intestinal mucosa, which has the highest GATA5 gene expression in mouse.
Co-transfection with a USF1 expression plasmid significantly increased GATA5
promoter-driven luciferase transcription. Furthermore, real-time and RT (reverse 
transcription)-PCR analyses confirmed that overexpression of USF1 activates
endogenous GATA5 gene expression in human bronchial epithelial cells. The present
study provides the first evidence that USF1 activates GATA5 gene expression
through the E-box motif and suggests a potential mechanism (disruption of the
E-box) by which GATA5 promoter methylation reduces GATA5 expression in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3677829
PMID: 22625849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035539. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Deficient signaling via Alk2 (Acvr1) leads to bicuspid aortic valve development.

Thomas PS(1), Sridurongrit S, Ruiz-Lozano P, Kaartinen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital cardiac anomaly in
humans. Despite recent advances, the molecular basis of BAV development is poorly
understood. Previously it has been shown that mutations in the Notch1 gene lead
to BAV and valve calcification both in human and mice, and mice deficient in
Gata5 or its downstream target Nos3 have been shown to display BAVs. Here we show
that tissue-specific deletion of the gene encoding Activin Receptor Type I (Alk2 
or Acvr1) in the cushion mesenchyme results in formation of aortic valve defects 
including BAV. These defects are largely due to a failure of normal development
of the embryonic aortic valve leaflet precursor cushions in the outflow tract
resulting in either a fused right- and non-coronary leaflet, or the presence of
only a very small, rudimentary non-coronary leaflet. The surviving adult mutant
mice display aortic stenosis with high frequency and occasional aortic valve
insufficiency. The thickened aortic valve leaflets in such animals do not show
changes in Bmp signaling activity, while Map kinase pathways are activated.
Although dysfunction correlated with some pro-osteogenic differences in gene
expression, neither calcification nor inflammation were detected in aortic valves
of Alk2 mutants with stenosis. We conclude that signaling via Alk2 is required
for appropriate aortic valve development in utero, and that defects in this
process lead to indirect secondary complications later in life.

PMCID: PMC3334911
PMID: 22536403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 15;18(12):3387-95. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-3049. 
Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Defining a gene promoter methylation signature in sputum for lung cancer risk
assessment.

Leng S(1), Do K, Yingling CM, Picchi MA, Wolf HJ, Kennedy TC, Feser WJ, Baron AE,
Franklin WA, Brock MV, Herman JG, Baylin SB, Byers T, Stidley CA, Belinsky SA.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Department of
Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87108, USA.

Comment in
    Biomark Med. 2012 Aug;6(4):512.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the methylation state of 31 genes in sputum as biomarkers in
an expanded nested, case-control study from the Colorado cohort, and to assess
the replication of results from the most promising genes in an independent
case-control study of asymptomatic patients with stage I lung cancer from New
Mexico.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Cases and controls from Colorado and New Mexico were
interrogated for methylation of up to 31 genes using nested, methylation-specific
PCR. Individual genes and methylation indices were used to assess the association
between methylation and lung cancer with logistic regression modeling.
RESULTS: Seventeen genes with ORs of 1.4 to 3.6 were identified and selected for 
replication in the New Mexico study. Overall, the direction of effects seen in
New Mexico was similar to Colorado with the largest increase in case
discrimination (ORs, 3.2-4.2) seen for the PAX5a, GATA5, and SULF2 genes.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves generated from seven-gene panels
from Colorado and New Mexico studies showed prediction accuracy of 71% and 77%,
respectively. A 22-fold increase in lung cancer risk was seen for a subset of New
Mexico cases with five or more genes methylated. Sequence variants associated
with lung cancer did not improve the accuracy of this gene methylation panel.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies have identified and replicated a panel of methylated
genes whose integration with other promising biomarkers could initially identify 
the highest risk smokers for computed tomographic screening for early detection
of lung cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3483793
PMID: 22510351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Neoplasma. 2012;59(4):416-23. doi: 10.4149/neo_2012_054.

<U+0394>Np63a mediates proliferation and apoptosis in human gastric cancer cells by the 
regulation of GATA-6.

Wang H(1), Liu Z, Li J, Zhao X, Wang Z, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang 110001, People's Republic of China.

The oncogenic isoform of the p63 protein, <U+0394>Np63a, has been found to be
overexpressed in numerous human squamous cell carcinomas. However, the role of
<U+0394>Np63a in human gastric cancer remains unknown. To evaluate this role, we
screened a panel of gastric cancer cell lines for <U+0394>Np63a expression and found
that they are correlated with the differentiation status of the cell lines. Using
the MKN28 gastric cancer cell line for loss-of-function or gain-of-function of
<U+0394>Np63a in our experiments, we observed that forced expression of <U+0394>Np63a promoted 
cell proliferation as assessed by the MTT and colony formation assays, and
increased the GATA-6 expression. In contrast, down-regulation of <U+0394>Np63a via small
interfering RNA suppressed cell proliferation, induced cell apoptosis, and
reduced the expression of GATA-6. In conclusion, our data suggest that <U+0394>Np63a
plays an important role in cell growth and proliferation of gastric cancer cells,
which may be associated with the regulation of GATA-6 expression. This is the
first study exploring the biological functions and the underlying mechanism of
<U+0394>Np63a during gastric cancer development. It also identifies potential targets
for anti-tumor treatment.

PMID: 22489697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Cardiol. 2012 May 31;157(2):305-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.03.132. Epub 
2012 Apr 6.

Mutational spectrum of the GATA5 gene associated with familial atrial
fibrillation.

Yang YQ, Wang J, Wang XH, Wang Q, Tan HW, Zhang M, Shen FF, Jiang JQ, Fang WY,
Liu X.

PMID: 22483626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Stem Cells. 2012 May;30(5):946-55. doi: 10.1002/stem.1059.

NOTCH1 is required for regeneration of Clara cells during repair of airway
injury.

Xing Y(1), Li A, Borok Z, Li C, Minoo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Will Rogers Institute
Pulmonary Research Center, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1579.

The airways of the mammalian lung are lined with highly specialized epithelial
cell types that are the targets of airborne toxicants and injury. Notch signaling
plays an important role in the ontogeny of airway epithelial cells, but its
contributions to recruitment, expansion or differentiation of resident
progenitor/stem cells, and repair and re-establishment of the normal composition 
of airway epithelium following injury have not been addressed. In this study, the
role of a specific Notch receptor, Notch1, was investigated by targeted
inactivation in the embryonic lung epithelium using the epithelial-specific
Gata5-Cre driver line. Notch1-deficient mice are viable without discernible
defects in pulmonary epithelial cell-fate determination and differentiation.
However, in an experimental model of airway injury, activity of Notch1 is found
to be required for normal repair of the airway epithelium. Absence of Notch1
reduced the ability of a population of cells distinguished by expression of
PGP9.5, otherwise a marker of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, which appears to
serve as a reservoir for regeneration of Clara cells. Hairy/enhancer of split-5
(Hes5) and paired-box-containing gene 6 (Pax6) were found to be downstream
targets of Notch1. Both Hes5 and Pax6 expressions were significantly increased in
association with Clara cell regeneration in wild-type lungs. Ablation of Notch1
reduced Hes5 and Pax6 and inhibited airway epithelial repair. Thus, although
dispensable in developmental ontogeny of airway epithelial cells, normal activity
of Notch1 is required for repair of the airway epithelium. The signaling pathway 
by which Notch1 regulates the repair process includes stimulation of Hes5 and
Pax6 gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4005608
PMID: 22331706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BJU Int. 2012 Jul;110(2 Pt 2):E144-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2011.10862.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 30.

GATA5 CpG island methylation in renal cell cancer: a potential biomarker for
metastasis and disease progression.

Peters I(1), Eggers H, Atschekzei F, Hennenlotter J, Waalkes S, Tränkenschuh W,
Grosshennig A, Merseburger AS, Stenzl A, Kuczyk MA, Serth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

GATA5 CpG island (CGI) methylation and transcriptional inactivation is involved
in colorectal and gastric cancer. Whether DNA methylation of GATA5 affects
clinical pathology is still unclear. In the present study, we analysed, for the
first time, CGI methylation in RCC and its association with clinicopathological
parameters and progression-free survival of patients. We show for the first time 
GATA5 CGI hypermethylation in RCC. Moreover, we found out that increased
methylation is statistically associated with status of metastasis, progressive
disease and shortened progression-free survival. The present study underline the 
necessity for further functional investigations as well as prospective survival
analyses to clarify whether GATA5 promoter methylation can provide independent
information for future clinical management of patients with RCC.OBJECTIVE: To
investigate whether GATA5 CpG island (CGI) methylation occurs in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) and is associated with clinical, histopathological
characteristics or progression-free survival of patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Methylation was quantified in 117 RCC samples and 89 paired
adjacent normal tissues using quantitative combined bisulphite restriction
analysis (COBRA). COBRA was evaluated in advance by pyrosequencing analyses of
control RCC cell lines (coefficient of correlation, R = 0.95). Statistical
analyses were carried out using the paired t-test for matched tumour tissue (TU) 
and adjacent normal tissue (adN) samples, logistic regression for comparisons of 
independent sample groups and Cox regression for analysis of progression-free
survival.
RESULTS: In the present study, we found a significant higher mean relative
methylation in TU (20.4%) than in adN (7.9%, P < 0.001) in paired samples of all 
RCCs. Increased GATA5 methylation in tumours was associated with metastasis (P = 
0.005) and decreased progression-free survival (P = 0.005, HR = 4.59) in the
clear-cell RCC (ccRCC) group. CGI methylation in advanced ccRCCs (pT =3 and/or
N1, M1 or G2-3/G3) exceeds those detected in localized tumours (pT =2, N0, M0,
G1/G1-2) (27.8% vs 11.0%, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The association of GATA5 hypermethylation with metastasis and
progression-free survival of patients indicates that epigenetic alterations of
GATA5 participate in renal cell carcinogenesis. Moreover, GATA5 CGI methylation
could serve as a biomarker for tumour progression, although prospective and
functional investigations are necessary to clarify whether independent
information for future clinical management of patients with RCC can be obtained.

© 2012 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 22289415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Jul;18(3):703-12. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9498-8. Epub
2012 Jan 26.

Epigenetic and copy number variation analysis in retinoblastoma by MS-MLPA.

Livide G(1), Epistolato MC, Amenduni M, Disciglio V, Marozza A, Mencarelli MA,
Toti P, Lazzi S, Hadjistilianou T, De Francesco S, D'Ambrosio A, Renieri A,
Ariani F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

Retinoblastoma is the most common primary intraocular malignancy in children. Two
step inactivation of RB1 (M1-M2) represents the key event in the pathogenesis of 
retinoblastoma but additional genetic and epigenetic events (M3-Mn) are required 
for tumor development. In the present study, we employed Methylation Specific
Multiplex Ligation Probe Assay to investigate methylation status and copy number 
changes of 25 and 39 oncosuppressor genes, respectively. This technique was
applied to analyse 12 retinoblastomas (5 bilateral and 7 unilateral) and results 
were compared to corresponding normal retina. We identified hypermethylation in
seven new genes: MSH6 (50%), CD44 (42%), PAX5 (42%), GATA5 (25%), TP53 (8%), VHL 
(8%) and GSTP1 (8%) and we confirmed the previously reported hypermethylation of 
MGMT (58%), RB1 (17%) and CDKN2 (8%). These genes belong to key pathways
including DNA repair, pRB and p53 signalling, transcriptional regulation, protein
degradation, cell-cell interaction, cellular adhesion and migration. In the same 
group of retinoblastomas, a total of 29 copy number changes (19 duplications and 
10 deletions) have been identified. Interestingly, we found deletions of the
following oncosuppressor genes that might contribute to drive retinoblastoma
tumorigenesis: TP53, CDH13, GATA5, CHFR, TP73 and IGSF4. The present data
highlight the importance of epigenetic changes in retinoblastoma and indicate
seven hypermethylated oncosuppressors never associated before to retinoblastoma
pathogenesis. This study also confirms the presence of copy number variations in 
retinoblastoma, expecially in unilateral cases (mean 3 ± 1.3) where these changes
were found more frequently respect to bilateral cases (mean 1.4 ± 1.1).

PMID: 22278416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Anticancer Res. 2011 Dec;31(12):4647-52.

Clinical significance of hypermethylation status in NSCLC: evaluation of a
30-gene panel in patients with advanced disease.

Pesek M(1), Kopeckova M, Benesova L, Meszarosova A, Mukensnabl P, Bruha F,
Minarik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Faculty Hospital Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is one of major factors in cancer progression. We
observed multiple genes involved in cancer-related signaling and focused on
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and evaluated
methylation in relation to various clinical parameters.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty genes were examined in 121 NSCLC patients using the 
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
method. Correlations to gender, smoking status, tumor subtype, disease stage and 
EGFR/KRAS mutation status were performed by chi-square test.
RESULTS: 90% of tumors exhibited methylation of at least one gene. Most
frequently methylated were cadherin-13 (CDH13), Ras associated domain-containing 
protein (RASSF1A), Wilms' tumor protein (WT1), adenomatous polyposis coli protein
(APC), paired box protein Pax-5 (PAX5), estrogen receptor (ESR1), an inhibitor of
cyclin-dependent kinase p15 (CDKN2B), paired box protein Pax-6 (PAX6),
transcription factor GATA-5 (GATA5) and cell adhesion molecule 4 (IGSF4). Overall
methylation (any gene) was increased in adenocarcinomas (p=0.0329), unrelated to 
gender or disease stage. Several genes exhibited variable methylation with gender
(CDH13, p<0.001; GATA5, p=0.02; PAX6, p=0.01 and ESR1, p=0.03), smoking (CDH13,
p=0.002), or epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status [Von
Hippel-Lindau disease tumor supresor (VHL), p=0.001; CDKN2B, p=0.02; CDH13,
p=0.02; APC, p=0.04 and ESR1, p=0.04].
CONCLUSION: Differences in gene methylation associated with gender, smoking and
EGFR mutation suggest potential for prediction in relation to management of
tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy.

PMID: 22199344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Gynecol Oncol. 2012 Mar;124(3):582-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.11.026. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Prognostic and diagnostic significance of DNA methylation patterns in high grade 
serous ovarian cancer.

Montavon C(1), Gloss BS, Warton K, Barton CA, Statham AL, Scurry JP, Tabor B,
Nguyen TV, Qu W, Samimi G, Hacker NF, Sutherland RL, Clark SJ, O'Brien PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney NSW
2010, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Altered DNA methylation patterns hold promise as cancer biomarkers. In
this study we selected a panel of genes which are commonly methylated in a
variety of cancers to evaluate their potential application as biomarkers for
prognosis and diagnosis in high grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC); the most 
common and lethal subtype of ovarian cancer.
METHODS: The methylation patterns of 10 genes (BRCA1, EN1, DLEC1, HOXA9, RASSF1A,
GATA4, GATA5, HSULF1, CDH1, SFN) were examined and compared in a cohort of 80
primary HGSOC and 12 benign ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) samples using
methylation-specific headloop suppression PCR.
RESULTS: The genes were variably methylated in primary HGSOC, with HOXA9
methylation observed in 95% of cases. Most genes were rarely methylated in benign
OSE, with the exception of SFN which was methylated in all HGSOC and benign OSE
samples examined. Methylation of DLEC1 was associated with disease recurrence,
independent of tumor stage and suboptimal surgical debulking (HR 3.5 (95%
CI:1.10-11.07), p=0.033). A combination of the methylation status of HOXA9 and
EN1 could discriminate HGSOC from benign OSE with a sensitivity of 98.8% and a
specificity of 91.7%, which increased to 100% sensitivity with no loss of
specificity when pre-operative CA125 levels were also incorporated.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence to support the feasibility of
detecting altered DNA methylation patterns as a potential diagnostic and
prognostic approach for HGSOC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22115852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS Biol. 2011 Oct;9(10):e1001181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001181. Epub 2011 
Oct 25.

Multifactorial origins of heart and gut defects in nipbl-deficient zebrafish, a
model of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome.

Muto A(1), Calof AL, Lander AD, Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2011 Oct;9(10):e1001180.

Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is the founding member of a class of
multi-organ system birth defect syndromes termed cohesinopathies, named for the
chromatin-associated protein complex cohesin, which mediates sister chromatid
cohesion. Most cases of CdLS are caused by haploinsufficiency for Nipped-B-like
(Nipbl), a highly conserved protein that facilitates cohesin loading. Consistent 
with recent evidence implicating cohesin and Nipbl in transcriptional regulation,
both CdLS cell lines and tissues of Nipbl-deficient mice show changes in the
expression of hundreds of genes. Nearly all such changes are modest,
however--usually less than 1.5-fold--raising the intriguing possibility that, in 
CdLS, severe developmental defects result from the collective action of many
otherwise innocuous perturbations. As a step toward testing this hypothesis, we
developed a model of nipbl-deficiency in zebrafish, an organism in which we can
quantitatively investigate the combinatorial effects of gene expression changes. 
After characterizing the structure and embryonic expression of the two zebrafish 
nipbl genes, we showed that morpholino knockdown of these genes produces a
spectrum of specific heart and gut/visceral organ defects with similarities to
those in CdLS. Analysis of nipbl morphants further revealed that, as early as
gastrulation, expression of genes involved in endodermal differentiation (sox32, 
sox17, foxa2, and gata5) and left-right patterning (spaw, lefty2, and dnah9) is
altered. Experimental manipulation of the levels of several such genes--using RNA
injection or morpholino knockdown--implicated both additive and synergistic
interactions in causing observed developmental defects. These findings support
the view that birth defects in CdLS arise from collective effects of quantitative
changes in gene expression. Interestingly, both the phenotypes and gene
expression changes in nipbl morphants differed from those in mutants or morphants
for genes encoding cohesin subunits, suggesting that the transcriptional
functions of Nipbl cannot be ascribed simply to its role in cohesin loading.

PMCID: PMC3201921
PMID: 22039349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025985. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Epigenetic subgroups of esophageal and gastric adenocarcinoma with differential
GATA5 DNA methylation associated with clinical and lifestyle factors.

Wang X(1), Kang GH, Campan M, Weisenberger DJ, Long TI, Cozen W, Bernstein L, Wu 
AH, Siegmund KD, Shibata D, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Adenocarcinomas located near the gastroesophageal junction have
unclear etiology and are difficult to classify. We used DNA methylation analysis 
to identify subtype-specific markers and new subgroups of gastroesophageal
adenocarcinomas, and studied their association with epidemiological risk factors 
and clinical outcomes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used logistic regression models and
unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of 74 DNA methylation markers on 45
tumor samples (44 patients) of esophageal and gastric adenocarcinomas obtained
from a population-based case-control study to uncover epigenetic markers and
cluster groups of gastroesophageal adenocarcinomas. No distinct epigenetic
differences were evident between subtypes of gastric and esophageal cancers.
However, we identified two gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma subclusters based on
DNA methylation profiles. Group membership was best predicted by GATA5 DNA
methylation status. We analyzed the associations between these two epigenetic
groups and exposure using logistic regression, and the associations with survival
time using Cox regression in a larger set of 317 tumor samples (278 patients).
There were more males with esophageal and gastric cardia cancers in Cluster Group
1 characterized by higher GATA5 DNA methylation values (all p<0.05). This group
also showed associations of borderline statistical significance with having ever 
smoked (p-value<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.07), high body mass index (p-value<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.06), and symptoms of
gastroesophageal reflux (p-value<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.07). Subjects in cluster Group 1 showed
better survival than those in Group 2 after adjusting for tumor differentiation
grade, but this was not found to be independent of tumor stage.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: DNA methylation profiling can be used in
population-based studies to identify epigenetic subclasses of gastroesophageal
adenocarcinomas and class-specific DNA methylation markers that can be linked to 
epidemiological data and clinical outcome. Two new epigenetic subgroups of
gastroesophageal adenocarcinomas were identified that differ to some extent in
their survival rates, risk factors of exposure, and GATA5 DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC3197593
PMID: 22028801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):41036-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.268573. Epub
2011 Oct 3.

MicroRNA-processing enzyme Dicer is required in epicardium for coronary
vasculature development.

Singh MK(1), Lu MM, Massera D, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
masingh@mail.med.upenn.edu

The epicardium is a sheet of epithelial cells covering the heart during early
cardiac development. In recent years, the epicardium has been identified as an
important contributor to cardiovascular development, and epicardium-derived cells
have the potential to differentiate into multiple cardiac cell lineages. Some
epicardium-derived cells that undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and
delaminate from the surface of the developing heart subsequently invade the
myocardium and differentiate into vascular smooth muscle of the developing
coronary vasculature. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated broadly in tissue
patterning and development, including in the heart, but a role in epicardium is
unknown. To examine the role of miRNAs during epicardial development, we
conditionally deleted the miRNA-processing enzyme Dicer in the proepicardium
using Gata5-Cre mice. Epicardial Dicer mutant mice are born in expected Mendelian
ratios but die immediately after birth with profound cardiac defects, including
impaired coronary vessel development. We found that loss of Dicer leads to
impaired epicardial epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and a reduction in
epicardial cell proliferation and differentiation into coronary smooth muscle
cells. These results demonstrate a critical role for Dicer, and by implication
miRNAs, in murine epicardial development.

PMCID: PMC3220479
PMID: 21969379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 15;358(2):368-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.07.037. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

GATA5 interacts with GATA4 and GATA6 in outflow tract development.

Laforest B(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différentiation Cardiaque, Programme de
Biologie Moléculaire, Université de Montréal, Montréal QC, Canada H3C 3J7.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors are critical regulators of
heart development and mutations in 2 of them, GATA4 and GATA6 are associated with
outflow tract and septal defects in human. The heart expresses 3 GATA factors,
GATA4, 5 and 6 in a partially overlapping pattern. Here, we report that compound 
Gata4/Gata5 and Gata5/Gata6 mutants die embryonically or perinatally due to
severe congenital heart defects. Almost all Gata4(+/-)Gata5(+/-) mutant embryos
have double outlet right ventricles (DORV), large ventricular septal defects
(VSD) as well as hypertrophied mitral and tricuspid valves. Only 25% of double
compound Gata4/Gata5 heterozygotes survive to adulthood and these mice have
aortic stenosis. Compound loss of a Gata5 and a Gata6 allele also leads to DORVs 
associated with subaortic VSDs. Expression of several transcription factors
important for endocardial and myocardial cell differentiation, such as Tbx20,
Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand2, was reduced in compound heterozygote embryos. These
findings suggest the existence of important genetic interactions between Gata5
and the 2 other cardiac GATA factors in endocardial cushion formation and outflow
tract morphogenesis. The data identify GATA5 as a potential genetic modifier of
congenital heart disease and provide insight for elucidating the genetic basis of
an important class of human birth defects.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21839733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Genes Cancer. 2010 Dec;1(12):1178-88. doi: 10.1177/1947601911404223.

GATA Transcription Factors and Cancer.

Zheng R(1), Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

It has been almost a quarter century since it was first appreciated that a class 
of oncogenes contained in rapidly transforming avian retroviruses encoded
DNA-binding transcription factors. As with other oncogenes, genetic recombination
with the viral genome led to their overexpression or functional alteration. In
the years that followed, alterations of numerous transcription factors were shown
to be causatively involved in various cancers in human patients and model
organisms. Depending on their normal cellular functions, these factors were
subsequently categorized as proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. This
review focuses on the role of GATA transcription factors in carcinogenesis. GATA 
factors are zinc finger DNA binding proteins that control the development of
diverse tissues by activating or repressing transcription. GATA factors thus
coordinate cellular maturation with proliferation arrest and cell survival.
Therefore, a role of this family of genes in human cancers is not surprising.
Prominent examples include structural mutations in GATA1 that are found in almost
all megakaryoblastic leukemias in patients with Down syndrome; loss of GATA3
expression in aggressive, dedifferentiated breast cancers; and silencing of GATA4
and GATA5 expression in colorectal and lung cancers. Here, we discuss possible
mechanisms of carcinogenesis vis-à-vis the normal functions of GATA factors as
they pertain to human patients and mouse models of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3092280
PMID: 21779441  [PubMed]


71. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):541-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.040. Epub 2011 
Jul 1.

An evolutionarily conserved kernel of gata5, gata6, otx2 and prdm1a operates in
the formation of endoderm in zebrafish.

Tseng WF(1), Jang TH, Huang CB, Yuh CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County 350, Taiwan, ROC.

An evolutionarily conserved subcircuit (kernel) dedicated to a specific
developmental function is found at the top of the gene regulatory networks (GRNs)
hierarchy. Here we comprehensively demonstrate that a pan-deuterostome endoderm
specification kernel exists in zebrafish. We analyzed interactions among gata5,
gata6, otx2 and prdm1a using specific morpholino knockdowns and measured the gene
expression profiles by quantitative real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridization.
The mRNA rescue experiment validated the specificity of the morpholino knockdown.
We found that the interactions among gata5, gata6, otx2 and prdm1a determine the 
initial specification of the zebrafish endoderm. Although otx2 can activate both 
gata5 and gata6, and the prdm1a/krox homologue also activates some endoderm
transcription factors, a feedback loop from Gata to otx2 and prdm1a is missing.
Furthermore, we found the positive regulation between gata5 and gata6 to further 
lock-on the mesendoderm specification by the Gata family. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation was used to further validate the recruitment of Otx2 to the
gata5 and gata6 loci. Functional assays revealed that module B of gata6 and the
basal promoter of gata5 drive the gene at the mesendoderm, and mutational
analysis demonstrated that Otx2 and Gata5/6 contribute to reporter gene
activation. This is the first direct evidence for evolutionarily conserved
endoderm specification across echinoderms and vertebrates.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21756893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2011 Aug;138(15):3113-23. doi: 10.1242/dev.064279. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Smarcd3b and Gata5 promote a cardiac progenitor fate in the zebrafish embryo.

Lou X(1), Deshwar AR, Crump JG, Scott IC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada.

Development of the heart requires recruitment of cardiovascular progenitor cells 
(CPCs) to the future heart-forming region. CPCs are the building blocks of the
heart, and have the potential to form all the major cardiac lineages. However,
little is known regarding what regulates CPC fate and behavior. Activity of
GATA4, SMARCD3 and TBX5 - the `cardiac BAF' (cBAF) complex, can promote
myocardial differentiation in embryonic mouse mesoderm. Here, we exploit the
advantages of the zebrafish embryo to gain mechanistic understanding of cBAF
activity. Overexpression of smarcd3b and gata5 in zebrafish results in an
enlarged heart, whereas combinatorial loss of cBAF components inhibits cardiac
differentiation. In transplantation experiments, cBAF acts cell autonomously to
promote cardiac fate. Remarkably, cells overexpressing cBAF migrate to the
developing heart and differentiate as cardiomyocytes, endocardium and smooth
muscle. This is observed even in host embryos that lack endoderm or cardiac
mesoderm. Our results reveal an evolutionarily conserved role for cBAF activity
in cardiac differentiation. Importantly, they demonstrate that Smarcd3b and Gata5
can induce a primitive, CPC-like state.

PMID: 21715426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Cancer. 2011 Sep 1;129(5):1053-63. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25764. Epub 2011 Jan 7.

Interleukin-6 promotes tumorigenesis by altering DNA methylation in oral cancer
cells.

Gasche JA(1), Hoffmann J, Boland CR, Goel A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Charles A.
Sammons Cancer Center and Baylor Research Institute, Baylor University Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75246, USA.

Worldwide oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) accounts for more than 100,000
deaths each year. Chronic inflammation constitutes one of the key risk factors
for OSCC. Accumulating evidence suggests that aberrant DNA methylation may
contribute to OSCC tumorigenesis. This study investigated whether chronic
inflammation alters DNA methylation and expression of cancer-associated genes in 
OSCC. We established an in vitro model of interleukin (IL)-6 mediating chronic
inflammation in OSCC cell lines. Thereafter, we measured the ability of IL-6 to
induce global hypomethylation of long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE-1)
sequences, as well as CpG methylation changes using multiple methodologies
including quantitative pyrosequencing, methylation-specific multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification and sensitive melting analysis after
real-time-methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Gene expression
was investigated by quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR. IL-6 induced
significant global LINE-1 hypomethylation (p=0.016) in our in vitro model of
inflammatory stress in OSCC cell lines. Simultaneously, IL-6 induced CpG promoter
methylation changes in several important putative tumor suppressor genes
including CHFR, GATA5 and PAX6. Methylation changes correlated inversely with the
changes in the expression of corresponding genes. Our results indicate that
IL-6-induced inflammation promotes tumorigenesis in the oral cavity by altering
global LINE-1 hypomethylation. In addition, concurrent hypermethylation of
multiple tumor suppressor genes by IL-6 suggests that epigenetic gene silencing
may be an important consequence of chronic inflammation in the oral cavity. These
findings have clinical relevance, as both methylation and inflammation are
suitable targets for developing novel preventive and therapeutic measures.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3110561
PMID: 21710491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Clin Invest. 2011 Jul;121(7):2876-87. doi: 10.1172/JCI44555.

Loss of Gata5 in mice leads to bicuspid aortic valve.

Laforest B(1), Andelfinger G, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV), the leading congenital heart disease, occurs in
1%-2% of the population. Genetic studies suggest that BAV is an
autosomal-dominant disease with reduced penetrance. However, only 1 gene, NOTCH1,
has been linked to cases of BAV. Here, we show that targeted deletion of Gata5 in
mice leads to hypoplastic hearts and partially penetrant BAV formation.
Endocardial cell-specific inactivation of Gata5 led to BAV, similar to that
observed in Gata5-/- mice. In all cases, the observed BAVs resulted from fusion
of the right-coronary and noncoronary leaflets, the subtype associated with the
more severe valve dysfunction in humans. Neither endocardial cell proliferation
nor cushion formation was altered in the absence of Gata5. Rather, defective
endocardial cell differentiation, resulting from the deregulation of several
components of the Notch pathway and other important endocardial cell regulators, 
may be the underlying mechanism of disease. The results unravel a critical
cell-autonomous role for endocardial Gata5 in aortic valve formation and identify
GATA5 as a potential gene responsible for congenital heart disease in humans.
Mice with mutated Gata5 alleles represent unique models to dissect the mechanisms
underlying degenerative aortic valve disease and to develop much-needed
preventive and therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC3223824
PMID: 21633169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur Urol. 2011 Jul;60(1):131-40. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2011.04.020. Epub 2011 Apr
16.

Evaluation of the methylation status of tumour suppressor genes for predicting
bacillus Calmette-Guérin response in patients with T1G3 high-risk bladder
tumours.

Agundez M(1), Grau L, Palou J, Algaba F, Villavicencio H, Sanchez-Carbayo M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Markers Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2011 Jul;8(7):355.

BACKGROUND: Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is a standard treatment for reducing
tumour recurrence and delaying progression of high-risk non-muscle-invasive
bladder tumours. However, it is not clear yet which patients are more likely to
respond to BCG.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of the methylation of 25 tumour suppressor genes 
(TSG) as clinical outcome predictive biomarkers in T1G3 bladder tumours treated
with BCG.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective design included 91
paraffin-embedded tumours of patients with T1G3 primary non-muscle-invasive
disease undergoing nonmaintenance BCG treatment.
MEASUREMENTS: The methylation status of 25 TSGs was measured using a
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
assay. Recurrence, progression into muscle-invasive tumours, and disease-specific
survival (DSS) rates were analysed using univariate and multivariate tests.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: The genes most frequently methylated included STK11
(94.5%), MSH6 (81.3%), BRCA1 (72.5%), PAX5A (68.1%), MGMT (67.0%), CDH13 (62.6%),
and IGSF4 (61.5%). Methylation was newly identified in T1G3 tumours for TP73,
MSH6, ESR1, PAX5A, WT1, CD44, ATM, IGSF4, CHFR, BRCA2, THBS1, PYCARD, STK11, and 
GATA5. Methylation for several TSGs was significantly associated with
multifocality and tumour size. Patients with different methylation statuses of
TSGs showed differential recurrence rates (PAX6: p = 0.025), progression rates
(MSH6: p = 0.040; RB1: p = 0.042; THBS1: p = 0.041; PYCARD: p = 0.048; TP73: p = 
0.048; ESR1: p = 0.036; and GATA5: p = 0.019), and DSS rates (GATA5: p = 0.037). 
Several combinations improved prediction for progression. Multivariate analyses
indicated that among the combinations remaining as independent predictors, two
genes-MSH6 and THBS1-already provided the most significant predictive assessment 
for progression (p = 0.004). The major limitation of this study is related to its
retrospective design.
CONCLUSIONS: The methylation status of TSGs was associated with the clinical
outcome of patients with T1G3 tumours undergoing BCG treatment under three
clinical end points: recurrence, progression, and DSS. The methylation status of 
TSGs distinguished patients responding to BCG from those who may require a more
aggressive therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2011 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 21514719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Development. 2011 May;138(9):1817-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.056697. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Regulation of endoderm formation and left-right asymmetry by miR-92 during early 
zebrafish development.

Li N(1), Wei C, Olena AF, Patton JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of 21-23 nucleotide endogenous non-coding RNAs
that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression in a sequence-specific
manner. Typically, miRNAs downregulate target genes by recognizing and recruiting
protein complexes to 3'UTRs, followed by translation repression or mRNA
degradation. miR-92 is a well-studied oncogene in mammalian systems. Here, using 
zebrafish as a model system, we uncovered a novel tissue-inductive role for
miR-92 during early vertebrate development. Overexpression resulted in reduced
endoderm formation during gastrulation with consequent cardia and viscera bifida.
By contrast, depletion of miR-92 increased endoderm formation, which led to
abnormal Kupffer's vesicle development and left-right patterning defects. Using
target prediction algorithms and reporter constructs, we show that gata5 is a
target of miR-92. Alteration of gata5 levels reciprocally mirrored the effects of
gain and loss of function of miR-92. Moreover, genetic epistasis experiments
showed that miR-92-mediated defects could be substantially suppressed by
modulating gata5 levels. We propose that miR-92 is a critical regulator of
endoderm formation and left-right asymmetry during early zebrafish development
and provide the first evidence for a regulatory function for gata5 in the
formation of Kupffer's vesicle and left-right patterning.

PMCID: PMC3074454
PMID: 21447552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Dyn. 2011 Mar;240(3):649-62. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22570. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Different requirements for GATA factors in cardiogenesis are mediated by
non-canonical Wnt signaling.

Afouda BA(1), Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Research
Program, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, 
United Kingdom. boni.afouda@abdn.ac.uk

GATA factors and Wnt signals are key regulators of vertebrate cardiogenesis, but 
specific roles for individual GATA factors and how they interact with Wnt
signaling remain unknown. We use loss of function and overexpression approaches
to elucidate how these molecules regulate early cardiogenesis in Xenopus. In
order to minimize indirect effects due to abnormal early embryogenesis, we use
pluripotent embryonic tissues as cardiogenic assays. We confirm central roles for
GATA4, 5, and 6 in cardiogenesis, but also discover individual and different
requirements. We show that GATA4 or 6 regulate both cardiogenic potential and
subsequent cardiomyocyte differentiation but that GATA5 is involved in regulating
cardiomyocyte differentiation. We also show that Wnt11b signaling can rescue
reduced cardiac differentiation resulting from loss of function of GATA4 and 6
but not GATA5. We conclude that Wnt11b mediates the differential requirements for
GATA factors during vertebrate cardiogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21305652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Br J Pharmacol. 2011 Apr;162(8):1743-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.01197.x.

Cytosine arabinoside induces ectoderm and inhibits mesoderm expression in human
embryonic stem cells during multilineage differentiation.

Jagtap S(1), Meganathan K, Gaspar J, Wagh V, Winkler J, Hescheler J, Sachinidis
A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology,
Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Teratogenic substances induce adverse effects during the 
development of the embryo. Multilineage differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) mimics the development of the embryo in vitro. Here, we propose a
transcriptomic approach in hESCs for monitoring specific toxic effects of
compounds as an alternative to traditional time-consuming and cost-intensive in
vivo tests requiring large numbers of animals. This study was undertaken to
explore the adverse effects of cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C) on randomly
differentiated hESCs.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Human embryonic stem cells were used to investigate the
effects of a developmental toxicant Ara-C. Sublethal concentrations of Ara-C were
given for two time points, day 7 and day 14 during the differentiation. Gene
expression was assessed with microarrays to determine the dysregulated
transcripts in presence of Ara-C.
KEY RESULTS: Randomly differentiated hESCs were able to generate the multilineage
markers. The low concentration of Ara-C (1 nM) induced the ectoderm and inhibited
the mesoderm at day 14. The induction of ectodermal markers such as MAP2, TUBB
III, PAX6, TH and NESTIN was observed with an inhibition of mesodermal markers
such as HAND2, PITX2, GATA5, MYL4, TNNT2, COL1A1 and COL1A2. In addition, no
induction of apoptosis was observed. Gene ontology revealed unique dysregulated
biological process related to neuronal differentiation and mesoderm development. 
Pathway analysis showed the axon guidance pathway to be dysregulated.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our results suggest that hESCs in combination with 
toxicogenomics offer a sensitive in vitro developmental toxicity model as an
alternative to traditional animal experiments.

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3081118
PMID: 21198554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. FEBS J. 2011 Jan;278(2):282-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07945.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

The mouse Muc5b mucin gene is transcriptionally regulated by thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and GATA-6 transcription factors.

Jonckheere N(1), Velghe A, Ducourouble MP, Copin MC, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U837, Jean Pierre Aubert Research Center, Lille, France.
nicolas.jonckheere@inserm.fr

MUC5B is one of the major mucin genes expressed in the respiratory tract.
Previous studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that MUC5B is expressed in
human lung adenocarcinomas and during lung morphogenesis. Moreover, in human lung
adenocarcinoma tissues, a converse correlation between MUC5B and thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) expression, a lung-specific transcription factor, 
has been established. However, the molecular mechanisms that govern the
regulation of MUC5B expression in the lung are largely unknown. In order to
better understand the biological role of MUC5B in lung pathophysiology, we report
the characterization of the promoter region of the mouse Muc5b mucin gene. The
promoter is flanked by a TATA box (TACATAA) identical to that in the human gene. 
Human and murine promoters share 67.5% similarity over the first 170 nucleotides.
By RT-PCR, co-transfection studies and gel-shift assays, we show that Muc5b
promoter activity is completely inhibited by TTF-1, whereas factors of the GATA
family (GATA-4/GATA-5/GATA-6) are activators. Together, these results
demonstrate, for the first time, that Muc5b is a target gene of transcription
factors (TTF-1, GATA-6) involved in lung differentiation programs during
development and carcinogenesis, and identify TTF-1 as a strong repressor of
Muc5b. The characterization of the structural and functional features of the
Muc5b mucin gene will provide us with a strong base to develop studies in murine 
models aimed at the identification of its biological role in lung
pathophysiology.

Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS. No claim to original French governments works.

PMID: 21126317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Stem Cells Int. 2010 May 11;2010:602068. doi: 10.4061/2010/602068.

Alteration of Differentiation Potentials by Modulating GATA Transcription Factors
in Murine Embryonic Stem Cells.

Capo-Chichi CD(1), Smedberg JL, Rula M, Nicolas E, Yeung AT, Adamo RF, Frolov A, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 1550 NW 10th Avenue (M877),
Miami, FL 33156, USA.

Background. Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells can be differentiated in vitro by
aggregation and/or retinoic acid (RA) treatment. The principal differentiation
lineage in vitro is extraembryonic primitive endoderm. Dab2, Laminin, GATA4,
GATA5, and GATA6 are expressed in embryonic primitive endoderm and play critical 
roles in its lineage commitment. Results. We found that in the absence of GATA4
or GATA5, RA-induced primitive endoderm differentiation of ES cells was reduced. 
GATA4 (-/-) ES cells express higher level of GATA5, GATA6, and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 alpha marker of visceral endoderm lineage. GATA5 (-/-) ES cells express 
higher level of alpha fetoprotein marker of early liver development. GATA6 (-/-) 
ES cells express higher level of GATA5 as well as mesoderm and cardiomyocyte
markers which are collagen III alpha-1 and tropomyosin1 alpha. Thus, deletion of 
GATA6 precluded endoderm differentiation but promoted mesoderm lineages.
Conclusions. GATA4, GATA5, and GATA6 each convey a unique gene expression pattern
and influences ES cell differentiation. We showed that ES cells can be directed
to avoid differentiating into primitive endoderm and to adopt unique lineages in 
vitro by modulating GATA factors. The finding offers a potential approach to
produce desirable cell types from ES cells, useful for regenerative cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC2956456
PMID: 21048850  [PubMed]


81. J Vis Exp. 2010 Aug 11;(42). pii: 2020. doi: 10.3791/2020.

A reverse genetic approach to test functional redundancy during embryogenesis.

Rikin A(1), Rosenfeld GE, McCartin K, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University,
USA.

Gene function during embryogenesis is typically defined by loss-of-function
experiments, for example by targeted mutagenesis (knockout) in the mouse. In the 
zebrafish model, effective reverse genetic techniques have been developed using
microinjection of gene-specific antisense morpholinos. Morpholinos target an mRNA
through specific base-pairing and block gene function transiently by inhibiting
translation or splicing for several days during embryogenesis (knockdown).
However, in vertebrates such as mouse or zebrafish, some gene functions can be
obscured by these approaches due to the presence of another gene that compensates
for the loss. This is especially true for gene families containing sister genes
that are co-expressed in the same developing tissues. In zebrafish, functional
compensation can be tested in a relatively high-throughput manner, by
co-injection of morpholinos that target knockdown of both genes simultaneously.
Likewise, using morpholinos, a genetic interaction between any two genes can be
demonstrated by knockdown of both genes together at sub-threshold levels. For
example, morpholinos can be titrated such that neither individual knockdown
generates a phenotype. If, under these conditions, co-injection of both
morpholinos causes a phenotype, a genetic interaction is shown. Here we
demonstrate how to show functional redundancy in the context of two related GATA 
transcription factors. GATA factors are essential for specification of cardiac
progenitors, but this is revealed only by the loss of both Gata5 and Gata6. We
show how to carry out microinjection experiments, validate the morpholinos, and
evaluate the compensated phenotype for cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3156006
PMID: 20736915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Feb;56(2):387-96. doi: 10.1007/s10620-010-1312-4. Epub 2010 Jul
16.

DNA methylation in the rectal mucosa is associated with crypt proliferation and
fecal short-chain fatty acids.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Le Leu RK, Irahara N, Buttenshaw RL, Mallitt KA,
Greco SA, Ramsnes I, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Conjoint Gastroenterology Laboratory, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital
Research Foundation Clinical Research Centre, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation varies throughout the normal colorectal mucosa and
DNA methylation in normal appearing mucosa is associated with serrated and
adenomatous neoplasia elsewhere within the colorectum.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to measure luminal chemistry, rectal
proliferation and mucosal DNA methylation and thus determine whether regional and
pathological patterns of DNA methylation could be explained by luminal and
epithelial factors.
METHODS: Twenty healthy subjects had normal rectal mucosal biopsies and a 24-h
fecal collection. Rectal biopsies were analyzed for epithelial proliferation
(Ki67 immunohistochemistry) and DNA methylation at 17 different markers,
including "type A" markers (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1, SFRP1), "type C" markers
(MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G, NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3),
and LINE-1. Fecal analysis included short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), pH and
ammonia. Mean "type A" and CIMP panel methylation Z-scores were calculated.
RESULTS: Rectal proliferation was significantly correlated with methylation at
ESR1 (<U+03C1> = 0.81, P = 0.003) and GATA5 (<U+03C1> = 0.78, P = 0.012). LINE-1 methylation
was 71.7 vs. 74.1%, in patients with "low" and "high" fecal total SCFA
concentration (defined by the median value), respectively (P = 0.0019). On
multivariate linear regression "type A" methylation was independently associated 
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.001). LINE-1 methylation was directly associated
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.038) and total fecal SCFA concentration (P =
0.002), and inversely associated with fecal NH(3) concentrations (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation in normal rectal mucosa is associated with crypt
proliferation and fecal SCFA concentration. These associations may help to
explain regional differences in DNA methylation as well as providing a possible
link between the colorectal lumen and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20635146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Clin Chem. 2010 Aug;56(8):1287-96. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2010.143545. Epub 2010
Jun 15.

Methylation-specific loop-mediated isothermal amplification for detecting
hypermethylated DNA in simplex and multiplex formats.

Zerilli F(1), Bonanno C, Shehi E, Amicarelli G, Adlerstein D, Makrigiorgos GM.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di
Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation of gene promoters and the associated
silencing of tumor suppressor genes are recognized as mechanisms contributing to 
tumor development. Therefore, detection of promoter hypermethylation is becoming 
important for diagnosis, prognosis, and aiding the design of cancer therapies. We
describe a novel isothermal method for the detection of DNA hypermethylation.
METHODS: Methylation-specific loop-mediated isothermal amplification (MS-LAMP) is
a novel adaptation of LAMP. MS-LAMP was used for the highly specific detection of
hypermethylated CpGs in the promoters of the CDKN2A [cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2A (melanoma, p16, inhibits CDK4)], GATA5 (GATA binding protein 5), and
DAPK1 (death-associated protein kinase 1) genes. The reactions occurred under
isothermal conditions with 3 primer sets specific for methylated promoters. Both 
turbidimetry and fluorescence were used for detection. The MS-LAMP assay was
validated with bisulfite-treated plasmid and genomic DNA controls of known
methylation status and was applied to detect hypermethylation in 18 clinical
tumor samples. A multiplex MS-LAMP for CDKN2A, GATA5, and DAPK1 was also
validated with the aid of synthetic positive and negative controls.
RESULTS: The MS-LAMP assay showed high specificity with plasmid and genomic DNA
targets in reactions carried out in <1 h. The assay had a detection limit of
approximately 30 copies of methylated target sequence and a selectivity of 0.5%
methylated DNA in a mixture with unmethylated DNA. Compared with
methylation-specific PCR, the MS-LAMP assay detected lower rates of methylation
in lung adenocarcinoma samples. Simultaneous multiplex detection of
hypermethylation in the 3 targets (CDKN2A, GATA5, and DAPK1) was readily achieved
with the MS-LAMP assay in both the turbidimetric and fluorescence detection
formats.
CONCLUSIONS: MS-LAMP provides a highly specific isothermal method for methylation
detection and is well suited for multiplex approaches.

PMID: 20551384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2010 May 21;5(5):e10709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010709.

A data integration approach to mapping OCT4 gene regulatory networks operative in
embryonic stem cells and embryonal carcinoma cells.

Jung M(1), Peterson H, Chavez L, Kahlem P, Lehrach H, Vilo J, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics,
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. jung@molgen.mpg.de

It is essential to understand the network of transcription factors controlling
self-renewal of human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and human embryonal carcinoma
cells (ECs) if we are to exploit these cells in regenerative medicine regimes.
Correlating gene expression levels after RNAi-based ablation of OCT4 function
with its downstream targets enables a better prediction of motif-specific driven 
expression modules pertinent for self-renewal and differentiation of embryonic
stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells.We initially identified putative
direct downstream targets of OCT4 by employing CHIP-on-chip analysis. A
comparison of three peak analysis programs revealed a refined list of OCT4
targets in the human EC cell line NCCIT, this list was then compared to
previously published OCT4 CHIP-on-chip datasets derived from both ES and EC
cells. We have verified an enriched POU-motif, discovered by a de novo approach, 
thus enabling us to define six distinct modules of OCT4 binding and regulation of
its target genes.A selection of these targets has been validated, like NANOG,
which harbours the evolutionarily conserved OCT4-SOX2 binding motif within its
proximal promoter. Other validated targets, which do not harbour the classical
HMG motif are USP44 and GADD45G, a key regulator of the cell cycle.
Over-expression of GADD45G in NCCIT cells resulted in an enrichment and
up-regulation of genes associated with the cell cycle (CDKN1B, CDKN1C, CDK6 and
MAPK4) and developmental processes (BMP4, HAND1, EOMES, ID2, GATA4, GATA5, ISL1
and MSX1). A comparison of positively regulated OCT4 targets common to EC and ES 
cells identified genes such as NANOG, PHC1, USP44, SOX2, PHF17 and OCT4, thus
further confirming their universal role in maintaining self-renewal in both cell 
types. Finally we have created a user-friendly database
(http://biit.cs.ut.ee/escd/), integrating all OCT4 and stem cell related datasets
in both human and mouse ES and EC cells.In the current era of systems biology
driven research, we envisage that our integrated embryonic stem cell database
will prove beneficial to the booming field of ES, iPS and cancer research.

PMCID: PMC2873957
PMID: 20505756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Mar 14;16(10):1201-8.

Methylation of GATA-4 and GATA-5 and development of sporadic gastric carcinomas.

Wen XZ(1), Akiyama Y, Pan KF, Liu ZJ, Lu ZM, Zhou J, Gu LK, Dong CX, Zhu BD, Ji
JF, You WC, Deng DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Etiology, Peking University School of Oncology and
Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Fucheng Road No. 52, Haidian District,
Beijing 100142, China.

AIM: To understand the implication of GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation in gastric
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Methylation status of GATA-4 and GATA-5 CpG islands in human gastric
mucosa samples, including normal gastric biopsies from 45 outpatients, gastric
dysplasia [low-grade gastric intraepithelial neoplasia (GIN), n = 30; indefinite,
n = 77], and 80 paired sporadic gastric carcinomas (SGC) as well as the adjacent 
non-neoplastic gastric tissues was analyzed by methylation specific polymerase
chain reaction (MSP) and confirmed by denatured high performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC). Immunohistochemical staining was used to detect protein
expression. The correlation between GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation and
clinicopathological characteristics of patients including Helicobacter pylori (H.
pylori) infection was analyzed.
RESULTS: GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation was frequently observed in SGCs (53.8% and
61.3%, respectively) and their corresponding normal tissues (41.3% and 46.3%) by 
MSP. The result of MSP was consistent with that of DHPLC. Loss of both GATA-4 and
GATA-5 proteins was associated with their methylation in SGCs (P = 0.01).
Moreover, a high frequency of GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation was found in both
gastric low-grade GIN (57.1% and 69.0%) and indefinite for dysplasia (42.9% and
46.7%), respectively. However, GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation was detected only in
4/32 (12.5%) and 3/39 (7.7%) of normal gastric biopsies. GATA-4 methylation in
both normal gastric mucosa and low-grade GIN was also significantly associated
with H. pylori infection (P = 0.023 and 0.027, two-sides).
CONCLUSION: Epigenetic inactivation of GATA-4 (and GATA-5) by methylation of CpG 
islands is an early frequent event during gastric carcinogenesis and is
significantly correlated with H. pylori infection.

PMCID: PMC2839171
PMID: 20222162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Development. 2010 Mar;137(5):825-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.040535.

Signaling via Alk5 controls the ontogeny of lung Clara cells.

Xing Y(1), Li C, Li A, Sridurongrit S, Tiozzo C, Bellusci S, Borok Z, Kaartinen
V, Minoo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, University of Southern
California, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Clara cells, together with ciliated and pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, make up
the epithelium of the bronchioles along the conducting airways. Clara cells are
also known as progenitor or stem cells during lung regeneration after injury. The
mechanisms of Clara cell differentiation are largely unknown. Transforming growth
factor beta (TGFbeta)is a multifunctional molecule with roles in normal
development and disease pathogenesis. In this study, we deleted the TGFbeta type 
I receptor Alk5 in the embryonic lung epithelium using Gata5-Cre mice. Absence of
Alk5 blocked Clara cell differentiation but had no effect on ciliated or
pulmonary neuroendocrine cells. Hairy/Enhancer of Split-1, which is expressed in 
Clara cell putative ;progenitors' was found to be a downstream target of Alk5 in 
vivo and in vitro. Loss of Alk5-mediated signaling also stimulated Pten gene
expression and inhibited ERK phosphorylation in vivo. Using lung epithelial
cells, we show that Alk5-regulated Hes1 expression is stimulated through Pten and
the MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways. Thus, the signaling pathway by which
TGFbeta/ALK5 regulates Clara cell differentiation may entail inhibition of Pten
expression, which in turn activates ERK and AKT phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC2827691
PMID: 20147383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 18;29(11):1653-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.449. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

DNA methylation within the normal colorectal mucosa is associated with
pathway-specific predisposition to cancer.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Buttenshaw RL, Irahara N, Greco SA, Ramsnes I,
Mallitt KA, Le Leu RK, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital Research Foundation Clinical Research
Centre, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

There are two major molecular pathways to sporadic colorectal cancer, the
chromosomal instability (CIN) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
pathways. This study recruited 166 patients undergoing colonoscopy. Biopsy
samples were collected from the cecum, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and
rectum. DNA methylation was quantified at 'type A' (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1,
SFRP1) and 'type C' markers (MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G,
NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3), and LINE-1. 'Type A' genes are frequently methylated in
normal and neoplastic tissues, proportional to tissue age. 'Type C' methylation
is more specific for neoplasia. The last five 'type C' markers comprise a CIMP
panel. The mean 'type A' and CIMP-panel methylation Z-scores were calculated. In 
all, 88 patients had adenomatous lesions, 32 had proximal serrated polyps (PSPs) 
and 50 were normal. Most 'type A' genes showed direct correlations between
methylation and age (ESR1, rho=0.66, P<0.0001), with higher methylation distally 
(ESR1, P<0.0001). On multivariate analysis, 'type A' methylation was inversely
associated with colorectal adenomas (odds ratio=0.23, P<0.001), the precursor to 
CIN cancers. CIMP-panel methylation was significantly associated with advanced
PSPs (odds ratio=5.1, P=0.009), the precursor to CIMP cancers. DNA methylation in
normal mucosa varied with age and region and was associated with pathway-specific
pathology. In the future, the colorectal field could yield important information 
and potentially inform clinical practice.

PMID: 19966864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 15;285(3):1765-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038539. Epub 2009 
Nov 4.

Gata4 and Gata5 cooperatively regulate cardiac myocyte proliferation in mice.

Singh MK(1), Li Y, Li S, Cobb RM, Zhou D, Lu MM, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE, Gruber 
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

GATA5 is a member of the zinc finger transcription factor GATA family (GATA1-6)
that plays a wide variety of roles in embryonic and adult development.
Experiments in multiple model systems have emphasized the importance of the GATA 
family members 4-6 in the development of the endoderm and mesoderm. Yet despite
overlapping expression patterns, there is little evidence of an important role
for GATA5 in mammalian cardiac development. We have generated a new Gata5 mutant 
allele lacking exons 2 and 3 that encodes both zinc finger domains
(Gata5(tm)(2)(Eem)), and we show that although Gata5(-/-) mice are viable,
Gata4(+/-)5(-/-) mutants die at mid-gestation and exhibit profound cardiovascular
defects, including abnormalities of cardiomyocyte proliferation and cardiac
chamber maturation. These results demonstrate functional redundancy between Gata4
and Gata5 during cardiac development and implicate Gata5 as a candidate modifier 
gene for congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2804334
PMID: 19889636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Dec;297(6):G1214-22. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00165.2009. Epub 2009 Sep 24.

Alternative promoter and GATA5 transcripts in mouse.

Chen B(1), Yates E, Huang Y, Kogut P, Ma L, Turner JR, Tao Y, Camoretti-Mercado
B, Lang D, Svensson EC, Garcia JG, Gruber PJ, Morrisey EE, Solway J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Univ. of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

GATA5 is a member of the GATA zinc finger transcription factor family involved in
tissue-specific transcriptional regulation during cell differentiation and
embryogenesis. Previous reports indicate that null mutation of the zebrafish
GATA5 gene results in embryonic lethality, whereas deletion of exon 1 from the
mouse GATA5 gene causes only derangement of female urogenital development. Here, 
we have identified an alternate promoter within intron 1 of the mouse GATA5 gene 
that transcribes a 2.5-kb mRNA that lacks exon 1 entirely but includes 82 bp from
intron 1 and all of exons 2-6. The alternative promoter was active during
transient transfection in cultured airway myocytes and bronchial epithelial
cells, and it drove reporter gene expression in gastric epithelial cells in
transgenic mice. The 2.5-kb alternative transcript encodes an NH(2)-terminally
truncated "short GATA5" comprising aa 226-404 with a single zinc finger, which
retains ability to transactivate the atrial natriuretic factor promoter (albeit
less efficiently than full-length GATA5). Another new GATA5 transcript contains
all of exons 1-5 and the 5' portion of exon 6 but lacks the terminal 1143 bp of
the 3'-untranslated region from exon 6. These findings extend current
understanding of the tissue distribution of GATA5 expression and suggests that
GATA5 expression and function are more complex than previously appreciated.

PMCID: PMC2850090
PMID: 19779014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Int J Cardiol. 2011 Feb 17;147(1):95-111. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.08.021. Epub
2009 Sep 22.

Differentiation induction of mouse embryonic stem cells into sinus node-like
cells by suramin.

Wiese C(1), Nikolova T, Zahanich I, Sulzbacher S, Fuchs J, Yamanaka S, Graf E,
Ravens U, Boheler KR, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)In Vitro Differentiation Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research IPK, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Embryonic stem (ES) cells differentiate into cardiac phenotypes
representing early pacemaker-, atrial-, ventricular-, and sinus node-like cells, 
however, ES-derived specification into sinus nodal cells is not yet known. By
using the naphthylamine derivative of urea, suramin, we were able to follow the
process of cardiac specialization into sinus node-like cells.
METHODS: Differentiating mouse ES cells were treated with suramin (500 µM) from
day 5 to 7 of embryoid body formation, and cells were analysed for their
differentiation potential via morphological analysis, flow cytometry, RT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry and patch clamp analysis.
RESULTS: Application of suramin resulted in an increased number of cardiac cells,
but inhibition of neuronal, skeletal muscle and definitive endoderm
differentiation. Immediately after suramin treatment, a decreased mesendoderm
differentiation was found. Brachyury, FGF10, Wnt8 and Wnt3a transcript levels
were significantly down-regulated, followed by a decrease in mesoderm- and
cardiac progenitor-specific markers BMP2, GATA4/5, Wnt11, Isl1, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5
immediately after removal of the substance. With continued differentiation, a
significant up-regulation of Brachyury, FGF10 and GATA5 transcript levels was
observed, whereas Nkx2.5, Isl1, Tbx5, BMP2 and Wnt11 levels were normalized to
control levels. At advanced differentiation stages, sinus node-specific HCN4,
Tbx2 and Tbx3 transcript levels were significantly up-regulated.
Immunofluorescence and patch-clamp analysis confirmed the increased number of
sinus node-like cells, and electrophysiological analysis revealed a lower number 
of atrial- and ventricular-like cardiomyocytes following suramin treatment.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the interference of suramin with the cardiac
differentiation process modified mesoderm- and cardiac-specific gene expression
resulting in enhanced formation of sinus node-like cells.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4751033
PMID: 19775764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 15;15(12):3990-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0055.
Epub 2009 Jun 9.

GATA4 and GATA5 are potential tumor suppressors and biomarkers in colorectal
cancer.

Hellebrekers DM(1), Lentjes MH, van den Bosch SM, Melotte V, Wouters KA, Daenen
KL, Smits KM, Akiyama Y, Yuasa Y, Sanduleanu S, Khalid-de Bakker CA, Jonkers D,
Weijenberg MP, Louwagie J, van Criekinge W, Carvalho B, Meijer GA, Baylin SB,
Herman JG, de Bruïne AP, van Engeland M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Epidemiology, GROW - School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: The transcription factors GATA4 and GATA5 are involved in
gastrointestinal development and are inactivated by promoter hypermethylation in 
colorectal cancer. Here, we evaluated GATA4/5 promoter methylation as potential
biomarkers for noninvasive colorectal cancer detection, and investigated the role
of GATA4/5 in colorectal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Promoter methylation of GATA4/5 was analyzed in colorectal
tissue and fecal DNA from colorectal cancer patients and healthy controls using
methylation-specific PCR. The potential function of GATA4/5 as tumor suppressors 
was studied by inducing GATA4/5 overexpression in human colorectal cancer cell
lines.
RESULTS: GATA4/5 methylation was observed in 70% (63/90) and 79% (61/77) of
colorectal carcinomas, respectively, and was independent of clinicopathologic
features. Methylation frequencies in normal colon tissues from noncancerous
controls were 6% (5 of 88, GATA4; P < 0.001) and 13% (13 of 100, GATA5; P <
0.001). GATA4/5 overexpression suppressed colony formation (P < 0.005),
proliferation (P < 0.001), migration (P < 0.05), invasion (P < 0.05), and
anchorage-independent growth (P < 0.0001) of colorectal cancer cells. Examination
of GATA4 methylation in fecal DNA from two independent series of colorectal
cancer patients and controls yielded a sensitivity of 71% [95% confidence
interval (95% CI), 55-88%] and specificity of 84% (95% CI, 74-95%) for colorectal
cancer detection in the training set, and a sensitivity of 51% (95% CI, 37-65%)
and specificity of 93% (95% CI, 84-100%) in the validation set.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of GATA4/5 is a common and specific event in colorectal 
carcinomas, and GATA4/5 exhibit tumor suppressive effects in colorectal cancer
cells in vitro. GATA4 methylation in fecal DNA may be of interest for colorectal 
cancer detection.

PMID: 19509152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jan;29(1):363-9.

Promoter methylation primarily occurs in tumor cells of patients with non-small
cell lung cancer.

De Jong WK(1), Verpooten GF, Kramer H, Louwagie J, Groen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. w.k.de.jong@int.umcg.nl

BACKGROUND: The distribution of promoter methylation throughout the lungs of
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unknown. In this explorative 
study, we assessed the methylation status of the promoter region of 11 genes in
brush samples of 3 well-defined endobronchial locations in patients with NSCLC
and in brushes of former and current smokers without NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The methylation status of RASSF1A, GATA4, GATA5, SFRP1,
RARbeta2, DAPK, MGMT, p16, p14, CHFR and APC2 was determined in all samples using
real-time methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: Ten patients with NSCLC and 18 non-NSCLC controls were included. Eight
patients had one or more methylated genes in their tumor brush. Promoter
methylation of genes in proximal or contralateral locations was much less
frequent than in tumor brushes, and almost exclusively occurred in normal tissue 
if the same gene was also methylated in the tumor brush.
CONCLUSION: Promoter methylation almost exclusively occurred in tumor cells of
patients with NSCLC.

PMID: 19331174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Development. 2009 May;136(9):1465-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.032748. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Common genetic control of haemangioblast and cardiac development in zebrafish.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headington, 
Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Over the past few years it has become clear that over half of the mammalian heart
derives from outside the heart field as originally defined. Such a second heart
field, however, has not been described in zebrafish, which could explain its
smaller, two-chambered heart. Instead, zebrafish have a population of
haemangioblasts, which is absent in mammalian embryos, raising the possibility
that these cells represent the evolutionary ancestor of the second heart field.
Here, we show for the first time that the genetic programmes of these anterior
haemangioblasts and the adjacent heart field are co-regulated, by transcription
factors previously associated with heart but not blood or endothelial
development. We demonstrate that gata4, gata5 and gata6 are essential for
anterior haemangioblast specification, and for subsequent myelopoiesis, acting as
early as cloche and upstream of scl. The requirement for gata4, gata5 and gata6
in myeloid, endothelial and cardiac specification is in the mesoderm, but these
factors also control, from within the endoderm and the yolk syncytial layer, the 
migration of the cardiac precursors as they differentiate. This genetic link
between the blood/endothelial and cardiac programmes supports the notion that
this haemangioblast population in zebrafish is an evolutionary antecedent of the 
second heart field, and has implications for the differentiation of
haemangioblasts and cardiomyocytes from pluripotent cells, and for the origins of
stem cells in the adult heart.

PMCID: PMC2730399
PMID: 19297410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 1;322(1):208-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.038. Epub 2008
Aug 7.

Signaling via the Tgf-beta type I receptor Alk5 in heart development.

Sridurongrit S(1), Larsson J, Schwartz R, Ruiz-Lozano P, Kaartinen V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Trophic factors secreted both from the endocardium and epicardium regulate
appropriate growth of the myocardium during cardiac development.
Epicardially-derived cells play also a key role in development of the coronary
vasculature. This process involves transformation of epithelial (epicardial)
cells to mesenchymal cells (EMT). Similarly, a subset of endocardial cells
undergoes EMT to form the mesenchyme of endocardial cushions, which function as
primordia for developing valves and septa. While it has been suggested that
transforming growth factor-betas (Tgf-beta) play an important role in induction
of EMT in the avian epi- and endocardium, the function of Tgf-betas in
corresponding mammalian tissues is still poorly understood. In this study, we
have ablated the Tgf-beta type I receptor Alk5 in endo-, myo- and epicardial
lineages using the Tie2-Cre, Nkx2.5-Cre, and Gata5-Cre driver lines,
respectively. We show that while Alk5-mediated signaling does not play a major
role in the myocardium during mouse cardiac development, it is critically
important in the endocardium for induction of EMT both in vitro and in vivo.
Moreover, loss of epicardial Alk5-mediated signaling leads to disruption of
cell-cell interactions between the epicardium and myocardium resulting in a
thinned myocardium. Furthermore, epicardial cells lacking Alk5 fail to undergo
Tgf-beta-induced EMT in vitro. Late term mutant embryos lacking epicardial Alk5
display defective formation of a smooth muscle cell layer around coronary
arteries, and aberrant formation of capillary vessels in the myocardium
suggesting that Alk5 is controlling vascular homeostasis during cardiogenesis. To
conclude, Tgf-beta signaling via Alk5 is not required in myocardial cells during 
mammalian cardiac development, but plays an irreplaceable cell-autonomous role
regulating cellular communication, differentiation and proliferation in
endocardial and epicardial cells.

PMCID: PMC2677203
PMID: 18718461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 28;8:74. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-74.

GATA4 and GATA5 are essential for heart and liver development in Xenopus embryos.

Haworth KE(1), Kotecha S, Mohun TJ, Latinkic BV.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff, CF10 3US,
Wales, UK. haworthk@cardiff.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: GATA factors 4/5/6 have been implicated in the development of the
heart and endodermal derivatives in vertebrates. Work in zebrafish has indicated 
that GATA5 is required for normal development earlier than GATA4/6. However, the 
GATA5 knockout mouse has no apparent embryonic phenotype, thereby questioning the
importance of the gene for vertebrate development.
RESULTS: In this study we show that in Xenopus embryos GATA5 is essential for
early development of heart and liver precursors. In addition, we have found that 
in Xenopus embryos GATA4 is important for development of heart and liver
primordia following their specification, and that in this role it might interact 
with GATA6.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that GATA5 acts earlier than GATA4 to regulate
development of heart and liver precursors, and indicate that one early direct
target of GATA5 is homeobox gene Hex.

PMCID: PMC2526999
PMID: 18662378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Surgery. 2008 Aug;144(2):168-73. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2008.03.010. Epub 2008 May
9.

Defining the transcriptional regulation of the intestinal sodium-glucose
cotransporter using RNA-interference mediated gene silencing.

Balakrishnan A(1), Stearns AT, Rhoads DB, Ashley SW, Tavakkolizadeh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: The sodium glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) is responsible for all
active intestinal glucose uptake. Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 alpha and beta
(HNF 1 alpha and HNF 1 beta) activate the SGLT1 promoter, whereas GATA-binding
protein 5 (GATA-5) and caudal-type homeobox protein 2 (CDX2) regulate
transcription of other intestinal genes. We investigated SGLT1 regulation by
these transcription factors using promoter studies and RNA interference.
METHODS: Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were transiently cotransfected with an
SGLT1-luciferase promoter construct and combinations of expression vectors for
HNF 1 alpha, HNF 1 beta, CDX2, and GATA-5. Caco-2 cells were stably transfected
with knockdown vectors for either HNF 1 alpha or HNF 1 beta. mRNA levels of HNF 1
alpha, HNF 1 beta, and SGLT1 were determined using quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR).
RESULTS: HNF 1 alpha, GATA-5, and HNF 1 beta significantly activated the SGLT1
promoter (P < .05). Cotransfection of GATA-5 with HNF 1 alpha had an additive
effect, whereas HNF 1 beta and CDX2 antagonized HNF 1 alpha and GATA-5. SGLT1
expression was significantly reduced in HNF 1 alpha or HNF 1 beta knockdowns (P <
.001). HNF alpha knockdown significantly reduced HNF 1 beta expression and vice
versa (P < .005).
CONCLUSIONS: HNF 1 alpha and HNF 1 beta are important transcription factors for
endogenous SGLT1 expression by cultured enterocytes. GATA-5 and CDX2 also
regulate SGLT1 promoter activity and show cooperativity with the HNF1s. We,
therefore, propose a multifactorial model for SGLT1 regulation, with interactions
between HNF1, GATA-5, and CDX2 modulating intestinal glucose absorption.

PMCID: PMC2577164
PMID: 18656622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Chem Biol Interact. 2008 May 28;173(2):84-96. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2008.03.005.
Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Copper-adenine complex, a compound, with multi-biochemical targets and potential 
anti-cancer effect.

Hammud HH(1), Nemer G, Sawma W, Touma J, Barnabe P, Bou-Mouglabey Y, Ghannoum A, 
El-Hajjar J, Usta J.

Author information: 
(1)Beirut Arab University, Department of Chemistry, Beirut, Lebanon.

A series of adenine-copper complexes (1-6) with various ligands (Cl(-), SCN(-),
BF(4)(-) and acac [acetylacetonate ion]) have been synthesized and characterized 
by elemental analysis, infrared spectroscopy and thermal analysis. Among the six 
complexes only complex (1), Cu(2)(adenine)(4)Cl(4).2EtOH (abbreviated as Cu-Ad), 
demonstrated some toxic effect on different cell lines. In vitro investigations
of the biological effect of Cu-Ad complex have shown that it: (1) binds genomic
DNA; (2) decreases significantly, the viability of cells in culture in a
concentration (15-125 microM)-dependant manner; an estimated IC(50) of: 45 microM
with HepG2; 73 microM with C2C12; 103 microM with NIH3T3; and 108 microM with
MCF7. Cu-Ad had no effect on A549 cells; (3) inhibits Taq polymerase-catalyzed
reaction; (4) inhibits the binding of the transcription factor GATA-5 to labeled 
DNA probes; (5) inhibits mitochondrial NADH-UQ-reductase with an estimated IC(50)
of 2.8 nmol, but had no effect on succinate dehydrogenase activity; (6) increases
reactive oxygen species (60%) at 45 microM Cu-Ad; and (7) decreases ATP (80%) at 
50 microM Cu-Ad. The new compound Cu(2)(adenine)(4)Cl(4).2EtOH (Cu-Ad), belongs
to a class of copper-adenylate complexes that target many biochemical sites and
with potential anti-cancer activity.

PMID: 18452907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Neuroendocrinology. 2008;88(1):1-16. doi: 10.1159/000115952. Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Specific GATA-binding elements in the GnRH promoter are required for gene
expression pulse activity: role of GATA-4 and GATA-5 in this intermittent
process.

Leclerc GM(1), Bose SK, Boockfor FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Dynamics, Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

Recent evidence reveals that several GATA factors act as versatile
transcriptional modulators in neuroendocrine gene expression. The rat GnRH
promoter is expressed in an episodic fashion that requires a portion of the
promoter termed the neuron-specific enhancer (NSE) for activity. In this study,
we examined whether certain GATA regulatory elements in the NSE are necessary for
this intermittent activity. When injected into individual living GT1-7 cells,
luciferase reporter constructs containing mutations of either GATA-A- or
GATA-B-binding sites resulted in a marked reduction in gene expression pulse
frequency, while mutations of both sites virtually abolished pulses. In
subsequent studies, RT-PCR and western blot analysis revealed for the first time 
that GATA-5 and GATA-6 were expressed in GT1-7 cells, but electrophoretic
mobility shift assays demonstrated further that GATA-5 bound to one of these GATA
sites: GATA-A. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that all three
factors, GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6, were associated with the GnRH promoter in
vivo. Interestingly though, immunoneutralization of GATA-5 or GATA-4 (reported to
bind GATA-B) abolished gene expression pulses, but injection of GATA-6 antibody
did not, indicating that of these factors just GATA-5 and GATA-4 are critical for
intermittent activity. Finally, gel shift competition experiments revealed an
interaction between proteins binding at the GATA-A site and those associating
with an adjacent OCT1 site, previously shown to be necessary for pulse formation.
These findings indicate that episodic GnRH gene expression pulses are mediated by
GATA-5 and GATA-4, likely acting through the GATA-binding sites in the GnRH NSE
region. Moreover, our observations that factors associated with GATA sites may
also interact with OCT1 sites and that both are critical for pulse activity raise
the intriguing possibility that GnRH pulse elaboration is a highly complex
process that may require the coordinated interaction of several NSE-binding
elements of the GnRH promoter.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18259093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2008 Mar;135(5):941-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.010595. Epub 2008 Jan 30.

Zebrafish cdx1b regulates expression of downstream factors of Nodal signaling
during early endoderm formation.

Cheng PY(1), Lin CC, Wu CS, Lu YF, Lin CY, Chung CC, Chu CY, Huang CJ, Tsai CY,
Korzh S, Wu JL, Hwang SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung, Taiwan.

We identified a zebrafish caudal-related homeobox (cdx1b) gene, which shares
syntenic conservation with both human and mouse Cdx1. Zebrafish cdx1b transcripts
are maternally deposited. cdx1b is uniformly expressed in both epiblast and
hypoblast cells from late gastrulation to the 1-2s stages and can be identified
in the retinas, brain and somites during 18-22 hpf stages. After 28 hours of
development, cdx1b is exclusively expressed in the developing intestine. Both
antisense morpholino oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown and overexpression
experiments were conducted to analyze cdx1b function. Hypoplastic development of 
the liver and pancreas and intestinal abnormalities were observed in 96 hpf cdx1b
morphants. In 85% epiboly cdx1b morphants, twofold decreases in the respective
numbers of gata5-, cas-, foxa2- and sox17-expressing endodermal precursors were
identified. Furthermore, ectopic cdx1b expression caused substantial increases in
the respective numbers of gata5-, cas-, foxa2- and sox17-expressing endodermal
precursors and altered their distribution patterns in 85% epiboly injected
embryos. Conserved Cdx1-binding motifs were identified in both gata5 and foxa2
genes by interspecific sequence comparisons. Cdx1b can bind to the Cdx1-binding
motif located in intron 1 of the foxa2 gene based on an electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay. Co-injection of either zebrafish or mouse foxa2 mRNA with the cdx1b 
MO rescued the expression domains of ceruloplasmin in the liver of 53 hpf
injected embryos. These results indicate that zebrafish cdx1b regulates foxa2
expression and may also modulate gata5 expression, thus affecting early endoderm 
formation. This study underscores a novel role of zebrafish cdx1b in the
development of different digestive organs compared with its mammalian homologs.

PMID: 18234726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Development. 2008 Feb;135(3):451-61. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

The Gata5 target, TGIF2, defines the pancreatic region by modulating BMP signals 
within the endoderm.

Spagnoli FM(1), Brivanlou AH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Vertebrate Embryology, The Rockefeller University, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

Mechanisms underlying regional specification of distinct organ precursors within 
the endoderm, including the liver and pancreas, are still poorly understood. This
is particularly true for stages between endoderm formation and the initiation of 
organogenesis. In this report, we have investigated these intermediate steps
downstream of the early endodermal factor Gata5, which progressively lead to the 
induction of pancreatic fate. We have identified TGIF2 as a novel Gata5 target
and demonstrate its function in the establishment of the pancreatic region within
dorsal endoderm in Xenopus. TGIF2 acts primarily by restricting BMP signaling in 
the endoderm to allow pancreatic formation. Consistently, we found that blocking 
BMP signaling by independent means also perturbs the establishment of pancreatic 
identity in the endoderm. Previous findings demonstrated a crucial role for BMP
signaling in determining dorsal/ventral fates in ectoderm and mesoderm. Our
results now extend this trend to the endoderm and identify TGIF2 as the molecular
link between dorsoventral patterning of the endoderm and pancreatic
specification.

PMID: 18094028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Clin Chem. 2007 Dec;53(12):2119-27. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

MS-FLAG, a novel real-time signal generation method for methylation-specific PCR.

Bonanno C(1), Shehi E, Adlerstein D, Makrigiorgos GM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Milano Bicocca, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant promoter methylation is a major mechanism for silencing
tumor suppressor genes in cancer. Detection of hypermethylation is used as a
molecular marker for early cancer diagnosis, as a prognostic index, or to define 
therapeutic targets for reversion of aberrant methylation. We report on a novel
signal generation technology for real-time PCR to detect gene promoter
methylation.
METHODS: FLAG (fluorescent amplicon generation) is a homogeneous signal
generation technology based on the exceptionally thermostable endonuclease PspGI.
FLAG provides real-time signal generation during PCR by PspGI-mediated cleavage
of quenched fluorophores at the 5' end of double-stranded PCR products.
Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) applied on bisulfite-treated DNA was adapted to a 
real-time format (methylation-specific FLAG; MS-FLAG) for quantifying methylation
in the promoter of CDKN2A (p16), GATA5, and RASSF1. We validated MS-FLAG on
plasmids and genomic DNA with known methylation status and applied it to
detection of methylation in a limited number of clinical samples. We also
conducted bisulfite sequencing on these samples.
RESULTS: Real-time PCR results obtained via MS-FLAG agreed with results obtained 
via conventional, gel-based MSP. The new technology showed high specificity,
sensitivity (2-3 plasmid copies), and selectivity (0.01% of methylated DNA) on
control samples. It enabled correct prediction of the methylation status of all 3
gene promoters in 21 lung adenocarcinoma samples, as confirmed by bisulfite
sequencing. We also developed a multiplex MS-FLAG assay for GATA5 and RASSF1
promoters.
CONCLUSION: MS-FLAG provides a new, quantitative, high-throughput method for
detecting gene promoter methylation and is a convenient alternative to agarose
gel-based MSP for screening methylation. In addition to methylation, FLAG-based
real-time signal generation may have broad applications in DNA diagnostics.

PMID: 17962364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dev Biol. 2007 Dec 15;312(2):613-22. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

Gata5 and Gata6 are functionally redundant in zebrafish for specification of
cardiomyocytes.

Holtzinger A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

An outstanding problem in vertebrate development has been to define the genetic
program that specifies the cardiomyocyte lineage. It has been a challenge to
define the transcription factors that control specification, since candidate gene
knockouts typically cause rather complex morphogenetic defects. In contrast,
Drosophila genetics identified single transcription factors that are essential
for specification of cardiomyocytes from uncommitted mesoderm. For those
vertebrate orthologs, it has been considered that paralogous family members might
compensate for the loss-of-function of individual genes. However, this hypothesis
had not been formally tested. In zebrafish, defects in gata5 can lead to a loss
of myocardial tissue, but most embryos depleted for any single vertebrate
Gata4/5/6 transcription factor develop a cardiac morphogenetic defect, and
cardiomyocytes are specified and differentiate. Here we show that in zebrafish
the gata5 and gata6 genes are redundant for specification of cardiomyocytes.
Embryos depleted of these two gene products are heartless. Restoring either gene 
product is sufficient to rescue cardiomyocyte specification. In contrast, embryos
depleted of Gata4 and Gata6, or Gata4 and Gata5, develop defective heart tubes.
Our study identifies a specific pair of vertebrate transcription factor paralogs 
that is essential for cardiomyocyte specification.

PMCID: PMC2170521
PMID: 17950269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Oct;6(10):1546-52. Epub 2007 Jul 7.

Evaluation of GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation profiles in human pancreatic cancers 
indicate promoter methylation patterns distinct from other human tumor types.

Fu B(1), Guo M, Wang S, Campagna D, Luo M, Herman JG, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The GATA-4 and GATA-5 transcription factors are increasingly recognized as
playing a role in carcinogenesis of human tumors derived of endodermal and
mesodermal origin. The pancreas is derived from endodermal tissues suggesting
GATA-4 and GATA-5 gene methylation may play a critical role in the biology of
human pancreatic cancer as well. We investigated GATA-4 and -5 by
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in normal and neoplastic pancreatic tissues,
including isogenic xenografts or cultured cell lines derived from the coexistent 
primary cancer and/or metastases in patients with pancreatic carcinoma. The
relationship of promoter methylation was correlated with mRNA expression for each
gene, and methylation patterns were correlated with known clinicopathologic
features of patients. GATA-4 demonstrated a significantly lower methylation
frequency than GATA-5 in low passage pancreatic cancer xenografts or cell lines
(1/34 versus 21/34, p < 0.001). GATA-4 and -5 were also evaluated in
microdissected samples of normal duct epithelium and cancer from pancreas cancer 
tissues which confirmed infrequent GATA-4 methylation in pancreatic cancers as
well as in normal duct epithelium. GATA-4 was frequently overexpressed at the
mRNA level with 27 of 30 (90%) pancreatic cancers showing >5.0-fold
overexpression compared to normal duct epithelial cells. By contrast, high
frequency methylation of GATA-5 was confirmed in pancreatic cancers tissues, but 
was rarely methylated in normal duct epithelium, indicating hypermethylation of
this gene during pancreatic cancer development. GATA-5 mRNA expression did not
correlate with its promoter hypermethylation, and treatment with the
demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine only partially restored mRNA
expression suggesting additional regulatory mechanisms of GATA-5 expression. The 
presence of GATA-5 methylation showed a trend towards worse long-term survival
(14.0 +/- 9.2 months versus 19.5 +/- 3.9 months, p = 0.06). While
hypermethylation of GATA-5 seems to be a universal feature among human tumors,
infrequent methylation of GATA-4, and its corresponding overexpression, appears
unique to pancreatic cancer from other tumor types reported thus far.

PMID: 17912029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Radiat Res. 2007 Oct;168(4):409-14.

Radiation-induced lung adenocarcinoma is associated with increased frequency of
genes inactivated by promoter hypermethylation.

Lyon CM(1), Klinge DM, Liechty KC, Gentry FD, March TH, Kang T, Gilliland FD,
Adamova G, Rusinova G, Telnov V, Belinsky SA.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Lung Cancer Program, Albuquerque, New
Mexico 87108, USA

Epigenetic inactivation of genes by promoter hypermethylation, a major mechanism 
in the initiation and progression of tobacco-induced cancer, has also been
associated with lung cancer induced through environmental and occupational
exposures. Our previous study of gene methylation in workers from the MAYAK
nuclear enterprise identified a significantly higher prevalence for methylation
of the p16 gene (CDKN2A) in adenocarcinomas from workers compared to tumors from 
non-worker controls. The purpose of this investigation was to determine whether
genes in addition to p16 are "targeted" for silencing and whether overall gene
methylation was more common in radiation-induced adenocarcinoma. A significant
increase in the prevalence of methylation of GATA5 was seen in tumors from
workers compared to tumors from controls. The prevalence for methylation of PAX5 
beta and H-cadherin did not differ in tumors from workers and controls.
Evaluating the frequency for methylation of a five-gene panel revealed that 93%
of adenocarcinomas from workers compared to 66% of tumors from controls were
methylated for at least one gene. Moreover, a twofold increase was seen in the
number of tumors methylated for three or more genes for tumors from workers
compared to controls. Increased frequency for inactivation of genes by promoter
hypermethylation and targeting of tumor suppressor genes such as GATA5 may be
factors that contribute to the increased risk for lung cancer associated with
radiation exposure.

PMID: 17903034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 15;311(2):623-35. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Redundancy and evolution of GATA factor requirements in development of the
myocardium.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

The transcription factors, GATA4, 5 and 6, recognize the same DNA sequence and
are all expressed in the developing myocardium. However, knockout studies in the 
mouse have indicated that none of them are absolutely required for the
specification of the myocardium. Here we present evidence for redundancy in this 
family for the first time. Using morpholinos in both Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos, we show that GATA4 knockdown, for example, only affects cardiac marker
expression in the absence of either GATA5 or GATA6. A similar situation pertains 
for GATA5 in Xenopus whereas, in zebrafish, GATA5 (faust) plays a major role in
driving the myocardial programme. This requirement for GATA5 in zebrafish is for 
induction of the myocardium, in contrast to the GATA6 requirement in both
species, which is for differentiation. This early role for GATA5 in zebrafish
correlates with its earlier expression and with an earlier requirement for BMP
signalling, suggesting that a mutual maintenance loop for GATA, BMP and Nkx
expression is the evolutionarily conserved entity.

PMCID: PMC2279743
PMID: 17869240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 28;104(35):14008-13. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

Vertebrate heart growth is regulated by functional antagonism between Gridlock
and Gata5.

Jia H(1), King IN, Chopra SS, Wan H, Ni TT, Jiang C, Guan X, Wells S, Srivastava 
D, Zhong TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Embryonic organs attain their final dimensions through the generation of proper
cell number and size, but the control mechanisms remain obscure. Here, we
establish Gridlock (Grl), a Hairy-related basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor, as a negative regulator of cardiomyocyte proliferative
growth in zebrafish embryos. Mutations in grl cause an increase in expression of 
a group of immediate-early growth genes, myocardial genes, and development of
hyperplastic hearts. Conversely, cardiomyocytes with augmented Grl activity have 
diminished cell volume and fail to divide, resulting in a marked reduction in
heart size. Both bHLH domain and carboxyl region are required for Grl negative
control of myocardial proliferative growth. These Grl-induced cardiac effects are
counterbalanced by the transcriptional activator Gata5 but not Gata4, which
promotes cardiomyocyte expansion in the embryo. Biochemical analyses show that
Grl forms a complex with Gata5 through the carboxyl region and can repress
Gata5-mediated transcription via the bHLH domain. Hence, our studies suggest that
Grl regulates embryonic heart growth via opposing Gata5, at least in part through
their protein interactions in modulating gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1955785
PMID: 17715064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 30;7:91.

Specification of germ layer identity in the chick gastrula.

Chapman SC(1), Matsumoto K, Cai Q, Schoenwolf GC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah School of Medicine, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
and Children's Health Research Center, Room 2R066 SOM, 30 North 1900 East, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84132-2101, USA. schapm2@clemson.edu

BACKGROUND: Chick definitive endoderm is an important source of signals that
pattern the early embryo forming a central structure around which the body plan
is constructed. Although the origin of definitive endoderm has been mapped in the
chick, arising principally from rostral streak at elongating streak stages, it is
not known when this layer first becomes fully committed to its germ layer fate,
an important issue to resolve in light of its critical role in subsequent
patterning of the early embryo.
RESULTS: Through gene expression screening of chick gastrula, we identified
molecular markers of definitive endoderm restricted to rostral (Sox17) and caudal
(Gata5/6) regions, suggesting that at least two subpopulations of definitive
endodermal cells exist during ingression. We show (1) that presumptive mesoderm
cells migrate to the middle layer and remain mesenchymal when transplanted to
rostral primitive streak, and prospective endoderm cells enter the lower layer
and become epithelial when transplanted to caudal primitive streak; and (2) that 
presumptive endoderm cells and mesoderm cells lose normal gene expression (Sox17 
and Wnt8c, respectively) when transplanted outside of their normal position of
origin. Moreover, when rostral or caudal primitive streak segments are
transplanted into rostral blastoderm isolates (RBIs), both types of transplants
express Sox17 4-6 hours later--consistent with their new position, regardless of 
their presumptive germ layer origin--and prospective mesoderm transplants, which 
normally express Wnt8c, turn off expression, suggesting that signals within the
rostral blastoderm induce endoderm gene expression, and repress mesoderm gene
expression, during gastrulation.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that germ layer identity is fixed at the time
populations of endoderm and mesoderm cells ingress through the primitive streak, 
whereas their gene expression patterns remain labile. In addition, our results
show that inductive and repressive signals are present, and that these signals
regulate gene expression of both ingressed endoderm and mesoderm cells. Thus,
gastrula cells display elements of both pre-patterning and plasticity, with
endoderm the first germ layer becoming committed to its fate during early
gastrulation stages.

PMCID: PMC2000891
PMID: 17663788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Br J Cancer. 2007 Apr 23;96(8):1278-83. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Predicting gene promoter methylation in non-small-cell lung cancer by evaluating 
sputum and serum.

Belinsky SA(1), Grimes MJ, Casas E, Stidley CA, Franklin WA, Bocklage TJ, Johnson
DH, Schiller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, 2425 Ridgecrest 
Dr. SE, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA. sbelinsk@LRRI.org

The use of 5-methylcytosine demethylating agents in conjunction with inhibitors
of histone deacetylation may offer a new therapeutic strategy for lung cancer.
Monitoring the efficacy of gene demethylating treatment directly within the
tumour may be difficult due to tumour location. This study determined the
positive and negative predictive values of sputum and serum for detecting gene
methylation in primary lung cancer. A panel of eight genes was evaluated by
comparing methylation detected in the primary tumour biopsy to serum and sputum
obtained from 72 patients with Stage III lung cancer. The prevalence for
methylation of the eight genes in sputum (21-43%) approximated to that seen in
tumours, but was 0.7-4.3-fold greater than detected in serum. Sputum was superior
to serum in classifying the methylation status of genes in the tumour biopsy. The
positive predictive value of the top four genes (p16, DAPK, PAX5 beta, and GATA5)
was 44-72% with a negative predictive value for these genes > or =70%. The
highest specificity was seen for the p16 gene, and this was associated with a
odds ratio of six for methylation in the tumour when this gene was methylated in 
sputum. In contrast, for serum, the individual sensitivity for all genes was
6-27%. Evaluating the combined effect of methylation of at least one of the four 
most significant genes in sputum increased the positive predictive value to 86%. 
These studies demonstrate that sputum can be used effectively as a surrogate for 
tumour tissue to predict the methylation status of advanced lung cancer where
biopsy is not feasible.

PMCID: PMC2360148
PMID: 17406356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8(6):R64.

GATA3 protein as a MUC1 transcriptional regulator in breast cancer cells.

Abba MC(1), Nunez MI, Colussi AG, Croce MV, Segal-Eiras A, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park--Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.
mabba777@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies have demonstrated that members of the GATA-binding
protein (GATA) family (GATA4 and GATA5) might have pivotal roles in the
transcriptional upregulation of mucin genes (MUC2, MUC3 and MUC4) in
gastrointestinal epithelium. The zinc-finger GATA3 transcription factor has been 
reported to be involved in the growth control and differentiation of breast
epithelial cells. In SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression) studies we
observed an intriguing significant correlation between GATA3 and MUC1 mRNA
expression in breast carcinomas. We therefore designed the present study to
elucidate whether MUC1 expression is regulated by GATA3 in breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Promoter sequence analysis of the MUC1 gene identified six GATA cis
consensus elements in the 5' flanking region (GATA1, GATA3 and four GATA-like
sequences). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays were employed to study the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site.
GATA3 and MUC1 expression was analyzed in vitro with a GATA3 knockdown assay.
Furthermore, expression of GATA3 and MUC1 genes was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR 
and immunohistochemistry on breast cancer-specific tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: We confirmed the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site on the MUC1
promoter region in the MCF7 cell line. We determined that GATA3 knockdown assays 
led to a decrease in MUC1 protein expression in MCF7 and T47D cells. In addition,
we detected a statistically significant correlation in expression between GATA3
and MUC1 genes at the mRNA and protein levels both in normal breast epithelium
and in breast carcinomas (p = 0.01). GATA3 expression was also highly associated 
with estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status (p = 0.0001) and tumor
grade (p = 0.004) in breast carcinomas.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence indicating that GATA3 is probably a
mediator for the transcriptional upregulation of MUC1 expression in some breast
cancers.

PMCID: PMC1797033
PMID: 17078870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Dev Biol. 2006 Dec 15;300(2):612-22. Epub 2006 Sep 9.

Fgf signaling negatively regulates Nodal-dependent endoderm induction in
zebrafish.

Mizoguchi T(1), Izawa T, Kuroiwa A, Kikuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University 
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

In zebrafish development, Nodal signaling is critical for the induction of
endoderm and mesoderm. Three transcription factors downstream of Nodal, Bonnie
and Clyde (Bon), Faust (Fau)/Gata5 and Casanova (Cas), are required for endoderm 
induction. However, it is not yet fully understood how the Nodal signaling
pathway regulates the decision process of endoderm and mesoderm induction. In
this study, we focused on Fgf signaling, downstream of Nodal signaling, during
endoderm induction. We found that activation of Fgf signaling decreases the
number of cas-expressing endodermal cells. Conversely, inhibition of this
signaling increases the number of endodermal cells without affecting the
expression of Nodal, Nodal antagonists, bon or fau/gata5. Inhibition of Fgf
signaling in endoderm mutants suggests that this signaling negatively regulates
cas expression by a pathway parallel to Bon and Fau/Gata5 in the molecular
cascade leading to endoderm. Furthermore, activation of Fgf signaling can
overcome Cas-mediated abrogation of mesodermal gene expression. Altogether, these
results suggest that Fgf signaling negatively regulates endoderm induction,
possibly through repression of cas expression and down-regulation of Cas
function.

PMID: 17026981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Feb;145(1):39-44. Epub 2006 Jun
29.

Microinjecting recombinant rainbow trout Ea4-peptide of pro-IGF-I into zebrafish 
embryos causes abnormal development in heart, red blood cells, and vasculature.

Chun CZ(1), Chen TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, U-3125
Storrs, CT 06269, USA.

E-peptides and mature insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are produced from
pre-pro-IGFs during post-translational processing and co-secreted into the
circulation. Previously, we reported that introduction of a transgene encoding
the secreted form of rainbow trout (rt) Ea4-peptide or human (h) Eb-peptide into 
newly fertilized eggs of medaka (Oryzias latipes) and zebrafish (Danio rerio)
resulted in developmental defects in heart, red blood cells and vasculature. In
addition to vasculature and red blood cell developmental defects, multiple
phenocopies of heart developmental defects categorized by developmental arrest at
cardiomyocyte, heart tube and heart looping stages were also observed. These
results raise a question of whether rtEa4- or hEb-peptide exerts pleiotropic
inhibitory effects on heart, vasculature and red blood cell development in fish
embryos. To answer this question, various amounts of recombinant rtEa4-peptide
were microinjected into zebrafish eggs at 1.5, 2.5 and 5.5 h post-fertilization
(hpf). Although a dose-dependent developmental defect in heart, vasculature and
red blood cells was observed in embryos microinjected with rtEa4-peptide at 1.5
and 2.5 hpf, the heart development in all of the microinjected embryos was
arrested at the cardiomyocyte stage. Furthermore, the mRNA levels of Nkx2.5,
GATA5, VEGF, GATA1 and GATA2 genes in defective embryos were significantly
reduced by rtEa4-peptide. These results confirm our previous findings that rtEa4-
or hEb-peptide exhibits pleiotropic effects in inhibiting heart, vasculature and 
red blood cell development in zebrafish embryos.

PMID: 16914384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;3(1-2):94-100.

Induction of signalling in non-erythroid cells by pharmacological levels of
erythropoietin.

Dunlop EA(1), Percy MJ, Boland MP, Maxwell AP, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, and
Haematology Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK.

Erythropoiesis is maintained by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) binding to its
cognate receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitor cells. The Epo-EpoR interaction
initiates a signal transduction process that regulates the survival, growth and
differentiation of these cells. Originally perceived as highly
lineage-restricted, Epo is now recognised to have pleiotropic effects extending
beyond the maintenance of red cell mass. Functional interactions between Epo and 
EpoR have been demonstrated in numerous cells and tissues. EpoR expression on
neoplastic cells leads to concern that recombinant human erythropoietin, used to 
treat anaemia in cancer patients, may augment tumour growth. Here we demonstrate 
that EPO, at pharmacological concentrations, can activate three major signalling 
cascades, viz. the Jak2/STAT5, Ras/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. EpoR synthesis is normally under the control
of GATA-1, but NSCLC cells exhibit decreased GATA-1 levels compared to GATA-2, -3
and -6, suggesting that GATA-1 is not essential for EpoR production. The
increased Epo-induced signalling was not associated with a growth advantage for
the NSCLC cells.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16909043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 15;298(2):415-29. Epub 2006 Jul 4.

Gata6 is an important regulator of mouse pancreas development.

Decker K(1), Goldman DC, Grasch CL, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado at Denver Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO
80045, USA.

Gata4, Gata5, and Gata6 represent a subfamily of zinc-finger transcriptional
regulators that are important in the development and differentiation of numerous 
tissues, including many endodermally-derived organs. We demonstrate that Gata4
and Gata6 have overlapping expression patterns in the early pancreatic
epithelium. Later, Gata4 becomes restricted to exocrine tissue and Gata6 becomes 
restricted to a subset of endocrine cells. In addition, we show Gata6, but not
Gata4, physically interacts with Nkx2.2, an essential islet transcription factor.
To begin determining the roles that Gata4 and Gata6 play during pancreatic
development, we expressed Gata4-Engrailed and Gata6-Engrailed dominant repressor 
fusion proteins in the pancreatic epithelium and in the islet. At e17.5,
transgenic Gata6-Engrailed embryos exhibit two distinct phenotypes: a complete
absence of pancreas or a reduction in pancreatic tissue. In the embryos that do
form pancreas, there is a significant reduction of all pancreatic cell types,
with the few differentiated endocrine cells clustered within, or in close
proximity to, enlarged ductal structures. Conversely, the majority of transgenic 
Gata4-Engrailed embryos do not have a pancreatic phenotype. This study suggests
that Gata6 is an important regulator of pancreas specification.

PMCID: PMC2824170
PMID: 16887115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Cancer. 2006 Nov 1;119(9):2078-83.

Hypermethylation of the GATA gene family in esophageal cancer.

Guo M(1), House MG, Akiyama Y, Qi Y, Capagna D, Harmon J, Baylin SB, Brock MV,
Herman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors promotes the normal development of the
gastrointestinal tract during embryogenesis and determines tissue differentiation
in adult gut epithelium. Loss of GATA-4 and GATA-5 has been reported in human
gastric and colon cancer. We examined GATA-4,-5 and -6 gene expression in
established esophageal squamous cancer cell lines and the relationship to DNA
methylation in the promoter region of these genes. GATA-4 and GATA-5 expression
was absent in most esophageal cancer cell lines, but was restored upon treatment 
with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. For each of the cell lines
without detectable GATA gene expression, aberrant methylation of the promoter
region CpG-island was detected by methylation specific PCR. We confirmed these
results with genomic bisulfite sequencing. GATA-6 expression was found in each of
the cell lines. GATA-4/-5 promoter methylation was not detected in normal
esophageal mucosa, but GATA-4 methylation was present in 27 of 44 (61%) squamous 
carcinomas and 31 of 44 (71%) adenocarcinoma of the esophagus, while GATA-5
methylation was present in 14 of 44 (32%) squamous carcinomas and 24 of 44 (55%) 
adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Our studies demonstrate frequent silencing of
GATA-4 and GATA-5, but not GATA-6, in human esophageal neoplasia associated with 
gene promoter hypermethylation.

PMID: 16823849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Jun;48(5):283-95.

Development of the endoderm and gut in medaka, Oryzias latipes.

Kobayashi D(1), Jindo T, Naruse K, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

We performed an extensive analysis of endodermal development and gut tube
morphogenesis in the medaka embryo by histology and in situ hybridization. The
markers used in these analyses included sox17, sox32, foxA2, gata-4, -5, -6 and
shh. sox17, sox32, foxA2, and gata-5 and -6 are expressed in the early endoderm
to the onset of gut tube formation. Sections of medaka embryos hybridized with
foxA2, a pan-endodermal marker during gut morphogenesis, demonstrated that gut
tube formation is initiated in the anterior portion and that the anterior and
mid/posterior gut undergo distinct morphogenetic processes. Tube formation in the
anterior endoderm that is fated to the pharynx and esophagus is much delayed and 
appears to be independent of gut morphogenesis. The overall aspects of medaka gut
development are similar to those of zebrafish, except that zebrafish tube
formation initiates at both the anterior and posterior portions. Our results
therefore describe both molecular and morphological aspects of medaka digestive
system development that will be necessary for the characterization of medaka
mutants.

PMID: 16759279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1384-90.

GATA5 activation of the progesterone receptor gene promoter in breast cancer
cells is influenced by the +331G/A polymorphism.

Huggins GS(1), Wong JY, Hankinson SE, De Vivo I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA.

Previously, a modest association was observed between the progesterone receptor
+331G/A gene variant and breast cancer risk. Here, in a larger sample of breast
cancer cases and controls (n = 1,322/n = 1,953) nested in the Nurses' Health
Study cohort, we confirm a significant association (odds ratio, 1.41; 95%
confidence interval, 1.10-1.79) and suggest a molecular model. The association of
the +331G/A variant with breast cancer was particularly strong among obese women 
(body mass index > 30; odds ratio, 2.87; 95% confidence interval, 1.40-5.90). To 
help understand the molecular mechanism by which this variant may predispose
women to breast cancer, we identified nearby transcription factor binding sites. 
This search predicted a binding site for the GATA family of transcriptional
regulators adjacent to this hPR polymorphism. Importantly, we found GATA3, GATA4,
and GATA6 are expressed in normal breast tissue and two breast cancer cell lines,
whereas GATA5 is minimally expressed in normal mammary tissue and more strongly
expressed in two breast cancer cell lines. This finding was relevant because
GATA5 bound the site adjacent to the +331G/A polymorphism, and activated the hPR 
(-711 to +822)-luciferase reporter plasmid in breast cancer cells. Overexpression
of GATA5 increased expression of the endogenous hPR transcript, and GATA5 more
strongly activated an hPR promoter construct encoding the PR-B isoform. Finally, 
hPR promoter constructs including the +331A were more strongly activated by GATA5
than constructs including +331G. Our findings suggest that GATA5 interacts with
the +331G/A polymorphism to stimulate hPR-B expression in mammary cells, which
may contribute to breast cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 16452193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Jan 15;40(2):260-74. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Transcriptional regulation of the NADPH oxidase isoform, Nox1, in colon
epithelial cells: role of GATA-binding factor(s).

Brewer AC(1), Sparks EC, Shah AM.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Department of Cardiology, GKT School of Medicine and
Dentistry, New Medical School Building, Bessemer Road, London SE5 9PJ, UK.
alison.brewer@kcl.ac.uk

Nonphagocytic NADPH oxidases (Noxs) are major sources of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and exist as a family of isoenzymes with tissue-restricted expression and
functions. Nox1, expressed in colon epithelium and vascular smooth muscle, is
suggested to be involved in innate immune defense and cell growth or
proliferation. The transcriptional regulation of Nox1 appears to be particularly 
important in the modulation of its activity but the underlying mechanisms are
unknown. Here we have identified the functional Nox1 promoter in human colon
epithelial Caco-2 cells, and show that a 520-bp genomic fragment encompassing the
CAP site is sufficient to direct high levels of expression of a linked reporter
gene in these cells. Deletion analyses together with electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays (EMSAs) suggest that maximal promoter activity is dependent
on a GATA-binding site, conserved between human and mouse, within the proximal
promoter region. The ability of mouse GATA factors to transactivate the Nox1
promoter was demonstrated in Cos-7 cells and site-directed mutagenesis of the
conserved GATA-binding site further demonstrates that the regulation of Nox1
transcription is mediated by the direct binding of a GATA factor to the Nox1
proximal promoter. We also identified more distal, upstream regions which act to 
repress significantly expression from the Nox1 promoter.

PMID: 16413408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Apr;6(4):426-32. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Spatio-temporal patterns of intestine-specific transcription factor expression
during postnatal mouse gut development.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, 750 Welch Road, Suite 116, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

The small intestine matures from a primitive tube into morphologically and
functionally distinct regions during gut development. Maximal expression of the
genes encoding the digestive enzymes lactase-phlorizin hydrolase and
sucrase-isomaltase is spatially restricted to distinct segments along the
anterior-posterior axis of the small intestine and is temporally regulated during
postnatal maturation. Transcription factors capable of interacting with the
intestinal lactase and sucrase gene promoters are candidate regulators of
spatio-temporal patterning during gut development and maturation. We aimed to
quantitatively examine and compare the relative expression levels of a set of
intestine-specific transcription factors along the anterior-posterior gut axis
during postnatal maturation. Our analysis was focused on the transcription
factors capable of regulating the intestinal lactase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes. A real-time PCR protocol was used to quantitatively examine and compare
spatially and temporally the relative transcript abundance levels for
intestine-specific factors during postnatal intestinal maturation. Distinct
spatial expressions patterns were detected along the length of the small
intestine for PDX-1, Cdx-2, GATA-4, GATA-5, GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta and CDP
transcription factor genes. There is a general decline in transcript abundance
for the factor genes during postnatal maturation. Defining the spatio-temporal
expression patterns for intestine-specific transcription factor genes contributes
to investigation of the roles that factor gradients play in mediating gut
development and differentiation.

PMID: 16377257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cancer Lett. 2006 Sep 28;241(2):281-8. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Involvement of GATA-4/-5 transcription factors in ovarian carcinogenesis.

Wakana K(1), Akiyama Y, Aso T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comprehensive Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

To clarify the role of GATA transcription factors in ovarian carcinogenesis, we
analyzed the expression and methylation states of GATA-4/-5/-6 in eight human
ovarian cancer cell lines. GATA-4/-5 were methylated in three and two cell lines 
without their expression, respectively. Methylation of GATA-4/-5 was also
detected in nine and five of 15 primary ovarian cancers, respectively. GATA-6 was
not methylated in any cases. We transiently over-expressed GATA-5 in the JHOC-5
cell line using an adenovirus system, resulting in that apoptosis was induced and
apoptosis-related genes, such as Apaf-1, were up-regulated. These data suggest
that GATA-4/-5 may be involved in ovarian carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16337738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Cell. 2005 Oct;9(4):523-33.

Eomesodermin is a localized maternal determinant required for endoderm induction 
in zebrafish.

Bjornson CR(1), Griffin KJ, Farr GH 3rd, Terashima A, Himeda C, Kikuchi Y,
Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7350, USA.

In zebrafish, endoderm induction occurs in marginal blastomeres and requires
Casanova (Cas), the first endoderm-specific factor expressed in the embryo.
Whereas the transcription factors Gata5 and Bon are necessary and sufficient for 
cas expression in marginal blastomeres, Bon and Gata5 are unable to induce cas in
animal pole cells, suggesting that cas expression requires an additional,
unidentified factor(s). Here, we show that cas expression depends upon the T box 
transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes), a maternal determinant that is
localized to marginal blastomeres. Eomes synergizes potently with Bon and Gata5
to induce cas, even in animal pole blastomeres. We show that Eomes is required
for endogenous endoderm induction, acting via an essential binding site in the
cas promoter. Direct physical interactions between Eomes, Bon, and Gata5 suggest 
that Eomes promotes endoderm induction in marginal blastomeres by facilitating
the assembly of a transcriptional activating complex on the cas promoter.

PMID: 16198294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 15;286(2):574-86. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Perception of differentiation cues by GATA factors in primitive endoderm lineage 
determination of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Capo-Chichi CD(1), Rula ME, Smedberg JL, Vanderveer L, Parmacek MS, Morrisey EE, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer and Tumor Cell Biology Programs, Department of Medical
Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, Philadelphia, PA
19111-2497, USA.

The formation of the primitive endoderm covering the inner cell mass of early
mouse embryos can be simulated in vitro by the differentiation of mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells in culture following either aggregation of suspended cells or
stimulation of cell monolayers with retinoic acid. The developmentally regulated 
transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 have determining role in mouse
extraembryonic endoderm development. We analyzed the in vitro differentiation of 
mouse embryonic stem cells deficient of GATA factors and conclude that GATA-4 is 
required for ES cells to perceive a cell positioning (cell aggregation) signal
and GATA-6 is required to sense morphogenic (retinoic acid) signal. The
collaboration between GATA-6 and GATA-4, or GATA-6 and GATA-5 which can
substitute for GATA-4, is involved in the perception of differentiation cues by
embryonic stem cells in their determination of endoderm lineage. This study
indicates that the lineage differentiation of ES cells can be manipulated by the 
expression of GATA factors.

PMID: 16162334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Curr Biol. 2005 Mar 8;15(5):441-6.

Hand2 regulates epithelial formation during myocardial diferentiation.

Trinh LA(1), Yelon D, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Programs in Developmental Biology,
Genetics, and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2005 May 10;15(9):879-81.

Myocardial differentiation is initiated by the activation of
terminal-differentiation gene expression within a subset of cells in the anterior
lateral plate mesoderm. We have previously shown that shortly after this
activation, myocardial cells undergo epithelial maturation [1], suggesting that
myocardial differentiation encompasses both molecular and cellular changes. To
address the question of how the molecular programs driving myocardial gene
expression and the formation of the myocardial epithelium are integrated, we
analyzed the role of two essential myocardial terminal-differentiation factors,
Hand2 and Gata5, in myocardial epithelia formation. hand2 and gata5 mutants
exhibit a much-reduced number of myocardial cells and defects in myocardial gene 
expression [2,3]. We find that the few myocardial precursors that are present in 
hand2 mutants do not polarize. In contrast, embryos with reduced Gata5 function
exhibit polarized myocardial epithelia despite a similar reduction in myocardial 
precursor number, indicating that proper cell number is not required for
epithelial formation. Taken thogether, these results indicate that Hand2 is
uniquely required for myocardial polarization, a previously unappreciated role
for this critical transcription factor. Furthermore, these results demonstrate
that two independent processes, the polarizaton of myocardial precursors and the 
allocation of proper cell number, contribute to myocardial development.

PMID: 15786591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Mol Histol. 2005 Feb;36(1-2):15-24.

Epithelial lineages of the small intestine have unique patterns of GATA
expression.

Dusing MR(1), Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Developmental Biology, College of
Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The ability of the GATA family of factors to interact with numerous other
factors, co-factors, and repressors suggests that they may play key roles in
tissues and cells where they are expressed. Adult mouse small intestine has been 
shown to express GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6, where they have been implicated in
the activation of a number of intestinal genes. Determination of which GATA
factor(s) are involved in a specific function in tissues expressing multiple
family members has proven difficult. The immunohistochemical analysis presented
here demonstrate that within the mouse small intestine GATA-4/-5/-6 are found to 
be uniquely distributed among the various differentiated lineages of the
intestinal epithelium. Among differentiated cells GATA-4 is found only in the
villous enterocytes. GATA-5 is absent from enterocytes, but was found in the
remaining lineages: goblet, Paneth and enteroendocrine. Additionally, high levels
of GATA-6 are found in only one of these differentiated cell types, the
enteroendocrine lineage. The observed distribution suggests that the GATA factors
may have distinct roles in lineage allocation, lineage maintenance, and/or
terminal differentiation events in small intestine.

PMID: 15703995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Development. 2005 Feb;132(4):763-74. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

GATA4, 5 and 6 mediate TGFbeta maintenance of endodermal gene expression in
Xenopus embryos.

Afouda BA(1), Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

The individual contributions of the three vertebrate GATA factors to endoderm
formation have been unclear. Here we detail the early expression of GATA4, 5 and 
6 in presumptive endoderm in Xenopus embryos and their induction of endodermal
markers in presumptive ectoderm. Induction of HNF3beta by all three GATA factors 
was abolished when protein synthesis was inhibited, showing that these inductions
are indirect. In contrast, whereas induction of Sox17alpha and HNF1beta by GATA4 
and 5 was substantially reduced when protein synthesis was inhibited, induction
by GATA6 was minimally affected, suggesting that GATA6 is a direct activator of
these early endodermal genes. GATA4 induced GATA6 expression in the same assay
and antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs), designed to knock down
translation of GATA6, blocked induction of Sox17alpha and HNF1beta by GATA4,
suggesting that GATA4 induces these genes via GATA6 in this assay. All three GATA
factors were induced by activin, although GATA4 and 6 required lower
concentrations. GATA MOs inhibited Sox17alpha and HNF1beta induction by activin
at low and high concentrations in the order: GATA6>GATA4>GATA5. Together with the
timing of their expression and the effects of GATA MOs in vivo, these
observations identify GATA6 as the predominant GATA factor in the maintenance of 
endodermal gene expression by TGFbeta signaling in gastrulating embryos. In
addition, examination of gene expression and morphology in later embryos,
revealed GATA5 and 6 as the most critical for the development of the gut and the 
liver.

PMID: 15659482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):95-106. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Using the zebrafish model to study GATA transcription factors.

Heicklen-Klein A(1), McReynolds LJ, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Chanin Room 501, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The zebrafish is an established animal model system that profits from the
availability of strong experimental approaches in both genetics and embryology.
As a vertebrate, zebrafish can be used to model many aspects of human development
and disease. GATA transcription factors play important roles in the development
of many organ systems, including those for hematopoietic, cardiovascular,
reproductive, and gut-endoderm derived tissues. The six vertebrate GATA factors
are highly conserved in zebrafish at the level of sequence, expression pattern,
and function. The identification of mutants, establishment of transgenic GFP
reporter fish, and the ease of performing loss- and gain-of-function experiments 
have all contributed new insight into our understanding of the regulation and
function of GATA factors. We review recent advances toward this goal using the
zebrafish system with a focus on hematopoiesis and cardiogenesis, and suggest how
comparative genetics using the zebrafish genes might reveal core conserved
properties, as well as changes in gene function that reflect different
morphogenetic programs utilized by various vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 15659344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):83-94. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

The roles of GATA-4, -5 and -6 in vertebrate heart development.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Loose M, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS.

The transcription factors GATA-4, -5 and -6 are expressed very early in heart
tissue. Essential GATA sites have been detected in several cardiac genes and the 
cardiac GATA factors interact with a wide variety of cofactors which
synergistically increase gene expression. These multi-protein transcriptional
complexes confer promoter-specificity on the GATA factors and also on the more
broadly expressed cofactors. Here we summarise the data on these interactions and
represent the conclusions as a GATA factor-based genetic regulatory network for
the heart. Of the three cardiac GATAs, GATA-4 is by far the most extensively
studied, however, loss-of-function data question its presumed dominance during
heart development as opposed to hypertrophy.

PMID: 15659343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):71-81. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Regulation of GATA gene expression during vertebrate development.

Burch JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. john.burch@fccc.edu

GATA factors regulate critical events in hematopoietic lineages (GATA-1/2/3), the
heart and gut (GATA-4/5/6) and various other tissues. Transgenic approaches have 
revealed that GATA genes are regulated in a modular fashion by sets of enhancers 
that govern distinct temporal and/or spatial facets of the overall expression
patterns. Efforts are underway to resolve how these GATA gene enhancers are
themselves regulated in order to elucidate the genetic and molecular hierarchies 
that govern GATA expression in particular developmental contexts. These enhancers
also afford a raft of tools that can be used to selectively perturb and probe
various developmental events in transgenic animals.

PMID: 15659342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 1;10(23):7917-24.

Hypermethylation of the GATA genes in lung cancer.

Guo M(1), Akiyama Y, House MG, Hooker CM, Heath E, Gabrielson E, Yang SC, Han Y, 
Baylin SB, Herman JG, Brock MV.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.

PURPOSE: In lung cancer, DNA hypermethylation is known to be a common event.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression and methylation status of GATA-4, GATA-5,
and GATA-6 were analyzed with cell lines and primary human lung cancers.
Methylation profiles of primary lung cancers were analyzed and correlated with
clinical as well as histopathological data.
RESULTS: Complete methylation was detected by methylation-specific PCR for both
GATA-4 and GATA-5 in four cell lines (H358, DMS-53, A549, and H1299), all of
which had no expression by reverse transcription-PCR analysis. Demethylation with
5-aza-2'deoxycytidine restored expression in each case. GATA-6 was ubiquitously
expressed in all of the six cell lines. GATA-4 bisulfite sequencing revealed
complete methylation of the GATA-4 promoter in H358 cells, correlating well with 
its lack of expression at the mRNA level. Only a few CpG sites showed methylation
by bisulfite sequencing within the GATA-4 promoter in a cell line that expressed 
the gene. In 63 cases of primary lung cancers, GATA-4 and GATA-5 promoter
methylation was detected in (42 of 63) 67% and (26 of 63) 41%, respectively.
GATA-6 remained unmethylated both in cell lines and primary tumors. Six autopsy
specimens of normal lung tissue showed no aberrant promoter hypermethylation for 
the GATA genes. Correlation of concomitant GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation with
clinicopathological parameters only found a statistically significant increase in
methylation frequency with increasing patient age (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These epigenetic changes in the GATA genes in lung cancer are
tumor-specific, relate to the loss of GATA gene expression, and occur
increasingly in the elderly.

PMID: 15585625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Dec;5(2):161-5.

Expression of Spgatae, the Strongylocentrotus purpuratus ortholog of vertebrate
GATA4/5/6 factors.

Lee PY(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California
Blvd, Mail Code 156-29, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Spgatae is the sea urchin ortholog of the vertebrate gata4/5/6 genes, as
confirmed by phylogenetic analysis. The accumulation of Spgatae transcripts
during embryonic development and the spatial pattern of expression are reported
here. Expression was first detected in the 15 h blastula. The number of Spgatae
RNA molecules increases steadily during blastula stages, with expression peaking 
during gastrulation. After gastrulation is complete, the level of expression
decreases until the end of embryogenesis. Whole mount in situ hybridization
showed that Spgatae transcripts were first detected in a ring of prospective
mesoderm cells in the vegetal plate. Spgatae expression then expands to include
the entire vegetal plate at the mesenchyme blastula stage. During gastrulation
Spgatae is expressed at the blastopore, and at prism stage strongly in the
hindgut and midgut but not foregut, and also in mesoderm cells at the tip of the 
archenteron. Towards the end of embryogenesis, expression in the hindgut
decreases. The terminal pattern of expression is in midgut plus coelomic pouches.

PMID: 15567710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Development. 2004 Oct;131(19):4709-23. Epub 2004 Aug 25.

SMAD-mediated modulation of YY1 activity regulates the BMP response and
cardiac-specific expression of a GATA4/5/6-dependent chick Nkx2.5 enhancer.

Lee KH(1), Evans S, Ruan TY, Lassar AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, 240 Longwood Avenue Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Prior work has indicated that BMP signals act in concert with FGF8, WNT11 and WNT
antagonists to induce the formation of cardiac tissue in the vertebrate embryo.
In an effort to understand how these signaling pathways control the expression of
key cardiac regulators, we have characterized the cis-regulatory elements of the 
chick tinman homolog chick Nkx2.5. We find that at least three distinct cardiac
activating regions (CARs) of chick Nkx2.5 cooperate to regulate early expression 
in the cardiac crescent and later segmental expression in the developing heart.
In this report, we focus our attention on a 3' BMP-responsive enhancer, termed
CAR3, which directs robust cardiac transgene expression. By systematic
mutagenesis and gel shift analysis of this enhancer, we demonstrate that
GATA4/5/6, YY1 and SMAD1/4 are all necessary for BMP-mediated induction and
heart-specific expression of CAR3. Adjacent YY1 and SMAD-binding sites within
CAR3 constitute a minimal BMP response element, and interaction of SMAD1/4 with
the N terminus of YY1 is required for BMP-mediated induction of CAR3. Our data
suggest that BMP-mediated activation of this regulatory region reflects both the 
induction of GATA genes by BMP signals, as well as modulation of the
transcriptional activity of YY1 by direct interaction of this transcription
factor with BMP-activated SMADs.

PMID: 15329343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biochem. 2004 Feb;135(2):165-9.

Regulatory elements directing gut expression of the GATA6 gene during mouse early
development.

Sun-Wada GH(1), Kamei Y, Wada Y, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, The Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Mihogaoka 8-1, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047.

The GATA6 transcription factor, as well as GATA4 and GATA5, is expressed in a
variety of mammalian tissues including the precardiac mesoderm and endoderm, and 
gut-related organs. Genetic studies have also implicated GATA factors as
important regulators of gut endoderm development. Previously, we identified the
promoter and a cardiac-specific enhancer of mouse GATA6 [Sun-Wada et al. (2000)
J. Biochem. 127, 703-709], however, little is known about the regulatory elements
that govern GATA6 expression in the primitive gut. Here, we identified a distal
enhancer of the GATA6 gene directing expression in the gut by creating transgenic
mice. A sequence of approximately 200 bp between -8.0 kb and -7.8 kb contains
element(s) that enhance transcription in the gut during embryonic development,
when linked to the hsp68 promoter/lacZ fusion gene. Our results also show that
GATA6 expression is controlled by multiple regulatory regions including
cardiac-specific and gut-specific enhancers.

PMID: 15047717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Dev Dyn. 2004 Apr;229(4):756-62.

Notch signaling can regulate endoderm formation in zebrafish.

Kikuchi Y(1), Verkade H, Reiter JF, Kim CH, Chitnis AB, Kuroiwa A, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. yutaka@cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Early in vertebrate development, the processes of gastrulation lead to the
formation of the three germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. The
mechanisms leading to the segregation of the endoderm and mesoderm are not well
understood. In mid-blastula stage zebrafish embryos, single marginal cells can
give rise to both endoderm and mesoderm (reviewed by Warga and Stainier [2002]
The guts of endoderm formation. In: Solnica-Krezel L, editor. Pattern formation
in zebrafish. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. p 28-47). By the late blastula stage,
however, single marginal cells generally give rise to either endoderm or
mesoderm. To investigate this segregation of the blastoderm into cells with
either endodermal or mesodermal fates, we analyzed the role of Notch signaling in
this process. We show that deltaC, deltaD, and notch1 are expressed in the
marginal domain of blastula stage embryos and that this expression is dependent
on Nodal signaling. Activation of Notch signaling from an early stage leads to a 
reduction of endodermal cells, as assessed by sox17 and foxA2 expression. We
further find that this reduction in endoderm formation by the activation of Notch
signaling is preceded by a reduction in the expression of bonnie and clyde (bon) 
and faust/gata5, two genes necessary for endoderm formation (Reiter et al. [1999]
Genes Dev 13:2983-2995; Reiter et al. [2001] Development 128:125-135; Kikuchi et 
al. [2001] Genes Dev 14:1279-1289). However, activation of Notch signaling in bon
mutant embryos leads to a further reduction in endodermal cells, also arguing for
a bon-independent role for Notch signaling in endoderm formation. Altogether,
these results suggest that Notch signaling plays a role in the formation of the
endoderm, possibly in its segregation from the mesoderm.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15042699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2004 May;130(5):245-52. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Transcription factor GATA-5 selectively up-regulates mucin gene expression.

Ren CY(1), Akiyama Y, Miyake S, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Overlapping expression patterns of epithelial mucins, MUC1-MUC6, and
transcription factor GATA-5 were reported previously. However, the functional
relationship between them is poorly understood. The aim of the current study is
to elucidate whether or not expression of mucin genes is regulated by GATA-5.
METHODS: GATA-5 was transiently overexpressed in COS-7 and 293T cells by plasmid 
transfection and/or adenovirus infection. GATA-5 expression was confirmed by
Western blot analysis. Expression of mucin genes was studied by
reverse-transcription-PCR. Reporter gene assays were employed to analyze the
effect of GATA-5 on the promoter activity of mucin genes.
RESULTS: mRNA levels of MUC2, MUC3, and MUC4 were increased, whereas those of
MUC1, MUC5AC, MUC5B, and MUC6 remained unchanged upon the overexpression of
GATA-5 in both COS-7 and 293T cells. By means of luciferase assay, GATA-5 was
found to activate the promoters of the human MUC2 and MUC4 genes. GATA-5 lacking 
the zinc finger domain impaired these functions.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that GATA-5 may play important roles in the 
regulation of mucin expression and gastrointestinal epithelial cell
differentiation.

Copyright 2004 Springer-Verlag

PMID: 14986113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Nov;287(5):G1086-99. Epub 2004 Jan 
8.

GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6 activate the rat liver fatty acid binding protein gene
in concert with HNF-1alpha.

Divine JK(1), Staloch LJ, Haveri H, Jacobsen CM, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M, Simon 
TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Transcriptional regulation by GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6 in intestine and liver
was explored using a transgene constructed from the proximal promoter of the rat 
liver fatty acid binding protein gene (Fabpl). An immunohistochemical survey
detected GATA-4 and GATA-6 in enterocytes, GATA-6 in hepatocytes, and GATA-5 in
neither cell type in adult animals. In cell transfection assays, GATA-4 or GATA-5
but not GATA-6 activated the Fabpl transgene solely through the most proximal of 
three GATA binding sites in the Fabpl promoter. However, all three factors
activated transgenes constructed from each Fabpl site upstream of a minimal viral
promoter. GATA factors interact with hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, and the
proximal Fabpl GATA site adjoins an HNF-1 site. GATA-4, GATA-5, or GATA-6 bounded
to HNF-1alpha in solution, and all cooperated with HNF-1alpha to activate the
Fabpl transgene. Mutagenizing all Fabpl GATA sites abrogated transgene activation
by GATA factors, but GATA-4 activated the mutagenized transgene in the presence
of HNF-1alpha. These in vitro results suggested GATA/HNF-1alpha interactions
function in Fabpl regulation, and in vivo relevance was determined with
subsequent experiments. In mice, the Fabpl transgene was active in enterocytes
and hepatocytes, a transgene with mutagenized HNF-1 site was silent, and a
transgene with mutagenized GATA sites had identical expression as the native
transgene. Mice mosaic for biallelic Gata4 inactivation lost intestinal but not
hepatic Fabpl expression in Gata4-deficient cells but not wild-type cells. These 
results demonstrate GATA-4 is critical for intestinal gene expression in vivo and
suggest a specific GATA-4/HNF-1alpha physical and functional interaction in Fabpl
activation.

PMID: 14715527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(23):8429-39.

GATA-4 and GATA-5 transcription factor genes and potential downstream antitumor
target genes are epigenetically silenced in colorectal and gastric cancer.

Akiyama Y(1), Watkins N, Suzuki H, Jair KW, van Engeland M, Esteller M, Sakai H, 
Ren CY, Yuasa Y, Herman JG, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors participates in gastrointestinal (GI)
development. Increases in GATA-4 and -5 expression occur in differentiation and
GATA-6 expression in proliferation in embryonic and adult settings. We now show
that in colorectal cancer (CRC) and gastric cancer promoter hypermethylation and 
transcriptional silencing are frequent for GATA-4 and -5 but are never seen for
GATA-6. Potential antitumor target genes upregulated by GATA-4 and -5, the
trefoil factors, inhibinalpha, and disabled-2 (Dab2) are also silenced, in GI
cancers, with associated methylation of the promoters. Drug or genetically
induced demethylation simultaneously leads to expression, in CRC cells, of all of
the GATA-4, -5, and downstream genes. Expression of exogenous GATA-5 overrides
methylation at the downstream promoters to activate the target genes. Selection
for silencing of both upstream transcription factors and their target genes in GI
cancers could indicate that epigenetic silencing of the involved genes provides a
summated contribution to tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC262684
PMID: 14612389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Dev Biol. 2003 Nov 1;263(1):67-80.

Zebrafish hhex, nk2.1a, and pax2.1 regulate thyroid growth and differentiation
downstream of Nodal-dependent transcription factors.

Elsalini OA(1), von Gartzen J, Cramer M, Rohr KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17, 
50923 Köln, Germany.

During zebrafish development, the thyroid primordium initiates expression of
molecular markers such as hhex and nk2.1a in the endoderm prior to pharynx
formation. As expected for an endodermally derived organ, initiation of thyroid
development depends on Nodal signalling. We find that it also depends on three
downstream effectors of Nodal activity, casanova (cas), bonnie and clyde (bon),
and faust (fau)/gata5. Despite their early Nodal-dependent expression in the
endoderm, both hhex and nk2.1a are only required relatively late during thyroid
development. In hhex and nk2.1a loss-of-function phenotypes, thyroid development 
is initiated and arrests only after the primordium has evaginated from the
pharyngeal epithelium. Thus, like pax2.1, both hhex and nk2.1a have similarly
late roles in differentiation or growth of thyroid follicular cells, and here, we
show that all three genes act in parallel rather than in a single pathway. Our
functional analysis suggests that these genes have similar roles as in mammalian 
thyroid development, albeit in a different temporal mode of organogenesis.

PMID: 14568547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 15;262(2):206-24.

Cardiac T-box factor Tbx20 directly interacts with Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5 in
regulation of gene expression in the developing heart.

Stennard FA(1), Costa MW, Elliott DA, Rankin S, Haast SJ, Lai D, McDonald LP,
Niederreither K, Dolle P, Bruneau BG, Zorn AM, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 384 Victoria Street, Darlinghurst,
2010, Sydney, Australia.

Tbx20 is a member of the T-box transcription factor family expressed in the
forming hearts of vertebrate and invertebrate embryos. We report here analysis of
Tbx20 expression during murine cardiac development and assessment of DNA-binding 
and transcriptional properties of Tbx20 isoforms. Tbx20 was expressed in
myocardium and endocardium, including high levels in endocardial cushions. cDNAs 
generated by alternative splicing encode at least four Tbx20 isoforms, and Tbx20a
uniquely carried strong transactivation and transrepression domains in its C
terminus. Isoforms with an intact T-box bound specifically to DNA sites
resembling the consensus brachyury half site, although with less avidity compared
with the related factor, Tbx5. Tbx20 physically interacted with cardiac
transcription factors Nkx2-5, GATA4, and GATA5, collaborating to synergistically 
activate cardiac gene expression. Among cardiac GATA factors, there was
preferential synergy with GATA5, implicated in endocardial differentiation. In
Xenopus embryos, enforced expression of Tbx20a, but not Tbx20b, led to induction 
of mesodermal and endodermal lineage markers as well as cell migration,
indicating that the long Tbx20a isoform uniquely bears functional domains that
can alter gene expression and developmental behaviour in an in vivo context. We
propose that Tbx20 plays an integrated role in the ancient myogenic program of
the heart, and has been additionally coopted during evolution of vertebrates for 
endocardial cushion development.

PMID: 14550786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(18):6646-61.

GATA- and Smad1-dependent enhancers in the Smad7 gene differentially interpret
bone morphogenetic protein concentrations.

Benchabane H(1), Wrana JL.

Author information: 
(1)Programme in Molecular Biology and Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Room 1075, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

Smad7, an inhibitor of transforming growth factor beta superfamily signaling, is 
induced by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) in an inhibitory feedback loop. Here,
we identify multiple BMP response elements (BREs) in the Smad7 gene and
demonstrate that they function differentially to interpret BMP signals in a cell 
type-specific manner. Two BREs (BRE-1 and -2) reside in the promoter region. One 
of these contains several conserved Smad1 and Smad4 binding sites that cooperate 
to mediate BMP-dependent induction, most likely in the absence of DNA binding
partners. The third BRE (I-BRE) resides in the first intron and contains GATA
factor binding sites. GATA-1, -5, or -6 is required for strong activation of
I-BRE, and we show that they assemble with Smad1 on the I-BRE in living cells.
Activation of the I-BRE is mediated by a specific region in GATA-5 and -6 but
does not require direct physical interaction with Smad1. Comparison of I-BRE to
BRE-1 showed that I-BRE is more responsive to low BMP concentrations. Moreover,
analysis by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrates that the
endogenous I-BRE is occupied more robustly by endogenous Smad1 than is BRE-1.
This correlates with regulation of the Smad7 gene, which is induced at lower BMP 
concentrations in GATA-expressing cell lines compared to non-GATA-expressing
lines. These data thus define how cooperative and noncooperative Smad-dependent
transcriptional regulation can function to interpret different BMP
concentrations.

PMCID: PMC193708
PMID: 12944489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mech Dev. 2003 Jan;120(1):5-18.

From endoderm formation to liver and pancreas development in zebrafish.

Ober EA(1), Field HA, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0448, USA.

Recent studies in zebrafish have contributed to our understanding of early
endoderm formation in vertebrates. Specifically, they have illustrated the
importance of Nodal signaling as well as three transcription factors,
Faust/Gata5, Bonnie and Clyde, and Casanova, in this process. Ongoing genetic and
embryological studies in zebrafish are also contributing to our understanding of 
later aspects of endoderm development, including the formation of the gut and its
associated organs, the liver and pancreas. The generation of transgenic lines
expressing GFP in these organs promises to be particularly helpful in such
studies.

PMID: 12490292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):5659-68. Epub 2002 Dec 2.

Transcriptional regulation of the rat NHE3 gene. Functional interactions between 
GATA-5 and Sp family transcription factors.

Kiela PR(1), LeSueur J, Collins JF, Ghishan FK.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentf Pediatrics and Physiology, Steele Memorial Children's Research
Center, University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

Expression of sodium-hydrogen exchanger isoform 3 (NHE3) in the intestinal and
renal epithelium plays a critical role in sodium absorption and acid/base
homeostasis. To decipher rat NHE3 gene regulation, its cis-acting regulatory
elements and associated transcription factors were characterized by transient
transfection of Caco-2, IEC-6, Qt6, and Drosophila SL2 cells. Deletion and
mutational analyses demonstrated that the atypical TATA box located at bp -26/-31
was not necessary for promoter activity, and that a -20/+8-bp fragment represents
a functional initiator. Within the 81-bp upstream region, three Sp transcription 
factor binding sites were critical because their mutation drastically reduced
promoter activity. The roles of Sp1 and Sp3 were further demonstrated by
electromobility shift assay and by transactivation of the NHE3 promoter in SL2
cells by forced expression of Sp1 and Sp3. Both of these transcription factors
were found to act synergistically with GATA-5 bound to a GATA box in exon 1
(+20/+23 bp). These studies demonstrate that rat NHE3 promoter is
initiator-driven and controlled mainly by Sp1 and Sp3, which functionally
interact with GATA-5. This interaction represents a novel regulatory mechanism,
which is likely to participate in a gradient of intestinal gene expression along 
the crypt-villus axis.

PMID: 12464626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):4901-14.

Mezzo, a paired-like homeobox protein is an immediate target of Nodal signalling 
and regulates endoderm specification in zebrafish.

Poulain M(1), Lepage T.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7009 CNRS, Université de Paris VI, Observatoire Oceanologique, 06230
Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.

Endoderm specification in zebrafish is mediated by the zygotic transcription
factors Bon/Mixer, Faust/Gata5, Casanova and Sox17, whose expression is induced
by Nodal signalling. Bon/Mixer and Gata5 require Casanova in order to promote
endoderm formation and all three factors act upstream of sox17, but it is not
clear whether Casanova acts downstream of or in parallel to Bon/Mixer and Gata5. 
An additional factor induced at the margin of the blastoderm by Nodal signalling 
is thought to be required to induce casanova expression. We show that Mezzo, a
novel paired-like homeobox protein, may be this missing transcription factor. The
homeobox of Mezzo is mostly related to the homeodomain of the Mix-like and Mixer 
homeoproteins, but Mezzo is distinct from Bon/Mixer, the product of the bonnie
and clyde gene. Like bon/mixer, mezzo is expressed transiently in mesendoderm
precursors. By analysing the expression of mezzo in various mutants of Nodal
signalling, we show that its expression strictly depends on a functional Nodal
signalling pathway. By expressing a constitutively active Nodal receptor in the
presence of translation inhibitors, we further demonstrate that mezzo, bonnie and
clyde, and casanova are all immediate early targets of Nodal signalling, while
sox17 requires post-MBT protein synthesis in order to be induced. Overexpression 
of mezzo mRNA can induce ectopic expression of casanova and sox17 and can also
turn on the pan mesodermal marker gene ntl. We show that the function of mezzo is
redundant with that of bonnie and clyde and that mezzo RNA can partially rescue
bonnie and clyde mutants. Injection of antisense Morpholino oligonucleotides
targeted against mezzo into bonnie and clyde mutant embryos abolishes all sox17
expression and aggravates their mutant phenotype. These results highlight the
complexity of the transcriptional network operating during endoderm formation.
They place mezzo as a new transcription factor with unique properties acting in
parallel with bonnie and clyde, faust and casanova in the Nodal signalling
pathway that controls specification of mesoderm and endoderm in zebrafish.

PMID: 12397099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Development. 2002 Sep;129(17):4045-55.

Cooperative interaction between GATA5 and NF-ATc regulates
endothelial-endocardial differentiation of cardiogenic cells.

Nemer G(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, Québec H2W 1R7.

In vertebrates, heart development is a complex process requiring proper
differentiation and interaction between myocardial and endocardial cells.
Significant progress has been made in elucidating the molecular events underlying
myocardial cell differentiation. In contrast, little is known about the
development of the endocardial lineage that gives rise to cardiac valves and
septa. We have used a novel in vitro model to identify the molecular hierarchy of
endocardial differentiation and the role of transcription factor GATA5 in
endocardial development. The results indicate that GATA5 is induced at an early
stage of endothelial-endocardial differentiation prior to expression of such
early endocardial markers as Tie2 and ErbB3. Inhibition of either GATA5
expression or NF-ATc activation, blocks terminal differentiation at a
pre-endocardial stage and GATA5 and NF-ATc synergistically activate endocardial
transcription. The data reveal that transcription factor GATA5 is required for
differentiation of cardiogenic precursors into endothelial endocardial cells.
This, in turn, suggests that the GATA5 pathway may be relevant to early stages of
valvuloseptal development, defects of which account for the majority of human
birth malformations.

PMID: 12163407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):27659-67. Epub 2002 May 14.

Physical interaction between GATA-5 and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha results 
in synergistic activation of the human lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter.

van Wering HM(1), Huibregtse IL, van der Zwan SM, de Bie MS, Dowling LN, Boudreau
F, Rings EH, Grand RJ, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

GATA-4, -5, and -6 zinc finger and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) 
homeodomain transcription factors are expressed in the intestinal epithelium and 
synergistically activate the promoter of intestinal genes. Here, we demonstrate
that GATA-5 and HNF-1alpha physically associate both in vivo and in vitro and
that this interaction is necessary for cooperative activation of the
lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter. Furthermore, physical association is
mediated by the C-terminal zinc finger of GATA factors and the homeodomain of
HNF-1alpha. Deletion of HNF-1alpha activation domains or interruption of
HNF-1-binding sites in the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter resulted in a
complete loss of cooperativity, whereas deletion of GATA-5 activation domains or 
interruption of GATA-binding sites resulted in a reduction, but not an
elimination, of cooperativity. We hypothesize that GATA/HNF-1alpha cooperativity 
is mediated by HNF-1alpha through its activation domains, which are oriented for 
high levels of activation through binding to DNA and physical association with
GATA factors. These data suggest a paradigm whereby intestine-specific gene
expression is regulated by unique interactions among tissue-restricted
transcription factors coexpressed in the intestine. Parallel mechanisms in other 
tissues as well as in Drosophila suggest that zinc finger/homeodomain
interactions are an efficient pathway of cooperative activation of gene
transcription that has been conserved throughout evolution.

PMID: 12011060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Pflugers Arch. 2002 Jan;443(3):362-9. Epub 2001 Oct 19.

Direct left ventricular wall stretch activates GATA4 binding in perfused rat
heart: involvement of autocrine/paracrine pathways.

Hautala N(1), Tenhunen O, Szokodi I, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter Oulu, 90014 University of
Oulu, Finland.

The signaling cascades that activate transcription factors during cardiac
hypertrophy are largely unknown. To evaluate the mechanisms for GATA4 and
activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation, isolated perfused rat hearts were exposed 
to elevated wall stretch by inflating a left ventricular balloon. Gel mobility
shift assays were used to analyze the transacting factors that interact with the 
GATA or the AP-1 motifs of the B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) promoter. Direct 
wall stretch for 30 min produced a twofold increase ( P<0.001) in left
ventricular BNP GATA4- but not GATA5- and GATA6-binding activity. In addition,
increased BNP AP-1-binding activity and the presence of c-fos were demonstrated
in wall-stretch-stimulated ventricles compared with unloaded ventricles. The
mixed endothelin-1 ETA/ETB receptor antagonist bosentan and the angiotensin II
(Ang II) type 1 (AT1) receptor antagonist CV-11974 completely inhibited the
wall-stretch-induced increase in left ventricular BNP GATA4 and AP-1 activity.
Infusions of ET-1 and Ang II in the absence of wall stretch also stimulated BNP
GATA4-binding activity ( P<0.01). These results show that ET-1 and Ang II are
required for the stimulation of GATA4 and AP-1 DNA-binding activity in response
to direct left ventricular wall stretch.

PMID: 11810204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Development. 2002 Jan;129(2):275-86.

Molecular integration of casanova in the Nodal signalling pathway controlling
endoderm formation.

Aoki TO(1), David NB, Minchiotti G, Saint-Etienne L, Dickmeis T, Persico GM,
Strähle U, Mourrain P, Rosa FM.

Author information: 
(1)U 368 INSERM, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46, rue d'Ulm, F-75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

Endoderm originates from a large endomesodermal field requiring Nodal signalling.
The mechanisms that ensure segregation of endoderm from mesoderm are not fully
understood. We first show that the timing and dose of Nodal activation are
crucial for endoderm formation and the endoderm versus mesoderm fate choice,
because sustained Nodal signalling is required to ensure endoderm formation but
transient signalling is sufficient for mesoderm formation. In zebrafish,
downstream of Nodal signals, three genes encoding transcription factors (faust,
bonnie and clyde and the recently identified gene casanova) are required for
endoderm formation and differentiation. However their positions within the
pathway are not completely established. In the present work, we show that
casanova is the earliest specification marker for endodermal cells and that its
expression requires bonnie and clyde. Furthermore, we have analysed the molecular
activities of casanova on endoderm formation and found that it can induce
endodermal markers and repress mesodermal markers during gastrulation, as well as
change the fate of marginal blastomeres to endoderm. Overexpression of casanova
also restores endoderm markers in the absence of Nodal signalling. In addition,
casanova efficiently restores later endodermal differentiation in these mutants, 
but this process requires, in addition, a partial activation of Nodal signalling.

PMID: 11807021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Dev Dyn. 2001 Dec;222(4):552-63.

Cardiac patterning and morphogenesis in zebrafish.

Yelon D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Department of Cell Biology, Skirball Institute
of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10016, USA. yelon@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Development of the embryonic vertebrate heart requires the precise coordination
of pattern formation and cell movement. Taking advantage of the availability of
zebrafish mutations that disrupt cardiogenesis, several groups have identified
key regulators of specific aspects of cardiac patterning and morphogenesis.
Several genes, including gata5, fgf8, bmp2b, one-eyed pinhead, and hand2, have
been shown to be relevant to the patterning events that regulate myocardial
differentiation. Studies of mutants with morphogenetic defects have indicated at 
least six genes that are essential for cardiac fusion and heart tube assembly,
including casanova, bonnie and clyde, gata5, one-eyed pinhead, hand2, miles
apart, and heart and soul. Furthermore, analysis of the jekyll gene has indicated
its important role during the morphogenesis of the atrioventricular valve.
Altogether, these data provide a substantial foundation for future investigations
of cardiac patterning, cardiac morphogenesis, and the relationship between these 
processes.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11748825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):267-79.

A distant upstream region of the rat multipartite Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger NCX1
gene promoter is sufficient to confer cardiac-specific expression.

Koban MU(1), Brugh SA, Riordon DR, Dellow KA, Yang HT, Tweedie D, Boheler KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College School of Medicine, London, UK.

The Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger (NCX) regulates intracellular calcium homeostasis. We 
report on an upstream region of the rat NCX1 multipartite promoter that is active
in cardiac myocytes. Although inactive in most non-cardiac cell lines, its
activity can be rescued by cotransfection with GATA-4 and -6, but not GATA-5
transcription factors. In transgenic mice and similar to endogenous NCX1 mRNA
expression, the upstream promoter region directs uniform beta-galactosidase
expression in cardiac myocytes from approximately 7.75dpc. In adult mouse hearts,
promoter activity is, however, significantly reduced and heterogeneous, except in
the conduction system (sinoatrial and atrioventricular node, atrioventricular
bundles). The upstream NCX1 promoter region thus directs appropriate spatial and 
temporal control of cardiac expression throughout development.

PMID: 11731239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;79(8):673-81.

Regulation of the ANF and BNP promoters by GATA factors: lessons learned for
cardiac transcription.

McBride K(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, QC, Canada.

The identification and molecular cloning of the cardiac transcription factors
GATA-4, -5, and -6 has greatly contributed to our understanding of how
tissue-specific transcription is achieved during cardiac growth and development. 
Through analysis of their interacting partners, it has also become apparent that 
a major mechanism underlying spatial and temporal specificity within the heart as
well as in the response to cardiogenic regulators is the combinatorial
interaction between cardiac-restricted and inducible transcription factors. The
cardiac GATA factors appear to be fundamental contributors to these regulatory
networks. Two of the first targets identified for the cardiac GATA factors were
the natriuretic peptide genes encoding atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP), the major heart secretory products that are also
accepted clinical markers of the diseased heart. Studies using the ANF and BNP
promoters as models of cardiac-specific transcription have unraveled the pivotal 
role that GATA proteins play in cardiac gene expression. We review the current
knowledge on the modulation of the natriuretic peptide promoters by GATA factors,
including examples of combinatorial interactions between GATA proteins and
diverse transcription factors.

PMID: 11558676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Development. 2001 Aug;128(15):2953-62.

Rho kinases play an obligatory role in vertebrate embryonic organogenesis.

Wei L(1), Roberts W, Wang L, Yamada M, Zhang S, Zhao Z, Rivkees SA, Schwartz RJ, 
Imanaka-Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Rho-associated kinases (Rho kinases), which are downstream effectors of RhoA
GTPase, regulate diverse cellular functions including actin cytoskeletal
organization. We have demonstrated that Rho kinases also direct the early stages 
of chick and mouse embryonic morphogenesis. We observed that Rho kinase
transcripts were enriched in cardiac mesoderm, lateral plate mesoderm and the
neural plate. Treatment of neurulating embryos with Y27632, a specific inhibitor 
of Rho kinases, blocked migration and fusion of the bilateral heart primordia,
formation of the brain and neural tube, caudalward movement of Hensen's node, and
establishment of normal left-right asymmetry. Moreover, Y27632 induced precocious
expression of cardiac alpha-actin, an early marker of cardiomyocyte
differentiation, coincident with the upregulated expression of serum response
factor and GATA4. In addition, specific antisense oligonucleotides significantly 
diminished Rho kinase mRNA levels and replicated many of the teratologies induced
by Y27632. Thus, our study reveals new biological functions for Rho kinases in
regulating major morphogenetic events during early chick and mouse development.

PMID: 11532918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Genes Dev. 2001 Jun 15;15(12):1493-505.

casanova encodes a novel Sox-related protein necessary and sufficient for early
endoderm formation in zebrafish.

Kikuchi Y(1), Agathon A, Alexander J, Thisse C, Waldron S, Yelon D, Thisse B,
Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143-0448, USA.

Early endoderm formation in zebrafish requires at least three loci that function 
downstream of Nodal signaling but upstream of the early endodermal marker sox17: 
bonnie and clyde (bon), faust (fau), and casanova (cas). cas mutants show the
most severe phenotype as they do not form any gut tissue and lack all sox17
expression. Activation of the Nodal signaling pathway or overexpression of Bon or
Fau/Gata5 fails to restore any sox17 expression in cas mutants, demonstrating
that cas plays a central role in endoderm formation. Here we show that cas
encodes a novel member of the Sox family of transcription factors. Initial cas
expression appears in the dorsal yolk syncytial layer (YSL) in the early
blastula, and is independent of Nodal signaling. In contrast, endodermal
expression of cas, which begins in the late blastula, is regulated by Nodal
signaling. Cas is a potent inducer of sox17 expression in wild-type embryos as
well as in bon and fau/gata5 mutants. Cas is also a potent inducer of sox17
expression in MZoep mutants, which cannot respond to Nodal signaling. In
addition, ectopic expression of cas in presumptive mesodermal cells leads to
their transfating into endoderm. Altogether, these data indicate that Cas is the 
principal transcriptional effector of Nodal signaling during zebrafish endoderm
formation.

PMCID: PMC312713
PMID: 11410530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jul;281(1):G69-84.

Differential activation of intestinal gene promoters: functional interactions
between GATA-5 and HNF-1 alpha.

Krasinski SD(1), Van Wering HM, Tannemaat MR, Grand RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of
Pediatrics, The Floating Hospital for Children, New England Medical Center, and
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The effects of GATA-4, -5, and -6, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1
alpha) and -beta, and Cdx-2 on the rat and human lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
(LPH) and human sucrase-isomaltase (SI) promoters were studied using transient
cotransfection assays in Caco-2 cells. GATA factors and HNF-1 alpha were strong
activators of the LPH promoters, whereas HNF-1 alpha and Cdx-2 were strong
activators of the SI promoter, although GATA factors were also necessary for
maximal activation of the SI gene. Cotransfection of GATA-5 and HNF-1 alpha
together resulted in a higher activation of all three promoters than the sum of
the activation by either factor alone, demonstrating functional cooperativity. In
the human LPH promoter, an intact HNF-1 binding site was required for functional 
synergy. This study is the first to demonstrate 1) differential activation of the
LPH and SI promoters by multiple transcription factors cotransfected singly and
in combination and 2) that GATA and HNF-1 transcription factors cooperatively
activate intestinal gene promoters. Synergistic activation is a mechanism by
which higher levels of tissue-specific expression might be attained by
overlapping expression of specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11408257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Biol. 2001 Jun 15;234(2):330-8.

Bmp2b and Oep promote early myocardial differentiation through their regulation
of gata5.

Reiter JF(1), Verkade H, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143-0448, USA.

Members of both the bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp) and EGF-CFC families have
been implicated in vertebrate myocardial development. Zebrafish swirl (swr)
encodes Bmp2b, a member of the Bmp family required for patterning the
dorsoventral axis. Zebrafish one-eyed pinhead (oep) encodes a maternally and
zygotically expressed member of the EGF-CFC family essential for Nodal signaling.
Both swr/bmp2b and oep mutants exhibit severe defects in myocardial development. 
swr/bmp2b mutants exhibit reduced or absent expression of nkx2.5, an early marker
of the myocardial precursors. Embryos lacking zygotic oep (Zoep mutants) display 
cardia bifida and, as we show here, also display reduced or absent nkx2.5
expression. Recently, we have demonstrated that the zinc finger transcription
factor Gata5 is an essential regulator of nkx2.5 expression. In this paper, we
investigate the relationships between bmp2b, oep, gata5, and nkx2.5. We show that
both swr/bmp2b and Zoep mutants exhibit defects in gata5 expression in the
myocardial precursors. Forced expression of gata5 in swr/bmp2b and Zoep mutants
restores robust nkx2.5 expression. Moreover, overexpression of gata5 in Zoep
mutants restores expression of cmlc1, a myocardial sarcomeric gene. These results
indicate that both Bmp2b and Oep regulate gata5 expression in the myocardial
precursors, and that Gata5 does not require Bmp2b or Oep to promote early
myocardial differentiation. We conclude that Bmp2b and Oep function at least
partly through Gata5 to regulate nkx2.5 expression and promote myocardial
differentiation. We integrate these and other data to propose a pathway of the
molecular events regulating early myocardial differentiation in zebrafish.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11397003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mech Dev. 2001 Feb;100(2):263-73.

Bone morphogenetic protein function is required for terminal differentiation of
the heart but not for early expression of cardiac marker genes.

Walters MJ(1), Wayman GA, Christian JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, School of Medicine, Portland 97201-3098, USA.

To examine potential roles for bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in
cardiogenesis, we used intracellular BMP inhibitors to disrupt this signaling
cascade in Xenopus embryos. BMP-deficient embryos showed endodermal defects, a
reduction in cardiac muscle-specific gene expression, a decrease in the number of
cardiomyocytes and cardia bifida. Early expression of markers of endodermal and
precardiac fate, however, was not perturbed. Heart defects were observed even
when BMP signal transduction was blocked only in cells that contribute primarily 
to endodermal, and not cardiac fates, suggesting a non-cell autonomous function. 
Our results suggest that BMPs are not required for expression of early
transcriptional regulators of cardiac fate but are essential for migration and/or
fusion of the heart primordia and cardiomyocyte differentiation.

PMID: 11165483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Circulation. 2001 Feb 6;103(5):730-5.

Pressure overload increases GATA4 binding activity via endothelin-1.

Hautala N(1), Tokola H, Luodonpää M, Puhakka J, Romppanen H, Vuolteenaho O,
Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Physiology, Biocenter Oulu,
University of Oulu, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The signaling cascades responsible for the activation of
transcription factors in the hypertrophic growth of cardiac myocytes during
hemodynamic overload are largely unknown. Several of the genes upregulated in the
hypertrophied heart, including B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene, are
controlled by the cardiac-restricted zinc finger transcription factor GATA4.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An in vivo model of intravenous administration of
arginine(8)-vasopressin (AVP) for up to 4 hours in conscious normotensive rats
was used to study the signaling mechanisms for GATA activation in response to
pressure overload. Gel mobility shift assays were used to analyze the
trans-acting factors that interact with the GATA motifs of the BNP promoter.
AVP-induced increase in mean arterial pressure was followed by a significant
increase in the BNP and c-fos mRNA levels in both the endocardial and epicardial 
layers of the left ventricle, whereas GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA levels remained
unchanged. Pressure overload within 15 to 60 minutes produced an increase in left
ventricular BNP GATA4 but not GATA5 and GATA6 binding activity, and at 30 minutes
a 2.2-fold increase (P:<0.001) in GATA4 binding was noted. The mixed endothelin-1
ET(A)/ET(B) receptor antagonist bosentan but not the angiotensin II type 1
receptor antagonist losartan completely inhibited the pressure overload-induced
increase in left ventricular BNP GATA4 binding activity. Bosentan alone had no
statistically significant effect on GATA4 binding activity of the left ventricle 
in conscious animals.
CONCLUSIONS: ET-1 is a signaling molecule that rapidly upregulates GATA4 DNA
binding activity in response to pressure overload in vivo.

PMID: 11156886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Development. 2001 Jan;128(2):167-80.

Maternal VegT is the initiator of a molecular network specifying endoderm in
Xenopus laevis.

Xanthos JB(1), Kofron M, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

During cleavage stages, maternal VegT mRNA and protein are localized to the
Xenopus embryo's vegetal region from which the endoderm will arise and where
several zygotic gene transcripts will be localized. Previous loss-of-function
experiments on this T-box transcription factor suggested a role for VegT in
Xenopus endoderm formation. Here, we test whether VegT is required to initiate
endoderm formation using a loss of function approach. We find that the endodermal
genes, Bix1, Bix3, Bix4, Milk (Bix2), Mix.1, Mix.2, Mixer, Xsox17 alpha, Gata4,
Gata5, Gata6 and endodermin, as well as the anterior endodermal genes Xhex and
cerberus, and the organizer specific gene, Xlim1, are downstream of maternal
VegT. We also find that the TGF beta s, Xnr1, Xnr2, Xnr4 and derrière rescue
expression of these genes, supporting the idea that cell interactions are
critical for proper endoderm formation. Additionally, inhibitory forms of Xnr2
and Derrière blocked the ability of VegT mRNA injection to rescue VegT-depleted
embryos. Furthermore, a subset of endodermal genes was rescued in VegT-depleted
vegetal masses by induction from an uninjected vegetal mass. Finally, we begin to
establish a gene hierarchy downstream of VegT by testing the ability of Mixer and
Gata5 to rescue the expression of other endodermal genes. These results identify 
VegT as the maternal regulator of endoderm initiation and illustrate the
complexity of zygotic pathways activated by VegT in the embryo's vegetal region.

PMID: 11124113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):G58-67.

GATA family transcription factors activate lactase gene promoter in intestinal
Caco-2 cells.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Santiago NA, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors regulate tissue-specific patterns of
gene expression during development. We have characterized the interaction between
GATA proteins and the lactase gene promoter. Nuclear protein bound to the lactase
gene GATA region cis element (-97 to -73) was analyzed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) and supershift assays with GATA antibodies. Lactase 
promoter activities were assayed in Caco-2 cells transfected with wild-type and
mutated luciferase promoter-reporter constructs and GATA-4/5/6 expression
constructs. EMSA with the GATA region probe yields a specific DNA-protein complex
that requires the GATA factor binding site WGATAR. The complex is recognized by
GATA-4- and GATA-6-specific antibodies. GATA-4/5/6 expression constructs are able
to activate transcription driven by the wild-type promoter, but not by a promoter
in which the GATA binding site is mutated, in Caco-2 and nonintestinal QT6 cells.
GATA factor binding to the lactase cis element correlates with functional
promoter activation. We conclude that each of the GATA family zinc finger
proteins expressed in the intestine, GATA-4, -5, and -6, can interact with the
lactase promoter GATA element and can function to activate the promoter in Caco-2
cells.

PMID: 11123198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Development. 2001 Jan;128(1):125-35.

Multiple roles for Gata5 in zebrafish endoderm formation.

Reiter JF(1), Kikuchi Y, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that gata5, a zinc-finger transcription factor
gene, is required for the development of the zebrafish gut tube. Here, we show
that gata5 mutants also display defects in the development of other endodermal
organs such as the liver, pancreas, thyroid and thymus. gata5 is expressed in the
endodermal progenitors from late blastula stages, suggesting that it functions
early during endoderm development. We indeed find that during gastrulation
stages, gata5 mutants form fewer endodermal cells than their wild-type siblings. 
In addition, the endodermal cells that form in gata5 mutants appear to express
lower than wild-type levels of endodermal genes such as sox17 and axial/foxA2.
Conversely, overexpression of gata5 leads to expanded endodermal gene expression.
These data indicate that Gata5 is involved both in the generation of endodermal
cells at late blastula stages and in the maintenance of endodermal sox17
expression during gastrulation. We have also analyzed the relationship of Gata5
to other factors involved in endoderm formation. Using complementary mutant and
overexpression analyses, we show that Gata5 regulates endoderm formation in
cooperation with the Mix-type transcription factor Bon, that Gata5 and Bon
function downstream of Nodal signaling, and that cas function is usually required
for the activity of Gata5 in endoderm formation. Finally, we show that fau/gata5,
bon and cas exhibit dominant genetic interactions providing additional support
that they function in the same pathway. Together, these data demonstrate that
Gata5 plays multiple roles in endoderm development in zebrafish, and position
Gata5 relative to other regulators of endoderm formation.

PMID: 11092818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):38949-52.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factors GATA-4, -5, and -6. Ubiquitously
expressed regulators of tissue-specific gene expression.

Molkentin JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. molkj0@chmcc.org

PMID: 11042222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4345-60.

A role for GATA5 in Xenopus endoderm specification.

Weber H(1), Symes CE, Walmsley ME, Rodaway AR, Patient RK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, The Randall Institute, King's College
London, London WC2B 5RL, UK.

The endoderm gives rise to the gut and tissues that develop as outgrowths of the 
gut tube, including the lungs, liver and pancreas. Here we show that GATA5, a
zinc-finger transcription factor, is expressed in the yolk-rich vegetal cells of 
Xenopus embryos from the early gastrula stage onwards, when these cells become
committed to form endoderm. At mid-gastrula stages, GATA5 is restricted to the
sub-blastoporal endoderm and is the first molecular marker for this subset of
endodermal cells so far identified. We show that GATA4 and GATA5 are potent
inducers of endodermal marker genes in animal cap assays, while other GATA
factors induce these genes only weakly, if at all. When injected into the dorsal 
marginal zone, GATA5 respecifies prospective mesoderm towards an endodermal fate,
thereby disrupting the convergence and extension movements normally undergone by 
the dorsal mesoderm. The resulting phenotype is very similar to those seen after 
injection of dominant negative versions of the FGF-receptor or the T-box
transcription factor, Xbra and can be rescued by eFGF. The ability of GATA5 to
respecify ectodermal and mesodermal cells towards endoderm suggests an important 
role for GATA5 in the formation of this germlayer. In animal cap assays, GATA5 is
induced by concentrations of activin above those known to induce dorsal mesoderm 
and heart, in an FGF-independent manner. These data indicate that the emerging
view for endodermal induction in general, namely that it is specified by high
levels of TGF-beta in the absence of FGF signalling, is specifically true for
sub-blastoporal endoderm.

PMID: 11003835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(20):7550-8.

Cardiac tissue enriched factors serum response factor and GATA-4 are mutual
coregulators.

Belaguli NS(1), Sepulveda JL, Nigam V, Charron F, Nemer M, Schwartz RJ.

Collaborators: Schwartz RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Combinatorial interaction among cardiac tissue-restricted enriched transcription 
factors may facilitate the expression of cardiac tissue-restricted genes. Here we
show that the MADS box factor serum response factor (SRF) cooperates with the
zinc finger protein GATA-4 to synergistically activate numerous myogenic and
nonmyogenic serum response element (SRE)-dependent promoters in CV1 fibroblasts. 
In the absence of GATA binding sites, synergistic activation depends on binding
of SRF to the proximal CArG box sequence in the cardiac and skeletal alpha-actin 
promoter. GATA-4's C-terminal activation domain is obligatory for synergistic
coactivation with SRF, and its N-terminal domain and first zinc finger are
inhibitory. SRF and GATA-4 physically associate both in vivo and in vitro through
their MADS box and the second zinc finger domains as determined by protein A
pullout assays and by in vivo one-hybrid transfection assays using Gal4 fusion
proteins. Other cardiovascular tissue-restricted GATA factors, such as GATA-5 and
GATA-6, were equivalent to GATA-4 in coactivating SRE-dependent targets. Thus,
interaction between the MADS box and C4 zinc finger proteins, a novel regulatory 
paradigm, mediates activation of SRF-dependent gene expression.

PMCID: PMC86307
PMID: 11003651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Carcinog. 2000 Jul;28(3):184-8.

Distinct expression of CDX2 and GATA4/5, development-related genes, in human
gastric cancer cell lines.

Bai Y(1), Akiyama Y, Nagasaki H, Yagi OK, Kikuchi Y, Saito N, Takeshita K, Iwai
T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

CDX2 is a tumor-suppressor homeobox gene involved in colon carcinogenesis, but
its role in gastric cancer is unknown. Although GATA4, -5 and, -6 transcription
factors have distinct functions in the regulation of gastrointestinal epithelial 
cell differentiation, there have been no reports regarding GATA4/5/6 alterations 
in gastrointestinal carcinomas. By using a semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay, we studied the expression of gut
development-related genes CDX2/1 and GATA4/5/6 in 11 human gastric cancer cell
lines. The expression of CDX2 appeared to progressively decrease with the
transition from well differentiated to poorly differentiated cancer cell lines.
CDX1 was below detectable levels in all cell lines. The expression of GATA4 and
GATA5 was undetectable in four and six cell lines, respectively, whereas the
majority of the cell lines expressed GATA6 abundantly. These results suggest that
CDX2 and GATA4/5 may be associated with the carcinogenesis of the stomach. Mol.
Carcinog. 28:184-188, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10942535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5256-60.

Abnormalities of the genitourinary tract in female mice lacking GATA5.

Molkentin JD(1), Tymitz KM, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors play important roles in cell 
fate specification, differentiation, and morphogenesis during mammalian
development. GATA5, the only one of the six vertebrate GATA factor genes not yet 
inactivated in mice, is expressed in a pattern that overlaps with but is distinct
from that of other GATA factor genes. During mouse embryogenesis, GATA5 is
expressed first in the developing heart and subsequently in the lung,
vasculature, and genitourinary system. To investigate the function of GATA5 in
vivo, we created mice homozygous for a GATA5 null allele. Homozygous mutants were
viable and fertile, but females exhibited pronounced genitourinary abnormalities 
that included vaginal and uterine defects and hypospadias. In contrast, the
genitourinary system was unaffected in male GATA5 mutants. These results reveal a
specific role of GATA5 in development of the female genitourinary system and
suggest that other GATA factors may have functions overlapping those of GATA5 in 
other tissues.

PMCID: PMC85974
PMID: 10866681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Biol. 2000 Jul 1;223(1):103-13.

Role for cGATA-5 in transcriptional regulation of the embryonic chicken
pepsinogen gene by epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the developing chicken 
stomach.

Sakamoto N(1), Fukuda K, Watanuki K, Sakai D, Komano T, Scotting PJ, Yasugi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The Graduate School of Science, Tokyo
Metropolitan University, 1-1 Minamiohsawa, Hachioji, Tokyo, 192-0397, Japan.

A gene encoding embryonic chicken pepsinogen (ECPg), a zymogen of the digestive
enzyme pepsin, is expressed specifically in epithelial cells of glands of
embryonic stage proventriculus (glandular stomach) under the influence of
mesenchyme. We found four GATA and one Sox binding motifs in 1.1 kb of the 5'
flanking region of the ECPg gene which are essential to the organ-specific
expression of the gene. The expression of cGATA-5 and cSox2 in the proventriculus
from day 6 to day 12 of incubation was therefore analyzed. cGATA-5 was more
strongly expressed in glandular epithelial cells than in luminal epithelial
cells, while cSox2 gene expression was weaker in glandular epithelial cells.
Using heterologous recombination explants we also discovered that the expression 
of cGATA-5 and cSox2 in epithelial cells was affected by mesenchyme when the
latter induced ECPg gene expression in epithelial cells. Introduction of
expression constructs into epithelial cells by electroporation demonstrated that 
cGATA-5 upregulated transcription of a reporter luciferase gene via a cis element
in the 5' flanking region of the ECPg gene. The gel mobility shift assay revealed
that the cGATA-5 protein specifically binds to the GATA binding sites. cSox2
downregulated the activity of luciferase but it was not through the Sox binding
motif. These results suggest that cGATA-5 positively regulates transcription of
the ECPg gene and is involved in spatial regulation of the pepsinogen gene during
development.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10864464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Dev Biol. 2000 Mar 1;219(1):59-70.

Anterior endoderm is sufficient to rescue foregut apoptosis and heart tube
morphogenesis in an embryo lacking retinoic acid.

Ghatpande S(1), Ghatpande A, Zile M, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

The vitamin A deficient (VAD) quail embryo lacks active retinoids, fails to
express normally GATA-4, and develops a nonlooping heart tube morphogenetic
defect that is a model for congenital cardiomyopathy. VAD quail embryos, or chick
embryos depleted specifically for GATA factors, show in addition abnormal foregut
development, characterized by apoptosis of the endoderm cells associated with
presumptive myocardium during the process of heart tube formation. Exogenous
retinoic acid or transplantation of normal chick embryo anterior endoderm is
sufficient to rescue apoptosis as well as GATA-4 expression and results in normal
development and heart tube morphogenesis. Normal posterior endoderm also contains
retinoids but is unable to rescue the VAD defect. Our results indicate that a
retinoid-dependent transcriptional program, mediated at least in part by GATA
factors, is critical in presumptive foregut endoderm for normal heart tube
morphogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10677255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):259-70.

BMP2 is required for early heart development during a distinct time period.

Schlange T(1), Andrée B, Arnold HH, Brand T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Technical University of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106,
Braunschweig, Germany.

BMP2, like its Drosophila homologue dpp, is an important signaling molecule for
specification of cardiogenic mesoderm in vertebrates. Here, we analyzed the
time-course of BMP2-requirement for early heart formation in whole chick embryos 
and in explants of antero-lateral plate mesoderm. Addition of Noggin to explants 
isolated at stage 4 and cultured for 24 h resulted in loss of NKX2.5, GATA4,
eHAND, Mef2A and vMHC expression. At stages 5-8 the individual genes showed
differential sensitivity to Noggin addition. While expression of eHAND, NKX2.5
and Mef2A was clearly reduced by Noggin vMHC was only marginally affected. In
contrast, GATA4 expression was enhanced after Noggin treatment. The developmental
period during which cardiac mesoderm required the presence of BMP signaling in
vivo was assessed by implantation of Noggin expressing cells into stage 4-8
embryos which were then cultured until stage 10-11. Complete loss of NKX2.5 and
eHAND expression was observed in embryos implanted at stages 4-6, and expression 
was still suppressed in stages 7 and 8 implanted embryos. GATA4 expression was
also blocked by Noggin at stage 4, however increased at stages 5, 6 and 7.
Explants of central mesendoderm, that normally do not form heart tissue were
employed to study the time-course of BMP2-induced cardiac gene expression. The
induction of cardiac lineage markers in central mesendoderm of stage 5 embryos
was distinct for different genes. While GATA4, -5, -6 and MEF2A were induced to
maximal levels within 6 h after BMP2 addition, eHAND and dHAND required 12 h to
reach maximum levels of expression. NKX2.5 was induced by 6 h and accumulated
over 48 h. vMHC and titin were induced at significant levels only after 48 h of
BMP2 addition. These results indicate that cardiac marker genes display distinct 
expression kinetics after BMP2 addition and differential response to Noggin
treatment suggesting complex regulation of myocardial gene expression in the
early tubular heart.

PMID: 10704850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Dev Biol. 2000 Jan 1;217(1):62-76.

Modular regulation of cGATA-5 gene expression in the developing heart and gut.

MacNeill C(1), French R, Evans T, Wessels A, Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol 2000 Jul 15;223(2):463.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2000 Oct 19;:OD-01-004.

The evolutionarily conserved GATA-5 transcription factor is an early and
persistent marker of heart and gut development in diverse vertebrate species. To 
search for control regions that might regulate the chicken GATA-5 (cGATA-5) gene,
we assayed a set of cGATA-5/lacZ constructs in transgenic mice and found evidence
for two functionally conserved control regions that regulate different facets of 
cGATA-5 gene expression. The more distal control region is activated in embryonic
endoderm at the head-fold stage, whereas the other control region contains a
regulatory module that is activated in a restricted region of endoderm following 
closure of the gut tube. Remarkably, the latter control region also contains a
complex regulatory module that is activated in the cardiac crescent at the
head-fold stage and subsequently functions in several mesodermal components of
the developing heart, including the outer (epicardial) layer. We discuss these
results in terms of possible contributions of epicardial-derived cells to the
formation of heart valves, conduction tissue, and compact myocardium. These
transgenes thus reveal, and provide a means to further analyze, transcriptional
programs for several facets of heart morphogenesis and gut development.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10625536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 1;216(1):57-71.

A role for GATA-4/5/6 in the regulation of Nkx2.5 expression with implications
for patterning of the precardiac field.

Jiang Y(1), Drysdale TA, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

Interactions between the key regulatory genes of the cardiogenic pathway,
including those from the GATA and Nkx2 transcription factor families, are not
well defined. Treating neurula-stage Xenopus embryos with retinoic acid (RA)
causes a specific block in cardiomyocyte development that correlates with a
progressive reduction in the region of the presumptive heart-forming region
expressing Nkx2.5. In contrast, RA does not block expression of the GATA-4/5/6
genes, which are transcribed normally in an overlapping pattern with Nkx2.5
throughout cardiogenesis. Instead, GATA-4/5/6 transcription levels are increased,
including an expansion of the expression domain corresponding to lateral plate
mesoderm that is part of the early heart field, but that normally is
progressively restricted in its ability to contribute to the myocardium.
GATA-dependent regulatory sequences of the Nkx2.5 gene that implicate GATA-4/5/6 
as upstream positive regulators were described recently. However, our experiments
also indicate that GATA factors might normally antagonize transcription of
Nkx2.5. To test this hypothesis we generated a dominant negative isoform of
GATA-4 (SRG4) capable of inhibiting transcription of GATA-dependent target genes.
Ectopic expression of SRG4 results in a transient expansion of the Nkx2.5
transcript pattern, indicating that a normal function of GATA factors is to limit
the boundary of the Nkx2.5 expression domain to the most anterior ventral region 
of the heart field. Regulatory mechanisms altered by excess RA must function
normally to limit GATA-4/5/6 expression levels, to define the region of Nkx2.5
expression and regulate myocardial differentiation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10588863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Genes Dev. 1999 Nov 15;13(22):2983-95.

Gata5 is required for the development of the heart and endoderm in zebrafish.

Reiter JF(1), Alexander J, Rodaway A, Yelon D, Patient R, Holder N, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Human Genetics and
Developmental Biology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California 94143-0448 USA.

The mechanisms regulating vertebrate heart and endoderm development have recently
become the focus of intense study. Here we present evidence from both loss- and
gain-of-function experiments that the zinc finger transcription factor Gata5 is
an essential regulator of multiple aspects of heart and endoderm development. We 
demonstrate that zebrafish Gata5 is encoded by the faust locus. Analysis of faust
mutants indicates that early in embryogenesis Gata5 is required for the
production of normal numbers of developing myocardial precursors and the
expression of normal levels of several myocardial genes including nkx2.5. Later, 
Gata5 is necessary for the elaboration of ventricular tissue. We further
demonstrate that Gata5 is required for the migration of the cardiac primordia to 
the embryonic midline and for endodermal morphogenesis. Significantly,
overexpression of gata5 induces the ectopic expression of several myocardial
genes including nkx2.5 and can produce ectopic foci of beating myocardial tissue.
Together, these results implicate zebrafish Gata5 in controlling the growth,
morphogenesis, and differentiation of the heart and endoderm and indicate that
Gata5 regulates the expression of the early myocardial gene nkx2.5.

PMCID: PMC317161
PMID: 10580005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 26;274(48):34096-102.

p300 protein as a coactivator of GATA-5 in the transcription of
cardiac-restricted atrial natriuretic factor gene.

Kakita T(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Kaburagi S, Wada H, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Kawara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

A cellular target of adenovirus E1A oncoprotein, p300 is a transcriptional
coactivator and a negative regulator of cellular proliferation. A previous study 
suggests that the p300 family is also involved in cell type-specific
transcription in cardiac myocytes. However, nothing is known about which cardiac 
transcription factor(s) interact with and transactivate through these proteins.
The transcription factors GATA-4/5/6 have been implicated as key regulators of
cardiogenesis, and they participate in the transcription of many cardiac-specific
genes. Here we show that E1A represses the GATA-5-dependent transactivation of a 
promoter derived from the cardiac-restricted atrial natriuretic factor gene. This
repression is correlated with the interaction of E1A with p300, indicating that
p300 participates in GATA-5-dependent transactivation. E1A markedly
down-regulates endogenous atrial natriuretic factor expression, as well as
disrupts the interaction between p300 and GATA-5. A small fragment of p300
containing the carboxyl-terminal cysteine/histidine-rich domain, sufficient to
interact with GATA-5, prevents transcriptional activation by GATA-5 as a
dominant-negative mutant. Consistent with its role as a coactivator, p300
markedly potentiates GATA-5-activated transcription. These results implicate p300
as an important component of myocardial cell differentiation and provide an
insight into the relationship between mechanisms that mediate cell type-specific 
transcription and cell cycle regulation during cardiogenesis.

PMID: 10567378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Dev Biol. 1999 Nov 15;215(2):343-57.

casanova plays an early and essential role in endoderm formation in zebrafish.

Alexander J(1), Rothenberg M, Henry GL, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Developmental Biology and Human Genetics, Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0448, USA.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate endoderm development in
vertebrates have only recently begun to be explored. Here we show that the
zebrafish locus casanova plays an early and essential role in this process.
casanova mutants lack a gut tube and do not express any molecular markers of
endoderm differentiation. The early endodermal expression of genes such as axial,
gata5, and fkd2 does not initiate in casanova mutants, indicating that the
endoderm is defective from the onset of gastrulation. Mosaic analysis
demonstrates that casanova functions cell autonomously within the endodermal
progenitors. We also report the isolation of a zebrafish homologue of Mixer, a
gene important for early endoderm formation in Xenopus. casanova does not encode 
zebrafish Mixer, and mixer expression is normal in casanova mutants, indicating
that casanova acts downstream of, or parallel to, mixer to promote endoderm
formation. We further find that the forerunner cells, a specialized group of
noninvoluting dorsal mesendodermal cells, do not form in casanova mutants.
Studies of casanova mutants do not support an important role for the forerunner
cells in either dorsal axis or tail development, as has been previously proposed.
In addition, although different populations of mesodermal precursors are
generated normally in casanova mutants, morphogenetic defects in the heart,
vasculature, blood, and kidney are apparent, suggesting a possible role for the
endoderm in morphogenesis of these organs.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10545242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mamm Genome. 1999 Oct;10(10):993-9.

Functional analysis and chromosomal mapping of Gata5, a gene encoding a zinc
finger DNA-binding protein.

Nemer G(1), Qureshi ST, Malo D, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada
H2W 1R7.

The GATA family of zinc finger proteins are transcriptional regulators with
critical functions in lineage differentiation and embryonic development. Based on
structural and expression pattern comparisons, the GATA proteins have been
subdivided into two groups. The first subgroup consists of GATA-1, -2, and -3,
which are all highly expressed in the hematopoietic system, whereas GATA-4, -5,
and -6 are present essentially in the heart and gut. We have isolated and
functionally characterized the rat GATA-5 cDNA, which encodes a 45-kDa protein
with 71%, 73%, and 97% homology to its amphibian, avian, and murine homologs,
respectively. Northern blot analysis showed that rat GATA-5 is expressed in a
dynamic pattern during embryonic and postnatal development. In the midgestation
embryo, GATA-5 transcripts are most abundant in the heart and decrease
dramatically in the postnatal heart; in contrast, GATA-5 expression is
upregulated in the lung and gut during postnatal development. Functional studies 
with recombinant GATA-4, -5, and -6 proteins show that GATA-5 has preferential
affinity for a subset of GATA elements found on cardiac promoters and
differentially activate cardiac gene transcription. Structure-function analysis
revealed the presence of an activation domain within the carboxy terminal region 
of GATA-5 that is essential for transcriptional regulation of target promoters.
Linkage analysis localized Gata5 to distal mouse Chromosome (Chr) 2 in a
conserved linkage group with genes localized to rat Chr 3q43 and human Chr
20q13.2-q13.3. The results suggest that GATA-5 may have specific downstream
targets and that GATA-4, -5, and -6 can only partially substitute for each other 
in cardiogenesis. Thus, Gata5 probably plays a specialized evolutionary conserved
role in cardiac development.

PMID: 10501969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Z Gastroenterol. 1999 May;37(5):463-5.

[Different functions of transcription factors GATA-4, -5 and -6 in regulation of 
intestinal epithelial differentiation].

[Article in German]

Mühlhöfer A(1), Gross M, Zoller WG.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Poliklinik, Klinikum Innenstadt der LMU München.

PMID: 10413848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3067-78.

Induction of the mesendoderm in the zebrafish germ ring by yolk cell-derived
TGF-beta family signals and discrimination of mesoderm and endoderm by FGF.

Rodaway A(1), Takeda H, Koshida S, Broadbent J, Price B, Smith JC, Patient R,
Holder N.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, King's College
London, London, WC2B 5RL, UK. roger.patient@kcl.ac.uk

The endoderm forms the gut and associated organs, and develops from a layer of
cells which emerges during gastrula stages in the vertebrate embryo. In
comparison to mesoderm and ectoderm, little is known about the signals which
induce the endoderm. The origin of the endoderm is intimately linked with that of
mesoderm, both by their position in the embryo, and by the molecules that can
induce them. We characterised a gene, zebrafish gata5, which is expressed in the 
endoderm from blastula stages and show that its transcription is induced by
signals originating from the yolk cell. These signals also induce the
mesoderm-expressed transcription factor no tail (ntl), whose initial expression
coincides with gata5 in the cells closest to the blastoderm margin, then spreads 
to encompass the germ ring. We have characterised the induction of these genes
and show that ectopic expression of activin induces gata5 and ntl in a pattern
which mimics the endogenous expression, while expression of a dominant negative
activin receptor abolishes ntl and gata5 expression. Injection of RNA encoding a 
constitutively active activin receptor leads to ectopic expression of gata5 and
ntl. gata5 is activated cell-autonomously, whereas ntl is induced in cells
distant from those which have received the RNA, showing that although expression 
of both genes is induced by a TGF-beta signal, expression of ntl then spreads by 
a relay mechanism. Expression of a fibroblast growth factor (eFGF) or a dominant 
negatively acting FGF receptor shows that ntl but not gata5 is regulated by FGF
signalling, implying that this may be the relay signal leading to the spread of
ntl expression. In embryos lacking both squint and cyclops, members of the nodal 
group of TGF-beta related molecules, gata5 expression in the blastoderm is
abolished, making these factors primary candidates for the endogenous TGF-beta
signal inducing gata5.

PMID: 10375499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Feb;10(1):85-91.

GATA transcription factors and cardiac development.

Charron F(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Laboratoire de développement et 
différenciation cardiaques, Québec, Canada.

Three members of the GATA family of transcription factors, GATA-4, -5, and -6,
are expressed in the developing heart. One family member, GATA-5, is restricted
to the endocardium while the other two, GATA-4 and -6, are present in the
myocardium where they apparently fulfil distinct functions. The mechanisms
underlying GATA factor specificity are not fully understood but may involve
interaction with other tissue-restricted or ubiquitous co-factors. Thus,
combinatorial interaction among GATA factors or between GATA factors and other
co-factors may differentially control various stages of cardiogenesis.

PMID: 10355032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12811-8.

GATA-5 is involved in leukemia inhibitory factor-responsive transcription of the 
beta-myosin heavy chain gene in cardiac myocytes.

Morimoto T(1), Hasegawa K, Kaburagi S, Kakita T, Masutani H, Kitsis RN, Matsumori
A, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Institute 
for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Leukemia inhibitory factor is a member of a family of structurally related
cytokines sharing the receptor component gp130. Activation of gp130 by leukemia
inhibitory factor is sufficient to induce myocardial cell hypertrophy accompanied
by specific changes in the pattern of gene expression. However, the molecular
mechanisms that link gp130 activation to these changes have not been clarified.
The present study investigated the transcriptional pathways by which leukemia
inhibitory factor activates beta-myosin heavy chain expression during myocardial 
cell hypertrophy. Mutation of the GATA motif in the beta-myosin heavy chain
promoter totally abolished leukemia inhibitory factor-responsive transcription
without changing basal transcriptional activity. In contrast, endothelin-1
responsiveness was unaffected by the GATA mutation. Among members of the cardiac 
GATA transcription factor subfamily (GATA-4, -5, and -6), GATA-5 was the sole and
potent transactivator for the beta-myosin heavy chain promoter. This
transactivation was dependent on sequence-specific binding of GATA-5 to the
beta-myosin heavy chain GATA element. Cardiac nuclear factors that bind to to the
beta-myosin heavy chain GATA element were induced by leukemia inhibitory factor
stimulation. Last, leukemia inhibitory factor stimulation markedly increased
transcripts of cardiac GATA-5, the expression of which is normally restricted to 
the early embryo. Thus, GATA-5 may be involved in gp130 signaling in cardiac
myocytes.

PMID: 10212267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):2658-64.

GATA-6 activates transcription of thyroid transcription factor-1.

Shaw-White JR(1), Bruno MD, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is expressed in respiratory epithelial
cells, where it regulates the transcription of target genes expressed in a
cell-selective manner. GATA-5 and -6, members of the zinc finger family of
transcription factors, are also expressed in various cell types within in the
developing lung. In the present work, GATA-6 mRNA was detected in adult mouse
lung, purified mouse type II epithelial cells, and differentiated mouse pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cells (MLE-15 cells), being co-expressed with TTF-1 mRNA. In order
to test whether GATA factors regulated TTF-1 gene transcription, GATA-5 and -6
expression vectors were co-transfected with TTF-1 luciferase expression vector.
GATA-6, but not GATA-5, markedly activated TTF-1 gene transcription in HeLa
cells. EMSA and supershift analysis with GATA-6 antiserum demonstrated that
GATA-6 in MLE-15 cell nuclear extracts bound to an element located 96-101 base
pairs from major start of TTF-1 gene transcription. Site directed mutagenesis of 
the GATA element in the TTF-1 promoter region inhibited transactivation by GATA-6
in HeLa cells. GATA-6 is co-expressed with TTF-1 in the respiratory epithelium in
vivo and respiratory epithelial cells in vitro. GATA-6 strongly enhanced activity
of the human TTF-1 gene promoter in vitro. These findings support the concept
that GATA-6 may play an important role in lung cell differentiation and gene
expression, at least in part by altering the expression of TTF-1 and its
potential targets.

PMID: 9915795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Genet. 1998;22(3):263-77.

Common role for each of the cGATA-4/5/6 genes in the regulation of cardiac
morphogenesis.

Jiang Y(1), Tarzami S, Burch JB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

The GATA-4/5/6 genes encode transcription factors implicated previously in the
regulation of cardiac-specific differentiation programs. However, recent analyses
of mouse GATA-4 null mutations found evidence for function in endoderm
development (in vitro) and embryonic morphogenesis (in vivo). Whether each of the
three cardiac-associated GATA factors function within distinct or common
developmental programs was previously untested; past studies defined specific and
distinct roles for each of the GATA-1/2/3 genes in embryonic hematopoiesis. In
this study, we compare the transcript patterns of cGATA-4/5/6 during chick
embryogenesis. Each of the three GATA factors is expressed in a similar pattern
within gastrulating cells of the primitive streak, prior to determination of the 
cardiomyocyte progenitors, and later within the lateral plate mesoderm and
associated endoderm layer. The patterns overlap but extend beyond the presumptive
cardiomyocyte population expressing cNkx-2.5. Later in development, cGATA-4/5/6
are all transcribed throughout the differentiating heart, in similar but not
identical patterns, within the endocardium, myocardium, and great vessels. In
order to test the function of GATA factors during chick cardiogenesis, embryos
were cultured in vitro in the presence of antisense oligomers designed to deplete
specifically transcripts encoding cGATA-4/5/6, beginning around stage 7. When
oligomers are used to target transcripts for all three genes, a high percentage
of the embryos develop abnormal hearts related to the failure to form a normal
primitive heart tube. In the most severe phenotype, cardiac bifida results in two
bilateral beating hearts. In some embryos, the paired heart primordia undergo
partial fusion but fail to form a single looping heart tube. In all cases,
cellular differentiation is not obviously affected, as the abnormal hearts form
beating tissue. Depletion of transcripts encoding any single GATA factor, or any 
combination of two GATA factors, does not affect development. The partial
depletion of all three genes in chick results in a remarkably similar phenotype
compared to the null GATA-4 mutation in mouse. Therefore, in the chick, each of
the GATA-4/5/6 genes functions in a common pathway, at the time of cardiac
crescent formation, for regulating early embryonic cardiac morphogenesis,
apparently associated with embryonic folding or the migration of primordia to
form a primitive tube.

PMID: 9621433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2901-11.

Distinct functions are implicated for the GATA-4, -5, and -6 transcription
factors in the regulation of intestine epithelial cell differentiation.

Gao X(1), Sedgwick T, Shi YB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Based on conserved expression patterns, three members of the GATA family of
transcriptional regulatory proteins, GATA-4, -5, and -6, are thought to be
involved in the regulation of cardiogenesis and gut development. Functions for
these factors are known in the heart, but relatively little is understood
regarding their possible roles in the regulation of gut-specific gene expression.
In this study, we analyze the expression and function of GATA-4, -5, and -6 using
three separate but complementary vertebrate systems, and the results support a
function for these proteins in regulating the terminal-differentiation program of
intestinal epithelial cells. We show that xGATA-4, -5, and -6 can stimulate
directly activity of the promoter for the intestinal fatty acid-binding protein
(xIFABP) gene, which is a marker for differentiated enterocytes. This is the
first direct demonstration of a target for GATA factors in the vertebrate
intestinal epithelium. Transactivation by xGATA-4, -5, and -6 is mediated at
least in part by a defined proximal IFABP promoter element. The expression
patterns for cGATA-4, -5, and -6 are markedly distinct along the proximal-distal 
villus axis. Transcript levels for cGATA-4 increase along the axis toward the
villus tip; likewise, cGATA-5 transcripts are largely restricted to the distal
tip containing differentiated cells. In contrast, the pattern of cGATA-6
transcripts is complementary to cGATA-5, with highest levels detected in the
region of proliferating progenitor cells. Undifferentiated and proliferating
human HT-29 cells express hGATA-6 but not hGATA-4 or hGATA-5. Upon stimulation to
differentiate, the transcript levels for hGATA-5 increase, and this occurs prior 
to increased transcription of the terminal differentiation marker intestinal
alkaline phosphatase. At the same time, hGATA-6 steady-state transcript levels
decline appreciably. All of the data are consistent with evolutionarily conserved
but distinct roles for these factors in regulating the differentiation program of
intestinal epithelium. Based on this data, we suggest that GATA-6 might function 
primarily within the proliferating progenitor population, while GATA-4 and GATA-5
function during differentiation to activate terminal-differentiation genes
including IFABP.

PMCID: PMC110669
PMID: 9566909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 15;11(8):1061-72.

Requirement of the transcription factor GATA4 for heart tube formation and
ventral morphogenesis.

Molkentin JD(1), Lin Q, Duncan SA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, 75235-9148, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 has been implicated in heart
development based on its early expression in precardiogenic splanchnic mesoderm
and its ability to activate the expression of a number of cardiac-specific genes.
To determine the role of GATA4 in embryogenesis, we generated mice homozygous for
a GATA4 null allele. Homozygous GATA4 null mice arrested in development between
E7.0 and E9.5 because of severe developmental abnormalities. Mutant embryos most 
notably lacked a primitive heart tube and foregut and developed partially outside
the yolk sac. In the mutants, the two bilaterally symmetric promyocardial
primordia failed to migrate ventrally but instead remained lateral and generated 
two independent heart tubes that contained differentiated cardiomyocytes. We show
that these deformities resulted from a general loss in lateral to ventral folding
throughout the embryo. GATA4 is most highly expressed within the precardiogenic
splanchnic mesoderm at the posterior lip of the anterior intestinal portal,
corresponding to the region of the embryo that undergoes ventral fusion. We
propose that GATA4 is required for the migration or folding morphogenesis of the 
precardiogenic splanchnic mesodermal cells at the level of the AIP.

PMID: 9136933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8515-24.

GATA-4 activates transcription via two novel domains that are conserved within
the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily.

Morrisey EE(1), Ip HS, Tang Z, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

GATA-4 is one of the earliest developmental markers of the precardiac mesoderm,
heart, and gut and has been shown to activate regulatory elements controlling
transcription of genes encoding cardiac-specific proteins. To elucidate the
molecular mechanisms underlying the transcriptional activity of the GATA-4
protein, structure-function analyses were performed. These analyses revealed that
the C-terminal zinc finger and adjacent basic domain of GATA-4 is bifunctional,
modulating both DNA-binding and nuclear localization activities. The N terminus
of the protein encodes two independent transcriptional Activation Domains (amino 
acids 1-74 and amino acids 130-177). Amino acid residues were identified within
each domain that are required for transcriptional activation. Finally, we have
shown that regions of Xenopus GATA-5 and -6 corresponding to Activation Domains I
and II, respectively, function as potent transcriptional activators. The
identification and functional characterization of two evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional Activation Domains within the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily suggests that 
each of these domains modulates critical functions in the transcriptional
regulatory program(s) encoded by GATA-4, -5, and -6 during vertebrate
development. As such these data provide novel insights into the molecular
mechanisms that control development of the heart.

PMID: 9079680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8396-401.

Transcripts for functionally distinct isoforms of chicken GATA-5 are
differentially expressed from alternative first exons.

MacNeill C(1), Ayres B, Laverriere AC, Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Our analysis of cDNA and genomic clones unexpectedly revealed that the chicken
gata-5 gene is differentially expressed from alternative first exons. Moreover,
we show that the respective transcripts are differentially processed to yield
mRNAs for two distinct isoforms of GATA-5. The major isoform, which we described 
previously, has two CXNCX17CNXC zinc fingers typical of a vertebrate GATA factor.
The minor isoform, on the other hand, has only one such zinc finger. We show that
this novel isoform localizes within the nuclei of transfected cells and can bind 
to a consensus GATA site. This truncated isoform of GATA-5 is compromised in its 
ability to transactivate a simple target gene, however, and thus is functionally 
distinct from the major isoform of GATA-5.

PMID: 9079664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Dev Biol. 1997 Mar 1;183(1):21-36.

GATA-5: a transcriptional activator expressed in a novel temporally and
spatially-restricted pattern during embryonic development.

Morrisey EE(1), Ip HS, Tang Z, Lu MM, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Members of the GATA family of zinc finger transcription factors regulate critical
steps of cellular differentiation during vertebrate development. In the studies
described in this report, we have isolated and functionally characterized the
murine GATA-5 cDNA and protein and defined the temporal and spatial pattern of
GATA-5 gene expression during mammalian development. The amino terminus of the
mouse GATA-5 protein shares high level amino acid sequence identity with the
murine GATA-4 and -6 proteins, but not with other members of the GATA family.
GATA-5 binds to the functionally important CEF-1 nuclear protein binding site in 
the cardiac-specific slow/cardiac troponin C (cTnC) transcriptional enhancer and 
overexpression of GATA-5 transactivates the cTnC enhancer in noncardiac muscle
cell lines. During embryonic and postnatal development, the pattern of GATA-5
gene expression differs significantly from that of other GATA family members. In 
the primitive streak embryo, GATA-5 mRNA is detectable in the precardiac
mesoderm. Within the embryonic heart, the GATA-5 gene is expressed within the
atrial and ventricular chambers (ED 9.5), becomes restricted to the atrial
endocardium (ED 12.5), and is subsequently not expressed in the heart during late
fetal and postnatal development. Moreover, coincident with the earliest steps in 
lung development, only the GATA-5 gene is expressed within the pulmonary
mesenchyme. Finally, the GATA-5 gene is expressed in tissue-restricted subsets of
smooth muscle cells (SMCs), including bronchial SMCs and SMCs in the bladder
wall. These data are consistent with a model in which GATA-5 performs a unique
temporally and spatially restricted function in the embryonic heart and lung.
Moreover, these data suggest that GATA-5 may play an important role in the
transcriptional program(s) that underlies smooth muscle cell diversity.

PMID: 9119112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Biol. 1996 Mar 15;174(2):258-70.

The Xenopus GATA-4/5/6 genes are associated with cardiac specification and can
regulate cardiac-specific transcription during embryogenesis.

Jiang Y(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. tevans@aecom.yu.edu

The GATA family of nuclear factors has been implicated in the regulation of cell 
type-specific transcription. We report the isolation of the Xenopus GATA-4 and
GATA-6 cDNA clones and characterize the expression patterns of the xGATA-4/5/6
genes. By comparing the sequence of the cDNAs with those previously reported from
chick and mammalian sources, we conclude that each is conserved across vertebrate
evolution as a distinct gene product. Each gene is expressed in differentiated
adult heart and gut, but maintains distinct transcript patterns in various other 
adult tissues. During embryogenesis, each gene displays a similar overlapping
distribution of transcripts localized throughout the developing cardiogenic
region. The xGATA-4 gene can be detected in dorsal cardiac progenitor rudiments
prior to migration. Axis disruption experiments were used to demonstrate that
transcription of these genes is intimately associated with the specification of
cardiac progenitors. Ectopic expression of each gene is specifically capable of
activating during embryogenesis the transcription of the cardiac genes encoding
actin and myosin heavy chain alpha. The data are consistent with a primary role
for the GATA-4/5/6 genes in regulating heart development.

PMID: 8631498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):9-11.

Gotta have GATA.

Simon MC.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):40-4.

PMID: 7550322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 16;269(37):23177-84.

GATA-4/5/6, a subfamily of three transcription factors transcribed in developing 
heart and gut.

Laverriere AC(1), MacNeill C, Mueller C, Poelmann RE, Burch JB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.

We describe experiments which show that: 1) two previously identified members of 
the GATA family of transcription factors (both of which were originally called
GATA-4) correspond to chicken cDNAs for two distinct factors (which we now refer 
to as cGATA-4 and cGATA-5); 2) another new member of this family corresponds to a
third factor designated cGATA-6; 3) each of these mRNAs displays a differential
expression pattern. The cGATA-5 gene is initially transcribed in the cardiac
crescent prior to formation of the primordial heart tube. Following formation of 
the primitive heart, cGATA-5 transcripts are evident in both endocardium and
myocardium as well as in other lateral plate derivatives. The cGATA-5 gene is
also transcribed in the primitive embryonic gut and in late stage embryos is
sequentially up-regulated in distinct segments of gastrointestinal epithelia as
they undergo terminal differentiation. These studies thus provide novel insights 
into tissue-specific regulation by GATA-5, as well as into possibly overlapping
regulatory functions for these three family members.

PMID: 8083222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


