
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 8;7:10605. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10605.

Genome-wide association study identifies multiple susceptibility loci for
craniofacial microsomia.

Zhang YB(1,)(2), Hu J(2), Zhang J(2,)(3), Zhou X(2), Li X(4), Gu C(1), Liu T(2), 
Xie Y(2), Liu J(5), Gu M(1), Wang P(1), Wu T(1), Qian J(2), Wang Y(2), Dong X(6),
Yu J(1), Zhang Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences and Key Laboratory of Genome Science and
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China. (2)Department of Ear Reconstruction, Plastic Surgery Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100144, China. (3)Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University,
Greenville, North Carolina 27834, USA. (4)Department of Cardiology, Beijing
Anzhen Hospital of the Capital University of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100029,
China. (5)Beijing KPS biotechnology, Beijing 102206, China. (6)Department of
Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Craniofacial microsomia (CFM) is a rare congenital anomaly that involves immature
derivatives from the first and second pharyngeal arches. The genetic pathogenesis
of CFM is still unclear. Here we interrogate 0.9 million genetic variants in 939 
CFM cases and 2,012 controls from China. After genotyping of an additional 443
cases and 1,669 controls, we identify 8 significantly associated loci with the
most significant SNP rs13089920 (logistic regression P=2.15 × 10(-120)) and 5
suggestive loci. The above 13 associated loci, harboured by candidates of ROBO1, 
GATA3, GBX2, FGF3, NRP2, EDNRB, SHROOM3, SEMA7A, PLCD3, KLF12 and EPAS1, are
found to be enriched for genes involved in neural crest cell (NCC) development
and vasculogenesis. We then perform whole-genome sequencing on 21 samples from
the case cohort, and identify several novel loss-of-function mutations within the
associated loci. Our results provide new insights into genetic background of
craniofacial microsomia.

PMCID: PMC4748111
PMID: 26853712  [PubMed - in process]


2. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 15;411(2):294-300. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.034. Epub 2016
Jan 28.

The epigenetic modifier DNMT3A is necessary for proper otic placode formation.

Roellig D(1), Bronner ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. Electronic address: roellig@caltech.edu.
(2)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. Electronic address: mbronner@caltech.edu.

Cranial placodes are thickenings in the ectoderm that give rise to sensory organs
and peripheral ganglia of the vertebrate head. At gastrula and neurula stages,
placodal precursors are intermingled in the neural plate border with future
neural and neural crest cells. Here, we show that the epigenetic modifier, DNA
methyl transferase (DNMT) 3A, expressed in the neural plate border region,
influences development of the otic placode which will contribute to the ear.
DNMT3A is expressed in the presumptive otic region at gastrula through neurula
stages and later in the otic placode itself. Whereas neural plate border and
non-neural ectoderm markers Erni, Dlx5, Msx1 and Six1 are unaltered, DNMT3A loss 
of function leads to early reduction in the expression of the key otic placode
specifier genes Pax2 and Gbx2 and later otic markers Sox10 and Soho1. Reduction
of Gbx2 was first observed at HH7, well before loss of other otic markers. Later,
this translates to significant reduction in the size of the otic vesicle. Based
on these results, we propose that DNMT3A is important for enabling the activation
of Gbx2 expression, necessary for normal development of the inner ear.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4783191 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26826496  [PubMed - in process]


3. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 Dec;57(9):657-66. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12254. Epub 2015 Dec
22.

Pea3 determines the isthmus region at the downstream of Fgf8-Ras-ERK signaling
pathway.

Harada H(1), Omi M(1), Sato T(1), Nakamura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging & Cancer
and Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, 980-8575,
Miyagi, Japan.

It has been shown that strong Fgf8 signal activates Ras-ERK signaling pathway to 
determine metencephalon, which consists of rhombomere 1 (r1), where the
cerebellum differentiates, and isthmus (r0). The present study was undertaken to 
check if Ets type transcription factor Pea3 functions downstream of Ras-ERK
signaling to determine metencephalon. Pea3 misexpression resulted in repression
of Otx2 expression in the mesencephalon, induction of Gbx2 and Fgf8 expression in
the mesencephalon, and differentiation of the trochlear neurons in the posterior 
mesencephalon. Fate change of the tectum to the cerebellum did not occur.
Repression of Pea3 function by misexpressing the chimeric molecule of Engrailed
repressor domain EH1 and Pea3 (eh1-Pea3) resulted in induction of Otx2 expression
in the metencephalon, repression of Gbx2 and Fgf8 expression in the
metencephalon, and differentiation of the oculomotor neurons in the isthmus. It
was concluded that Pea3 plays a pivotal role in determination of the isthmus (r0)
property downstream of Fgf8-Ras-ERK signaling.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 26691276  [PubMed - in process]


4. Anticancer Res. 2015 Oct;35(10):5443-51.

Signatures of Adverse Pathological Features, Androgen Insensitivity and
Metastatic Potential in Prostate Cancer.

Tolkach Y(1), Merseburger A(1), Herrmann T(1), Kuczyk M(1), Serth J(1), Imkamp
F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (2)Clinic for Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany imkamp.florian@mh-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The genetic characterization of prostate tumors is important for 
personalized therapy. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of
previously described prostate cancer-related genes in the genetic
characterization of prostate tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-two genes were selected for expression analysis
(real time-quantitative polymerase chain reaction). One normal prostatic
epithelial cell line and three standardized prostate cancer cell lines were used.
Twenty-eight patients treated with radical prostatectomy were included in the
study.
RESULTS: The following genes appeared to be possibly related to the metastatic
potential of the tumor: ELOVL fatty acid elongase 7 (ELOVL7), enhancer of zeste 2
polycomb repressive complex 2 subunit (EZH2), gastrulation brain homeobox 2
(GBX2), golgi membrane protein 1 (GOLM1), homeobox C6 (HOXC6), minichromosome
maintenance complex component 6 (MCM6), marker of proliferation Ki-67 (MKI67),
mucin 1, cell surface associated (MUC1), MYC binding protein 2, E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase (MYCBP2), somatostatin receptor 1 (SSTR1), topoisomerase (DNA) II 
alpha 170 kDa (TOP2A) and exportin 6 (XPO6). Six genes were differentially
expressed in patients with localized and locally advanced cancer (GOLM1, GBX2,
XPO6, SSTR1, TOP2A and cell division cycle associated 5, CDCA5) and three genes
(HOXC6, Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) and MYC binding protein 2, 
E3 ubiquitin protein ligase, MYCBP2) in patients with a low vs. high Gleason
grade/sum.
CONCLUSION: Some of the investigated genes show promising prognostic and
classification features, which might be useful in a clinical setting, warranting 
for further validation.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26408707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Aug 10;9:107. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00107. eCollection
2015.

Prepatterning and patterning of the thalamus along embryonic development of
Xenopus laevis.

Bandín S(1), Morona R(1), González A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University Complutense Madrid,
Spain.

Previous developmental studies of the thalamus (alar part of the diencephalic
prosomere p2) have defined the molecular basis for the acquisition of the
thalamic competence (preparttening), the subsequent formation of the secondary
organizer in the zona limitans intrathalamica, and the early specification of two
anteroposterior domains (rostral and caudal progenitor domains) in response to
inducing activities and that are shared in birds and mammals. In the present
study we have analyzed the embryonic development of the thalamus in the anuran
Xenopus laevis to determine conserved or specific features in the amphibian
diencephalon. From early embryonic stages to the beginning of the larval period, 
the expression patterns of 22 markers were analyzed by means of combined In situ 
hybridization (ISH) and immunohistochemical techniques. The early
genoarchitecture observed in the diencephalon allowed us to discern the
boundaries of the thalamus with the prethalamus, pretectum, and epithalamus.
Common molecular features were observed in the thalamic prepatterning among
vertebrates in which Wnt3a, Fez, Pax6 and Xiro1 expression were of particular
importance in Xenopus. The formation of the zona limitans intrathalamica was
observed, as in other vertebrates, by the progressive expression of Shh. The
largely conserved expressions of Nkx2.2 in the rostral thalamic domain vs. Gbx2
and Ngn2 (among others) in the caudal domain strongly suggest the role of Shh as 
morphogen in the amphibian thalamus. All these data showed that the molecular
characteristics observed during preparttening and patterning in the thalamus of
the anuran Xenopus (anamniote) share many features with those described during
thalamic development in amniotes (common patterns in tetrapods) but also with
zebrafish, strengthening the idea of a basic organization of this diencephalic
region across vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC4530589
PMID: 26321920  [PubMed]


6. Dev Biol. 2015 Nov 1;407(1):26-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.010. Epub 2015
Aug 20.

Gbx2 is essential for maintaining thalamic neuron identity and repressing
habenular characters in the developing thalamus.

Mallika C(1), Guo Q(1), Li JY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, University of Connecticut School
of Medicine, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, United States.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, University of Connecticut School
of Medicine, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, United States.
Electronic address: jali@uchc.edu.

The thalamus and habenula, two important nodes of the forebrain circuitry, are
derived from a single developmental compartment, called prosomere 2, in the
diencephalon. Habenular and thalamic neurons display distinct molecular identity,
neurochemistry, and connectivity. Furthermore, their progenitors exhibit
distinctive neurogenic patterns with a marked delay in the onset of neurogenesis 
in the thalamus. However, the progenitors in prosomere 2 express many common
developmental regulators and the mechanism underlying the specification and
differentiation of these two populations of neurons remains unknown. Gbx2, coding
for a homeodomain transcription factor, is initially expressed in thalamic
neuronal precursors that have just exited the cell cycle, and its expression is
maintained in many mature thalamic neurons in adults. Deletion of Gbx2 severely
disrupts histogenesis of the thalamus and abolishes thalamocortical projections
in mice. Here, by using genome-wide transcriptional profiling, we show that Gbx2 
promotes thalamic but inhibits habenular molecular characters. Remarkably,
although Gbx2 is expressed in postmitotic neuronal precursors, deletion of Gbx2
changes gene expression and cell proliferation in dividing progenitors in the
developing thalamus. These defects are partially rescued by the mosaic presence
of wild-type cells, demonstrating a cell non-autonomous role of Gbx2 in
regulating the development of thalamic progenitors. Our results suggest that Gbx2
is essential for the acquisition of the thalamic neuronal identity by repressing 
habenular identity through a feedback signaling from postmitotic neurons to
progenitors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4641819 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26297811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22460-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.675595. Epub
2015 Jul 29.

ETS-related transcription factors ETV4 and ETV5 are involved in proliferation and
induction of differentiation-associated genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells.

Akagi T(1), Kuure S(2), Uranishi K(3), Koide H(3), Costantini F(4), Yokota T(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tadayuki@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)the Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Helsinki, 00790 Helsinki, Finland, and. (3)From the Department of Stem Cell
Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, 13-1
Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan. (4)the Department of Genetics
and Development, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032.
(5)From the Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan,
tyokota@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

The pluripotency and self-renewal capacity of embryonic stem (ES) cells is
regulated by several transcription factors. Here, we show that the ETS-related
transcription factors Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5) are specifically expressed in
undifferentiated ES cells, and suppression of Oct3/4 results in down-regulation
of Etv4/5. Simultaneous deletion of Etv4 and Etv5 (Etv4/5 double knock-out (dKO))
in ES cells resulted in a flat, epithelial cell-like appearance, whereas the
morphology changed into compact colonies in a 2i medium (containing two
inhibitors for GSK3 and MEK/ERK). Expression levels of self-renewal marker genes,
including Oct3/4 and Nanog, were similar between wild-type and dKO ES cells,
whereas proliferation of Etv4/5 dKO ES cells was decreased with overexpression of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (p16/p19, p15, and p57). A differentiation
assay revealed that the embryoid bodies derived from Etv4/5 dKO ES cells were
smaller than the control, and expression of ectoderm marker genes, including
Fgf5, Sox1, and Pax3, was not induced in dKO-derived embryoid bodies. Microarray 
analysis demonstrated that stem cell-related genes, including Tcf15, Gbx2, Lrh1, 
Zic3, and Baf60c, were significantly repressed in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells. The
artificial expression of Etv4 and/or Etv5 in Etv4/5 dKO ES cells induced
re-expression of Tcf15 and Gbx2. These results indicate that Etv4 and Etv5,
potentially through regulation of Gbx2 and Tcf15, are involved in the ES cell
proliferation and induction of differentiation-associated genes in ES cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566222 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26224636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Jul 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Radial and tangential migration of telencephalic somatostatin neurons originated 
from the mouse diagonal area.

Puelles L(1), Morales-Delgado N, Merchán P, Castro-Robles B, Martínez-de-la-Torre
M, Díaz C, Ferran JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, School of Medicine, University 
of Murcia, Murcia, E30071, Spain, puelles@um.es.

The telencephalic subpallium is the source of various GABAergic interneuron
cohorts that invade the pallium via tangential migration. Based on
genoarchitectonic studies, the subpallium has been subdivided into four major
domains: striatum, pallidum, diagonal area and preoptic area (Puelles et al.
2013; Allen Developing Mouse Brain Atlas), and a larger set of molecularly
distinct progenitor areas (Flames et al. 2007). Fate mapping, genetic
lineage-tracing studies, and other approaches have suggested that each subpallial
subdivision produces specific sorts of inhibitory interneurons, distinguished by 
differential peptidic content, which are distributed tangentially to pallial and 
subpallial target territories (e.g., olfactory bulb, isocortex, hippocampus,
pallial and subpallial amygdala, striatum, pallidum, septum). In this report, we 
map descriptively the early differentiation and apparent migratory dispersion of 
mouse subpallial somatostatin-expressing (Sst) cells from E10.5 onward, comparing
their topography with the expression patterns of the genes Dlx5, Gbx2, Lhx7-8,
Nkx2.1, Nkx5.1 (Hmx3), and Shh, which variously label parts of the subpallium.
Whereas some experimental results suggest that Sst cells are pallidal, our data
reveal that many, if not most, telencephalic Sst cells derive from de diagonal
area (Dg). Sst-positive cells initially only present at the embryonic Dg
selectively populate radially the medial part of the bed nucleus striae
terminalis (from paraseptal to amygdaloid regions) and part of the central
amygdala; they also invade tangentially the striatum, while eschewing the globus 
pallidum and the preoptic area, and integrate within most cortical and nuclear
pallial areas between E10.5 and E16.5.

PMID: 26189100  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 14;10(7):e0132666. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132666.
eCollection 2015.

TqPCR: A Touchdown qPCR Assay with Significantly Improved Detection Sensitivity
and Amplification Efficiency of SYBR Green qPCR.

Zhang Q(1), Wang J(2), Deng F(3), Yan Z(2), Xia Y(4), Wang Z(1), Ye J(5), Deng
Y(2), Zhang Z(6), Qiao M(2), Li R(6), Denduluri SK(7), Wei Q(2), Zhao L(8), Lu
S(9), Wang X(10), Tang S(6), Liu H(2), Luu HH(7), Haydon RC(7), He TC(1), Jiang
L(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, and the Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child
Development and Disorders, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400046, China; Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago
Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637, United States of America. (2)Molecular
Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation
Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637, United
States of America; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Medicine,
and the Affiliated Hospitals of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016,
China. (3)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and
Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL
60637, United States of America; Department of Cell Biology, the Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. (4)Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, United
States of America. (5)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60637, United States of America; School of Bioengineering, Chongqing 
University, Chongqing 400044, China. (6)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago
Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637, United States of America; Departments of
General Surgery and Neurology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan
430071, China. (7)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60637, United States of America. (8)Molecular Oncology Laboratory,
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of 
Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637, United States of America; Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Lanzhou University,
Lanzhou 730000, China. (9)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago
Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637, United States of America; Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan 250012, China. (10)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of Chicago
Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637, United States of America; Department of
Surgery, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.
(11)Department of Neurology, and the Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of
Child Development and Disorders, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400046, China.

The advent of fluorescence-based quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) has
revolutionized the quantification of gene expression analysis in many fields,
including life sciences, agriculture, forensic science, molecular diagnostics,
and medicine. While SYBR Green-based qPCR is the most commonly-used platform due 
to its inexpensive nature and robust chemistry, quantifying the expression of
genes with low abundance or RNA samples extracted from highly restricted or
limited sources can be challenging because the detection sensitivity of SYBR
Green-based qPCR is limited. Here, we develop a novel and effective touchdown
qPCR (TqPCR) protocol by incorporating a 4-cycle touchdown stage prior to the
quantification amplification stage. Using the same cDNA templates, we find that
TqPCR can reduce the average Cq values for Gapdh, Rps13, and Hprt1 reference
genes by 4.45, 5.47, and 4.94 cycles, respectively, when compared with
conventional qPCR; the overall average Cq value reduction for the three reference
genes together is 4.95. We further find that TqPCR can improve PCR amplification 
efficiency and thus increase detection sensitivity. When the quantification of
Wnt3A-induced target gene expression in mesenchymal stem cells is analyzed, we
find that, while both conventional qPCR and TqPCR can detect the up-regulation of
the relatively abundant target Axin2, only TqPCR can detect the up-regulation of 
the lowly-expressed targets Oct4 and Gbx2. Finally, we demonstrate that the MRQ2 
and MRQ3 primer pairs derived from mouse reference gene Tbp can be used to
validate the RNA/cDNA integrity of qPCR samples. Taken together, our results
strongly suggest that TqPCR may increase detection sensitivity and PCR
amplification efficiency. Overall, TqPCR should be advantageous over conventional
qPCR in expression quantification, especially when the transcripts of interest
are lowly expressed, and/or the availability of total RNA is highly restricted or
limited.

PMCID: PMC4501803
PMID: 26172450  [PubMed - in process]


10. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 May 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular anatomy of the thalamic complex and the underlying transcription
factors.

Nagalski A(1,)(2), Puelles L(3), Dabrowski M(4), Wegierski T(1), Kuznicki J(1),
Wisniewska MB(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Warsaw, 02-109, Poland. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Centre 
of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 00-927, Poland. (3)Department 
of Human Anatomy, University of Murcia and IMIB, Murcia, 30071, Spain.
(4)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center of Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, Warsaw, 02-093, Poland. (5)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration,
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Warsaw, 02-109, Poland.
m.wisniewska@cent.uw.edu.pl. (6)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Centre of
New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 00-927, Poland.
m.wisniewska@cent.uw.edu.pl.

Thalamocortical loops have been implicated in the control of higher-order
cognitive functions, but advances in our understanding of the molecular
underpinnings of neocortical organization have not been accompanied by similar
analyses in the thalamus. Using expression-based correlation maps and the manual 
mapping of mouse and human datasets available in the Allen Brain Atlas, we
identified a few individual regions and several sets of molecularly related
nuclei that partially overlap with the classic grouping that is based on
topographical localization and thalamocortical connections. These new molecular
divisions of the adult thalamic complex are defined by the combinatorial
expression of Tcf7l2, Lef1, Gbx2, Prox1, Pou4f1, Esrrg, and Six3 transcription
factor genes. Further in silico and experimental analyses provided the evidence
that TCF7L2 might be a pan-thalamic specifier. These results provide substantial 
insights into the "molecular logic" that underlies organization of the thalamic
complex.

PMID: 25963709  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Aug 15;24(16):1901-11. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0025. Epub 2015
May 6.

Pig Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Neural Rosettes Developmentally Mimic
Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Neural Differentiation.

Gallegos-Cárdenas A(1,)(2,)(3), Webb R(1,)(2), Jordan E(1,)(2), West R(1,)(2),
West FD(1,)(2), Yang JY(1,)(2), Wang K(1,)(2), Stice SL(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Regenerative Bioscience Center, University of Georgia , Rhodes Center for
Animal and Dairy Science, Athens, Georgia . (2)2 Department of Animal and Dairy
Science, University of Georgia , Rhodes Center for Animal and Dairy Science,
Athens, Georgia . (3)3 Departamento de Producción Animal, Facultad de Zootecnia, 
Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina , Girona, Perú.

For diseases of the brain, the pig (Sus scrofa) is increasingly being used as a
model organism that shares many anatomical and biological similarities with
humans. We report that pig induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) can recapitulate
events in early mammalian neural development. Pig iPSC line
(POU5F1(high)/SSEA4(low)) had a higher potential to form neural rosettes (NR)
containing neuroepithelial cells than either POU5F1(low)/SSEA4(low) or
POU5F1(low)/SSEA4(high) lines. Thus, POU5F1 and SSEA4 pluripotency marker
profiles in starting porcine iPSC populations can predict their propensity to
form more robust NR populations in culture. The NR were isolated and expanded in 
vitro, retaining their NR morphology and neuroepithelial molecular properties.
These cells expressed anterior central nervous system fate markers OTX2 and GBX2 
through at least seven passages, and responded to retinoic acid, promoting a more
posterior fate (HOXB4+, OTX2-, and GBX2-). These findings offer insight into pig 
iPSC development, which parallels the human iPSC in both anterior and posterior
neural cell fates. These in vitro similarities in early neural differentiation
processes support the use of pig iPSC and differentiated neural cells as a cell
therapy in allogeneic porcine neural injury and degeneration models, providing
relevant translational data for eventual human neural cell therapies.

PMID: 25826126  [PubMed - in process]


12. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 13;10(2):e0115050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115050.
eCollection 2015.

Associations among Sebox and other MEGs and its effects on early embryogenesis.

Park MW(1), Kim KH(1), Kim EY(1), Lee SY(1), Ko JJ(1), Lee KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Pangyo-Ro 335, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, 463-400, Korea.

In a previous report, we identified Sebox as a new candidate maternal effect gene
that is essential for embryonic development and primarily impacts the two-cell
(2C) stage. The present study was conducted to determine the mechanism of action 
for Sebox in this capacity, as shown by changes in the expression levels of other
known MEG mRNAs after Sebox RNA interference (RNAi) in oocytes. Sebox-knockdown
metaphase II (Mll) oocytes displayed normal morphology, but among the 23 MEGs
monitored, 8 genes were upregulated, and 15 genes were unchanged. We hypothesized
that the perturbed gene expression of these MEGs may cause the arrest of embryo
development at the 2C stage and examined the expression of several marker genes
for the degradation of maternal factors and zygotic genome activation. We found
that some maternal mRNAs, c-mos, Gbx2, and Gdf9, were not fully degraded in
Sebox-knockdown 2C embryos, and that several zygotic genome activation markers,
Mt1a, Rpl23, Ube2a and Wee1, were not fully expressed in conjunction with
diminished embryonic transcriptional activity. In addition, Sebox may be involved
in the formation of the subcortical maternal complex through its regulation of
the upstream regulator, Figla. Therefore, we concluded that Sebox is important in
preparing oocytes for embryonic development by orchestrating the expression of
other important MEGs.

PMCID: PMC4331730
PMID: 25679966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 1;399(1):177-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.001. Epub 2015
Jan 12.

The cochlear sensory epithelium derives from Wnt responsive cells in the
dorsomedial otic cup.

Brown AS(1), Rakowiecki SM(1), Li JY(2), Epstein DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of
Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center, 400 
Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, USA. (3)Department of Genetics,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Blvd,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: epsteind@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Wnt1 and Wnt3a secreted from the dorsal neural tube were previously shown to
regulate a gene expression program in the dorsal otic vesicle that is necessary
for vestibular morphogenesis (Riccomagno et al., 2005. Genes Dev. 19, 1612-1623).
Unexpectedly, Wnt1(-/-); Wnt3a(-/-) embryos also displayed a pronounced defect in
the outgrowth of the ventrally derived cochlear duct. To determine how Wnt
signaling in the dorsal otocyst contributes to cochlear development we performed 
a series of genetic fate mapping experiments using two independent Wnt responsive
driver strains (TopCreER and Gbx2(CreER)) that when crossed to inducible
responder lines (Rosa(lacZ) or Rosa(zsGreen)) permanently labeled dorsomedial
otic progenitors and their derivatives. Tamoxifen time course experiments
revealed that most vestibular structures showed some degree of labeling when
recombination was induced between E7.75 and E12.5, consistent with continuous Wnt
signaling activity in this tissue. Remarkably, a population of Wnt responsive
cells in the dorsal otocyst was also found to contribute to the sensory
epithelium of the cochlear duct, including auditory hair and support cells.
Similar results were observed with both TopCreER and Gbx2(CreER) strains. The
ventral displacement of Wnt responsive cells followed a spatiotemporal sequence
that initiated in the anterior otic cup at, or immediately prior to, the
17-somite stage (E9) and then spread progressively to the posterior pole of the
otic vesicle by the 25-somite stage (E9.5). These lineage-tracing experiments
identify the earliest known origin of auditory sensory progenitors within a
population of Wnt responsive cells in the dorsomedial otic cup.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4339344
PMID: 25592224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 16;111(37):13385-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401923111. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

p53 Suppression partially rescues the mutant phenotype in mouse models of
DiGeorge syndrome.

Caprio C(1), Baldini A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Open University PhD Program, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute of
Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati Traverso, 80131 Naples, Italy; and.
(2)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute of Genetics and Biophysics
Adriano Buzzati Traverso, 80131 Naples, Italy; and Department of Molecular
Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples Federico II, 80131
Naples, Italy antonio.baldini@igb.cnr.it.

T-box 1 (Tbx1), a gene encoding a T-box transcription factor, is required for
embryonic development in humans and mice. Half dosage of this gene in humans
causes most of the features of the DiGeorge or Velocardiofacial syndrome
phenotypes, including aortic arch and cardiac outflow tract abnormalities. Here
we found a strong genetic interaction between Tbx1 and transformation related
protein 53 (Trp53). Indeed, genetic ablation of Trp53, or pharmacological
inhibition of its protein product p53, rescues significantly the cardiovascular
defects of Tbx1 heterozygous and hypomorphic mutants. We found that the Tbx1 and 
p53 proteins do not interact directly but both occupy a genetic element of Gbx2, 
which is required for aortic arch and cardiac outflow tract development, and is a
known genetic interactor of Tbx1. We found that Gbx2 expression is down-regulated
in Tbx1(+/-) embryos and is restored to normal levels in Tbx1(+/-);Trp53(+/-)
embryos. In addition, we found that the genetic element that binds both Tbx1 and 
p53 is highly enriched in H3K27 trimethylation, and upon p53 suppression H3K27me3
levels are reduced, along with Ezh2 enrichment. This finding suggests that the
rescue of Gbx2 expression in Tbx1(+/-);Trp53(+/-) embryos is due to reduction of 
repressive chromatin marks. Overall our data identify unexpected genetic
interactions between Tbx1 and Trp53 and provide a proof of principle that
developmental defects associated with reduced dosage of Tbx1 can be rescued
pharmacologically.

PMCID: PMC4169961
PMID: 25197075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014 Nov;35:189-202. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.08.015. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Computational and mathematical methods for morphogenetic gradient analysis,
boundary formation and axonal targeting.

Reingruber J(1), Holcman D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Computational Biology and Applied Mathematics, Institute of Biology
(IBENS), CNRS INSERM 1024, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris,
France. Electronic address: reingrub@ens.fr. (2)Group of Computational Biology
and Applied Mathematics, Institute of Biology (IBENS), CNRS INSERM 1024, Ecole
Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France. Electronic address:
david.holcman@ens.fr.

Morphogenesis and axonal targeting are key processes during development that
depend on complex interactions at molecular, cellular and tissue level.
Mathematical modeling is essential to bridge this multi-scale gap in order to
understand how the emergence of large structures is controlled at molecular level
by interactions between various signaling pathways. We summarize mathematical
modeling and computational methods for time evolution and precision of
morphogenetic gradient formation. We discuss tissue patterning and the formation 
of borders between regions labeled by different morphogens. Finally, we review
models and algorithms that reveal the interplay between morphogenetic gradients
and patterned activity for axonal pathfinding and the generation of the
retinotopic map in the visual system.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25194659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Dev Dyn. 2014 Nov;243(11):1487-98. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24186. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

The role of Zic genes in inner ear development in the mouse: Exploring mutant
mouse phenotypes.

Chervenak AP(1), Bank LM, Thomsen N, Glanville-Jones HC, Jonathan S, Millen KJ,
Arkell RM, Barald KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Murine Zic genes (Zic1-5) are expressed in the dorsal hindbrain and
in periotic mesenchyme (POM) adjacent to the developing inner ear. Zic genes are 
involved in developmental signaling pathways in many organ systems, including the
ear, although their exact roles haven't been fully elucidated. This report
examines the role of Zic1, Zic2, and Zic4 during inner ear development in mouse
mutants in which these Zic genes are affected.
RESULTS: Zic1/Zic4 double mutants don't exhibit any apparent defects in inner ear
morphology. By contrast, inner ears from Zic2(kd/kd) and Zic2(Ku/Ku) mutants have
severe but variable morphological defects in endolymphatic duct/sac and
semicircular canal formation and in cochlear extension in the inner ear. Analysis
of otocyst patterning in the Zic2(Ku/Ku) mutants by in situ hybridization showed 
changes in the expression patterns of Gbx2 and Pax2.
CONCLUSIONS: The experiments provide the first genetic evidence that the Zic
genes are required for morphogenesis of the inner ear. Zic2 loss-of-function
doesn't prevent initial otocyst patterning but leads to molecular abnormalities
concomitant with morphogenesis of the endolymphatic duct. Functional hearing
deficits often accompany inner ear dysmorphologies, making Zic2 a novel candidate
gene for ongoing efforts to identify the genetic basis of human hearing loss.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4206579
PMID: 25178196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Rare Dis. 2014 Mar 31;2:e28688. doi: 10.4161/rdis.28688. eCollection 2014.

Epistatic interactions between Chd7 and Fgf8 during cerebellar development:
Implications for CHARGE syndrome.

Basson MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology; King's College
London; Guy's Hospital Tower Wing; London, UK.

CHARGE syndrome is a rare, autosomal dominant condition caused by mutations in
the CHD7 gene. Although central nervous system defects have been reported, the
detailed description and analysis of these anomalies in CHARGE syndrome patients 
lag far behind the description of other, more easily observed defects. We
recently described cerebellar abnormalities in CHARGE syndrome patients and used 
mouse models to identify the underlying causes. Our studies identified altered
expression of the homeobox genes Otx2 and Gbx2 in the developing neural tube of
Chd7(-/-) embryos. Furthermore, we showed that the expression of Fgf8 is
sensitive to Chd7 gene dosage and demonstrated an epistatic relationship between 
these genes during cerebellar vermis development. These findings provided, for
the first time, an example of cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in a human syndrome
that can be linked to deregulated FGF signaling. I discuss some of these
observations and their implications for CHARGE syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4091603
PMID: 25054096  [PubMed]


18. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 1;390(1):51-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.02.019. Epub 2014
Feb 26.

Ephrin-B2 governs morphogenesis of endolymphatic sac and duct epithelia in the
mouse inner ear.

Raft S(1), Andrade LR(2), Shao D(3), Akiyama H(4), Henkemeyer M(5), Wu DK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Sensory Cell Regeneration and Development, National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: rafts@nidcd.nih.gov. (2)Laboratory
of Biomineralization, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, CCS, Universidade Federal
do Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21941-902, Brazil. (3)Department of Otolaryngology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, Gifu University, Gifu City 501-1194, Japan.
(5)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (6)Section on Sensory Cell Regeneration and
Development, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
wud@nidcd.nih.gov.

Control over ionic composition and volume of the inner ear luminal fluid
endolymph is essential for normal hearing and balance. Mice deficient in either
the EphB2 receptor tyrosine kinase or the cognate transmembrane ligand ephrin-B2 
(Efnb2) exhibit background strain-specific vestibular-behavioral dysfunction and 
signs of abnormal endolymph homeostasis. Using various loss-of-function mouse
models, we found that Efnb2 is required for growth and morphogenesis of the
embryonic endolymphatic epithelium, a precursor of the endolymphatic sac (ES) and
duct (ED), which mediate endolymph homeostasis. Conditional inactivation of Efnb2
in early-stage embryonic ear tissues disrupted cell proliferation, cell survival,
and epithelial folding at the origin of the endolymphatic epithelium. This
correlated with apparent absence of an ED, mis-localization of ES ion transport
cells relative to inner ear sensory organs, dysplasia of the endolymph fluid
space, and abnormally formed otoconia (extracellular calcite-protein composites) 
at later stages of embryonic development. A comparison of Efnb2 and Notch
signaling-deficient mutant phenotypes indicated that these two signaling systems 
have distinct and non-overlapping roles in ES/ED development. Homozygous deletion
of the Efnb2 C-terminus caused abnormalities similar to those found in the
conditional Efnb2 null homozygote. Analyses of fetal Efnb2 C-terminus deletion
heterozygotes found mis-localized ES ion transport cells only in the genetic
background exhibiting vestibular dysfunction. We propose that developmental
dysplasias described here are a gene dose-sensitive cause of the vestibular
dysfunction observed in EphB-Efnb2 signaling-deficient mice.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4113727
PMID: 24583262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Yi Chuan. 2013 Oct;35(10):1198-208.

[Comparative analysis of conservation and regulatory network on core
transcription factors in mouse inner ear development].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZQ(1), Han XH(2), Wei QJ(2), Xing GQ(3), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. erwin_0108@sina.com (2)School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

During vertebrate inner ear development, several core genes, such as Six1, Six4, 
Pax2, Pax8, Foxi1, Dlx5, Gbx2, Irx2/3, and Msx1, are crucial to the regulation of
the otic placode induction. In order to get the gene regulatory network during
inner ear development, bioinformatics methods were adopted to analyze
conservation and regulation of the core transcription factors in mice. Pax2,
Pax8, Foxi1, and Dlx5 remained to be the main regulators during inner ear
development, which was consistent with the gene regulatory network from
literature. Six1 was regulated by many transcription factors, and Gbx2, Irx2/3,
and Msx1 played important roles in the regulatory network. The differences in the
constructed regulatory network were reasonably analyzed. It was predicted that
Msxl regulated the expression of Six1 and Gbx2. In addition, several
transcription factors, such as Sox5, Lhx2, Rax, Otx1, Otx2, Pitxl, Pitx2, Nkx2-5,
Irx4, Irx6, Dlx2, Hmx1/2/3, Pou4f3, Pax4 and Tlx2, were found to be involved in
the regulatory network. Our results provide an improved understanding of the
regulatory mechanism during inner ear development.

PMID: 24459893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Development. 2014 Jan;141(2):389-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.099119.

Independently specified Atoh1 domains define novel developmental compartments in 
rhombomere 1.

Green MJ(1), Myat AM, Emmenegger BA, Wechsler-Reya RJ, Wilson LJ, Wingate RJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th floor
New Hunt's House, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The rhombic lip gives rise to neuronal populations that contribute to cerebellar,
proprioceptive and interoceptive networks. Cell production depends on the
expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Atoh1. In
rhombomere 1, Atoh1-positive cells give rise to both cerebellar neurons and
extra-cerebellar nuclei in ventral hindbrain. The origin of this cellular
diversity has previously been attributed to temporal signals rather than spatial 
patterning. Here, we show that in both chick and mouse the cerebellar Atoh1
precursor pool is partitioned into initially cryptic spatial domains that reflect
the activity of two different organisers: an isthmic Atoh1 domain, which gives
rise to isthmic nuclei, and the rhombic lip, which generates deep cerebellar
nuclei and granule cells. We use a combination of in vitro explant culture,
genetic fate mapping and gene overexpression and knockdown to explore the role of
isthmic signalling in patterning these domains. We show that an FGF-dependent
isthmic Atoh1 domain is the origin of distinct populations of Lhx9-positive
neurons in the extra-cerebellar isthmic nuclei. In the cerebellum, ectopic FGF
induces proliferation while blockade reduces the length of the cerebellar rhombic
lip. FGF signalling is not required for the specification of cerebellar cell
types from the rhombic lip and its upregulation inhibits their production. This
suggests that although the isthmus regulates the size of the cerebellar anlage,
the downregulation of isthmic FGF signals is required for induction of rhombic
lip-derived cerebellar neurons.

PMCID: PMC3879817
PMID: 24381197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Elife. 2013 Dec 24;2:e01873. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01873.

Deficits in early neural tube identity found in CHARGE syndrome.

Haldipur P(1), Millen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Parthiv Haldipur is in the Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, United States
parthiv.haldipur@seattlechildrens.org.

Long predicted from studies of model vertebrates, the first human example of
abnormal patterning of the early neural tube leading to underdevelopment of the
cerebellum has been demonstrated.

PMCID: PMC3870571
PMID: 24368735  [PubMed - in process]


22. Elife. 2013 Dec 24;2:e01305. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01305.

Deregulated FGF and homeotic gene expression underlies cerebellar vermis
hypoplasia in CHARGE syndrome.

Yu T(1), Meiners LC, Danielsen K, Wong MT, Bowler T, Reinberg D, Scambler PJ, van
Ravenswaaij-Arts CM, Basson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom.

Mutations in CHD7 are the major cause of CHARGE syndrome, an autosomal dominant
disorder with an estimated prevalence of 1/15,000. We have little understanding
of the disruptions in the developmental programme that underpin brain defects
associated with this syndrome. Using mouse models, we show that Chd7
haploinsufficiency results in reduced Fgf8 expression in the isthmus organiser
(IsO), an embryonic signalling centre that directs early cerebellar development. 
Consistent with this observation, Chd7 and Fgf8 loss-of-function alleles interact
during cerebellar development. CHD7 associates with Otx2 and Gbx2 regulatory
elements and altered expression of these homeobox genes implicates CHD7 in the
maintenance of cerebellar identity during embryogenesis. Finally, we report
cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in 35% of CHARGE syndrome patients with a proven
CHD7 mutation. These observations provide key insights into the molecular
aetiology of cerebellar defects in CHARGE syndrome and link reduced FGF
signalling to cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in a human syndrome. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01305.001.

PMCID: PMC3870572
PMID: 24368733  [PubMed - in process]


23. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 15;386(2):473-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.011. Epub 2013 
Dec 17.

Identification of Pax3 and Zic1 targets in the developing neural crest.

Bae CJ(1), Park BY(2), Lee YH(3), Tobias JW(4), Hong CS(5), Saint-Jeannet JP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science & Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, New 
York University, New York, USA. (2)Department of Anatomy, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea. (3)Department
of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry & Institute of Oral Biosciences, Chonbuk
National University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea. (4)Bioinformatics Group,
Molecular Profiling Facility, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
(5)Department of Basic Science & Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, New 
York University, New York, USA; Department of Biological Sciences, College of
Natural Sciences, Daegu University, Gyeongsan, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: cshong@daegu.ac.kr. (6)Department of Basic Science & Craniofacial
Biology, College of Dentistry, New York University, New York, USA; Department of 
Animal Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: jsj4@nyu.edu.

The neural crest (NC) is a multipotent population of migratory cells unique to
the vertebrate embryo, contributing to the development of multiple organ systems.
Transcription factors pax3 and zic1 are among the earliest genes activated in NC 
progenitors, and they are both necessary and sufficient to promote NC fate. In
order to further characterize the function of these transcription factors during 
NC development we have used hormone inducible fusion proteins in a Xenopus animal
cap assay, and DNA microarray to identify downstream targets of Pax3 and Zic1.
Here we present the results of this screen and the initial validation of these
targets using quantitative RT-PCR, in situ hybridization and morpholinos-mediated
knockdown. Among the targets identified we found several well-characterized
NC-specific genes, including snail2, foxd3, gbx2, twist, sox8 and sox9, which
validate our approach. We also obtained several factors with no known function in
Xenopus NC, which represent novel regulators of NC fate. The comprehensive
characterization of Pax3 and Zic1 targets function in the NC gene regulatory
network, are essential to understanding the mechanisms regulating the emergence
of this important cell population.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3933997
PMID: 24360908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 15;386(2):461-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.010. Epub 2013 
Dec 17.

Pax3 and Zic1 trigger the early neural crest gene regulatory network by the
direct activation of multiple key neural crest specifiers.

Plouhinec JL(1), Roche DD(1), Pegoraro C(1), Figueiredo AL(1), Maczkowiak F(1),
Brunet LJ(2), Milet C(1), Vert JP(3), Pollet N(4), Harland RM(2), Monsoro-Burq
AH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Sud, Centre Universitaire, F-91405 Orsay, France; Institut
Curie, CNRS UMR3347, INSERM U1021, Centre Universitaire, F-91405 Orsay, France.
(2)University of California at Berkeley, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology
and Center for Integrative Genomics, USA. (3)Centre for Computational Biology,
Mines ParisTech, 77300 Fontainebleau, France; Institut Curie, F-75248 Paris,
France; INSERM U900, F-75248 Paris, France. (4)CNRS, iSSB, F-91000 Évry, France; 
Univ. Evry, iSSB, F-91000 Évry, France. (5)Université Paris Sud, Centre
Universitaire, F-91405 Orsay, France; Institut Curie, CNRS UMR3347, INSERM U1021,
Centre Universitaire, F-91405 Orsay, France. Electronic address:
anne-helene.monsoro-burq@curie.fr.

Neural crest development is orchestrated by a complex and still poorly understood
gene regulatory network. Premigratory neural crest is induced at the lateral
border of the neural plate by the combined action of signaling molecules and
transcription factors such as AP2, Gbx2, Pax3 and Zic1. Among them, Pax3 and Zic1
are both necessary and sufficient to trigger a complete neural crest
developmental program. However, their gene targets in the neural crest regulatory
network remain unknown. Here, through a transcriptome analysis of frog
microdissected neural border, we identified an extended gene signature for the
premigratory neural crest, and we defined novel potential members of the
regulatory network. This signature includes 34 novel genes, as well as 44 known
genes expressed at the neural border. Using another microarray analysis which
combined Pax3 and Zic1 gain-of-function and protein translation blockade, we
uncovered 25 Pax3 and Zic1 direct targets within this signature. We demonstrated 
that the neural border specifiers Pax3 and Zic1 are direct upstream regulators of
neural crest specifiers Snail1/2, Foxd3, Twist1, and Tfap2b. In addition, they
may modulate the transcriptional output of multiple signaling pathways involved
in neural crest development (Wnt, Retinoic Acid) through the induction of key
pathway regulators (Axin2 and Cyp26c1). We also found that Pax3 could maintain
its own expression through a positive autoregulatory feedback loop. These
hierarchical inductions, feedback loops, and pathway modulations provide novel
tools to understand the neural crest induction network.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3962137
PMID: 24360906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):1014-20. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2927. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Validation of nucleolar protein 4 as a novel methylated tumor suppressor gene in 
head and neck cancer.

Demokan S(1), Chuang AY(2), Pattani KM(3), Sidransky D(3), Koch W(3), Califano
JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Oncology, Oncology Institute, Istanbul University, Capa,
Istanbul 34093, Turkey. (2)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University,
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and 
Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Methylation of CpG islands in the promoter region of genes acts as a significant 
mechanism of epigenetic gene silencing in head and neck cancer. In the present
study, we assessed the association of epigenetic alterations of a panel of 12
genes [nucleolar protein 4 (NOL4), iroquois homeobox 1 (IRX1), SLC5A8, LRRC3B,
FUSSEL18, EBF3, GBX2, HMX2, SEPT9, ALX3, SOCS3 and LHX6] with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) via a candidate gene approach. After the initial 
screening of methylated CpG islands on the promoter regions by bisulfite
sequencing using salivary rinse samples, only two genes had methylated CpG
dinucleotides on their promoter regions in tumor samples and absence of
methylated CpGs were found in normal salivary rinse samples after bisulfite
modification and bisulfite sequencing. We then performed real-time quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (QMSP) on 16 salivary rinse and 14 normal mucosal
samples from healthy subjects and 33 HNSCC tumor samples for the two genes
selected. After validation with QMSP, one gene, NOL4, was highly methylated (91%)
in tumor samples and unmethylated in normal salivary rinses and minimally
methylated in normal mucosal samples demonstrating cancer-specific methylation in
HNSCC tissues. Although the IRX1 gene was observed as methylated in normal
mucosal and salivary rinse samples, the methylation values of these normal
samples were very low (<10%). In conclusion, we identified NOL4 as a highly
specific promoter methylated gene associated with HNSCC. IRX1 may have potential 
as a biomarker for HNSCC and should be assessed in a larger cohort.

PMCID: PMC3896520
PMID: 24337411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1092:81-94. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-292-6_6.

Real-time PCR quantification of gene expression in embryonic mouse tissue.

Villalon E(1), Schulz DJ, Waters ST.

Author information: 
(1)Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center, University of Missouri, Columbia,
MO, USA.

The Gbx family of transcription factors consists of two closely related proteins 
GBX1 and GBX2. A defining feature of the GBX family is a highly conserved 60
amino acid DNA-binding domain, which differs by just two amino acids. Gbx1 and
Gbx2 are co-expressed in several areas of the developing central nervous system
including the forebrain, anterior hindbrain, and spinal cord, suggesting the
potential for genetic redundancy. However, there is a spatiotemporal difference
in expression of Gbx1 and Gbx2 in the forebrain and spinal cord. Gbx2 has been
shown to play a critical role in positioning the midbrain/hindbrain boundary and 
developing anterior hindbrain, whereas gene-targeting experiments in mice have
revealed an essential function for Gbx1 in the spinal cord for normal locomotion.
To determine if Gbx2 could potentially compensate for a loss of Gbx1 in the
developing spinal cord, we performed real-time PCR to examine levels of Gbx2
expression in Gbx1(-/-) spinal cord at embryonic day (E) 13.5, a developmental
stage when Gbx2 is rapidly downregulated. We demonstrate that Gbx2 expression is 
elevated in the spinal cord of Gbx1(-/-) embryos.

PMID: 24318815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Neurosci. 2013 Nov 13;14:144. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-14-144.

Stress susceptibility-specific phenotype associated with different hippocampal
transcriptomic responses to chronic tricyclic antidepressant treatment in mice.

Lisowski P(1), Juszczak GR, Goscik J, Stankiewicz AM, Wieczorek M, Zwierzchowski 
L, Swiergiel AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Postepu 36A, 05-552, Magdalenka, Jastrzebiec
n/Warsaw, Poland. p.lisowski@ighz.pl.

BACKGROUND: The effects of chronic treatment with tricyclic antidepressant
(desipramine, DMI) on the hippocampal transcriptome in mice displaying high and
low swim stress-induced analgesia (HA and LA lines) were studied. These mice
displayed different depression-like behavioral responses to DMI: stress-sensitive
HA animals responded to DMI, while LA animals did not.
RESULTS: To investigate the effects of DMI treatment on gene expression
profiling, whole-genome Illumina Expression BeadChip arrays and qPCR were used.
Total RNA isolated from hippocampi was used. Expression profiling was then
performed and data were analyzed bioinformatically to assess the influence of
stress susceptibility-specific phenotypes on hippocampal transcriptomic responses
to chronic DMI. DMI treatment affected the expression of 71 genes in HA mice and 
41 genes in LA mice. We observed the upregulation of Igf2 and the genes involved 
in neurogenesis (HA: Sema3f, Ntng1, Gbx2, Efna5, and Rora; LA: Otx2, Rarb, and
Drd1a) in both mouse lines. In HA mice, we observed the upregulation of genes
involved in neurotransmitter transport, the termination of GABA and glycine
activity (Slc6a11, Slc6a9), glutamate uptake (Slc17a6), and the downregulation of
neuropeptide Y (Npy) and corticotropin releasing hormone-binding protein (Crhbp).
In LA mice, we also observed the upregulation of other genes involved in
neuroprotection (Ttr, Igfbp2, Prlr) and the downregulation of genes involved in
calcium signaling and ion binding (Adcy1, Cckbr, Myl4, Slu7, Scrp1, Zfp330).
CONCLUSIONS: Several antidepressant treatment responses are similar in
individuals with different sensitivities to stress, including the upregulation of
Igf2 and the genes involved in neurogenesis. However, the findings also reveal
that many responses to antidepressant treatments, involving the action of
individual genes engaged in neurogenesis, neurotransmitter transport and
neuroprotection, depend on constitutive hippocampal transcriptomic profiles and
might be genotype dependent. The results suggest that, when and if this becomes
feasible, antidepressant treatment should take into consideration individual
sensitivity to stress.

PMCID: PMC3831054
PMID: 24225037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 1;386(1):181-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.10.026. Epub 2013
Oct 30.

Cerebellar development in the absence of Gbx function in zebrafish.

Su CY(1), Kemp HA(1), Moens CB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA. (2)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. Electronic address: cmoens@fhcrc.org.

The midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) is a well-known organizing center during
vertebrate brain development. The MHB forms at the expression boundary of Otx2
and Gbx2, mutually repressive homeodomain transcription factors expressed in the 
midbrain/forebrain and anterior hindbrain, respectively. The genetic hierarchy of
gene expression at the MHB is complex, involving multiple positive and negative
feedback loops that result in the establishment of non-overlapping domains of
Wnt1 and Fgf8 on either side of the boundary and the consequent specification of 
the cerebellum. The cerebellum derives from the dorsal part of the anterior-most 
hindbrain segment, rhombomere 1 (r1), which undergoes a distinctive morphogenesis
to give rise to the cerebellar primordium within which the various cerebellar
neuron types are specified. Previous studies in the mouse have shown that Gbx2 is
essential for cerebellar development. Using zebrafish mutants we show here that
in the zebrafish gbx1 and gbx2 are required redundantly for morphogenesis of the 
cerebellar primordium and subsequent cerebellar differentiation, but that this
requirement is alleviated by knocking down Otx. Expression of fgf8, wnt1 and the 
entire MHB genetic program is progressively lost in gbx1-;gbx2- double mutants
but is rescued by Otx knock-down. This rescue of the MHB genetic program depends 
on rescued Fgf signaling, however the rescue of cerebellar primordium
morphogenesis is independent of both Gbx and Fgf. Based on our findings we
propose a revised model for the role of Gbx in cerebellar development.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3935510
PMID: 24183937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mech Dev. 2013 Nov-Dec;130(11-12):532-52. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2013.07.004. Epub
2013 Aug 7.

Gbx2 functions as a transcriptional repressor to regulate the specification and
morphogenesis of the mid-hindbrain junction in a dosage- and stage-dependent
manner.

Nakayama Y(1), Kikuta H, Kanai M, Yoshikawa K, Kawamura A, Kobayashi K, Wang Z,
Khan A, Kawakami K, Yamasu K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama 
University, Shimo-Okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama City, Saitama 338-8570, Japan.

The Gbx subfamily of homeodomain transcription factors is involved in the
positioning of the isthmus, which patterns the midbrain and cerebellum in
vertebrates. To uncover the details of Gbx functions, we first examined the dose 
dependency of its effects on brain formation in zebrafish and found that
high-dose gbx2 mRNA injection affected the entire forebrain and midbrain, whereas
low-dose mRNA specifically disrupted the isthmic folding at the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) but only weakly affected the expression of
genes involved in MHB specification. Thus, isthmus morphogenesis, and not its
early specification, is highly sensitive to gbx2. Transient induction of
heat-inducible gbx2 using transgenic fish showed that MHB specification is most
sensitive to gbx2 at the end of epiboly and further suggested that otx2 is the
direct target gene. These together demonstrate that gbx2 regulates both
specification and morphogenesis of the MHB/isthmus region. Deletion analyses
showed that both the N- and C-terminal regions contribute to the suppressive
activity of Gbx2 against the anterior brain and that the N-terminal core region, 
including the Eh1 and proline-rich sequences, is required for this Gbx2 activity.
Comparison of the effects of activated and repressive forms with wild-type Gbx2
suggested that Gbx2 functions as a transcriptional repressor, which was further
evidenced by a luciferase assay in which gbx2 repressed the MHB enhancer of fgf8a
in mouse P19 cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Oct;95(2):156-65. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2013.06.012. Epub
2013 Jul 4.

Impact of LIF (leukemia inhibitory factor) expression in malignant melanoma.

Kuphal S(1), Wallner S, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Molecular Pathology, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address: Silke.Kuphal@klinik.uni-regensburg.de.

Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) signaling regulates cellular processes to
maintain the self-renewal and pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) cells.
Independent of these capabilities, LIF was also identified to be responsible for 
cancer development and progression. However, its detailed cellular function in
cancer remains unclear thus far. We found LIF to be expressed in melanoma cell
lines of primary and metastatic origin and in melanoma tissue. We further
elucidated stimuli that are responsible for the high expression levels of LIF.
Interestingly, hypoxia, specifically through HIF-1a, is involved in regulating
LIF. Furthermore, our data showed that the signaling of LIF was not mediated by
the classically described pathway via STAT3, but rather through BMP4 and BMP7. We
hypothesize that the co-expression of LIF and BMP is necessary for a
de-differentiated cancer phenotype. Ancillary to BMP4 and BMP7, classical stem
cell proteins, e.g., SOX2, NANOG, OCT3/4 and GBX2, are regulated by LIF. We
therefore speculate that LIF can induce a typical "cancer stem cell"-like
behavior, as the appropriate genes are regulated by LIF. Particularly, the
expression of these genes has been proposed as a driving force for tumorigenesis 
and the initiation of metastasis. Notably, LIF has an important role not only for
ES cells but also for cancer development. Melanoblast-related cells (MBrcs),
which resemble the neural crest precursor cells of melanocytes, expressed LIF in 
minor amounts compared to normal human melanocytes. These data, along with the
data that LIF is upregulated in melanoma cell lines compared to melanocytes,
strongly indicate that LIF is important for the stabilization of the melanoma
phenotype. To elucidate the role of LIF in cellular melanoma behavior, we
analyzed proliferation, attachment, migration and colony formation after
silencing LIF by siRNA, and found all four characteristics restricted. In
summary, we can show that LIF is an important factor in melanoma progression.

© 2013.

PMID: 23831429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Neuron. 2013 Jun 5;78(5):895-909. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.030. Epub 2013
May 9.

Temporal and mosaic Tsc1 deletion in the developing thalamus disrupts
thalamocortical circuitry, neural function, and behavior.

Normand EA(1), Crandall SR, Thorn CA, Murphy EM, Voelcker B, Browning C, Machan
JT, Moore CI, Connors BW, Zervas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Division of Biology and Medicine, Brown
University, 70 Ship Street, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Tuberous sclerosis is a developmental genetic disorder caused by mutations in
TSC1, which results in epilepsy, autism, and intellectual disability. The cause
of these neurological deficits remains unresolved. Imaging studies suggest that
the thalamus may be affected in tuberous sclerosis patients, but this has not
been experimentally interrogated. We hypothesized that thalamic deletion of Tsc1 
at distinct stages of mouse brain development would produce differential
phenotypes. We show that mosaic Tsc1 deletion within thalamic precursors at
embryonic day (E) 12.5 disrupts thalamic circuitry and alters neuronal
physiology. Tsc1 deletion at this early stage is unique in causing both seizures 
and compulsive grooming in adult mice. In contrast, only a subset of these
phenotypes occurs when thalamic Tsc1 is deleted at a later embryonic stage. Our
findings demonstrate that abnormalities in a discrete population of neurons can
cause global brain dysfunction and that phenotype severity depends on
developmental timing and degree of genetic mosaicism.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4529124
PMID: 23664552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurosci. 2013 May 8;33(19):8442-53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5786-12.2013.

Thalamic control of neocortical area formation in mice.

Vue TY(1), Lee M, Tan YE, Werkhoven Z, Wang L, Nakagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Developmental Biology Center, Stem Cell Institute,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2013 Aug 28;33(35):13938-9.

The mammalian neocortex undergoes dramatic transformation during development,
from a seemingly homogenous sheet of neuroepithelial cells into a complex
structure that is tangentially divided into discrete areas. This process is
thought to be controlled by a combination of intrinsic patterning mechanisms
within the cortex and afferent axonal projections from the thalamus. However,
roles of thalamic afferents in the formation of areas are still poorly
understood. In this study, we show that genetically increasing or decreasing the 
size of the lateral geniculate nucleus of the mouse thalamus resulted in a
corresponding change in the size of the primary visual area. Furthermore,
elimination of most thalamocortical projections from the outset of their
development resulted in altered areal gene expression patterns, particularly in
the primary visual and somatosensory areas, where they lost sharp boundaries with
adjacent areas. Together, these results demonstrate the critical roles of
thalamic afferents in the establishment of neocortical areas.

PMCID: PMC3732791
PMID: 23658181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Apr 11;4:e583. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.98.

Menin mediates epigenetic regulation via histone H3 lysine 9 methylation.

Yang YJ(1), Song TY, Park J, Lee J, Lim J, Jang H, Kim YN, Yang JH, Song Y, Choi 
A, Lee HY, Jo CH, Han JW, Kim ST, Youn HD, Cho EJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Republic of
Korea.

Menin, encoded by the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) gene, is a tumor
suppressor that leads to multiple endocrine tumors upon loss of its function.
Menin functions as a transcriptional activator by tethering MLL complex to
mediate histone H3 K4 methylation. It also functions as a repressor. However, the
molecular mechanism of how menin contributes to the opposite outcome in gene
expression is largely unknown. Here, we investigated the role of menin in the
epigenetic regulation of transcription mediated by histone covalent modification.
We show that the global methylation level of histone H3 K9, as well as H3 K4, was
decreased in Men1(-/-) MEF cells. Consistently, menin was able to interact with
the suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog family protein, SUV39H1, to mediate H3 
K9 methylation. This interaction decreased when patient-derived MEN1 mutation was
introduced into the SUV39H1-interaction domain. We show that menin mediated
different chromatin changes depending on target genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies showed that menin directly associated with the GBX2
promoter and menin-dependent recruitment of SUV39H1 was essential for chromatin
remodeling and transcriptional regulation. These results provide a molecular
basis of how menin functions as a transcriptional repressor and suggest that
menin-dependent integration of H3 K9 methylation might play an important role in 
preventing tumors.

PMCID: PMC3668625
PMID: 23579270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 May 15;19(10):2723-33. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2986. 
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Identification of prognosis-relevant subgroups in patients with chemoresistant
triple-negative breast cancer.

Yu KD(1), Zhu R, Zhan M, Rodriguez AA, Yang W, Wong S, Makris A, Lehmann BD, Chen
X, Mayer I, Pietenpol JA, Shao ZM, Symmans WF, Chang JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Shanghai Cancer Center and Cancer Institute of
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and residual disease 
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy generally have worse outcome; however, some
patients with residual tumor after neoadjuvant chemotherapy do not relapse. We
hypothesize that there are subgroups of patients with chemoresistant TNBC with
different prognosis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Forty-nine chemoresistant cases from 111 patients with TNBC 
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX) 
constituted the discovery cohort, and 25 chemoresistant samples from 47
neoadjuvant chemotherapy-treated TNBC (The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX) were 
chosen for validation. Extended validation was carried out in 269 operable TNBC
predicted to be chemoresistant by expression pattern from published datasets.
RESULTS: We established a seven-gene prognostic signature using dChip and gene
set enrichment analyses. In the independent validation cohort, the classifier
predicted correctly with positive predictive value of 75.0% and negative
predictive value (i.e., relapse-free survival; RFS) of 76.9% at 3 years. Those
predicted to relapse had a HR of 4.67 [95% confidence interval (CI): 1.27-17.15] 
for relapse in 3 years. In extended validation, patients predicted not to relapse
exhibited 3-year RFS of 78.9%, whereas the 3-year RFS was 48.5% for patients
predicted to relapse, with HR of 2.61 (95% CI: 1.52-4.49). The TNBC subgroup that
predicted to have relatively favorable prognosis was characterized by high
expression of "luminal-like" genes [androgen-receptor (AR) and GATA3], whereas
the subgroup with worse prognosis was characterized by expression of cancer
stem-cell markers.
CONCLUSION: We developed a clinically relevant signature for patients with
chemoresistant TNBC. For these women, new therapeutic strategies like targeting
AR activation or cancer stem cells may need to be developed.

©2013 AACR

PMCID: PMC3655097
PMID: 23549873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56214. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056214. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Characterization of the Gbx1-/- mouse mutant: a requirement for Gbx1 in normal
locomotion and sensorimotor circuit development.

Buckley DM(1), Burroughs-Garcia J, Lewandoski M, Waters ST.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri,
United States of America.

The Gbx class of homeobox genes encodes DNA binding transcription factors
involved in regulation of embryonic central nervous system (CNS) development.
Gbx1 is dynamically expressed within spinal neuron progenitor pools and becomes
restricted to the dorsal mantle zone by embryonic day (E) 12.5. Here, we provide 
the first functional analysis of Gbx1. We generated mice containing a conditional
Gbx1 allele in which exon 2 that contains the functional homeodomain is flanked
with loxP sites (Gbx1(flox)); Cre-mediated recombination of this allele results
in a Gbx1 null allele. In contrast to mice homozygous for a loss-of-function
allele of Gbx2, mice homozygous for the Gbx1 null allele, Gbx1(-/-), are viable
and reproductively competent. However, Gbx1(-/-) mice display a gross locomotive 
defect that specifically affects hindlimb gait. Analysis of embryos homozygous
for the Gbx1 null allele reveals disrupted assembly of the proprioceptive
sensorimotor circuit within the spinal cord, and a reduction in ISL1(+) ventral
motor neurons. These data suggest a functional requirement for Gbx1 in normal
development of the neural networks that contribute to locomotion. The generation 
of this null allele has enabled us to functionally characterize a novel role for 
Gbx1 in development of the spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC3572027
PMID: 23418536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Magn Reson Med. 2013 Dec;70(6):1707-17. doi: 10.1002/mrm.24597. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

MRI analysis of cerebellar and vestibular developmental phenotypes in Gbx2
conditional knockout mice.

Szulc KU(1), Nieman BJ, Houston EJ, Bartelle BB, Lerch JP, Joyner AL, Turnbull
DH.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine at the Skirball Institute of
Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA; Biomedical Imaging Program, New York University School of Medicine,
New York, New York, USA.

PURPOSE: Our aim in this study was to apply three-dimensional MRI methods to
analyze early postnatal morphological phenotypes in a Gbx2 conditional knockout
(Gbx2-CKO) mouse that has variable midline deletions in the central cerebellum,
reminiscent of many human cerebellar hypoplasia syndromes.
METHODS: In vivo three-dimensional manganese-enhanced MRI at 100-µm isotropic
resolution was used to visualize mouse brains between postnatal days 3 and 11,
when cerebellum morphology undergoes dramatic changes. Deformation-based
morphometry and volumetric analysis of manganese-enhanced MRI images were used
to, respectively, detect and quantify morphological phenotypes in Gbx2-CKO mice. 
Ex vivo micro-MRI was performed after perfusion-fixation with supplemented
gadolinium for higher resolution (50-µm) analysis.
RESULTS: In vivo manganese-enhanced MRI and deformation-based morphometry
correctly identified known cerebellar defects in Gbx2-CKO mice, and novel
phenotypes were discovered in the deep cerebellar nuclei and the
vestibulo-cerebellum, both validated using histology. Ex vivo micro-MRI revealed 
subtle phenotypes in both the vestibulo-cerebellum and the vestibulo-cochlear
organ, providing an interesting example of complementary phenotypes in a sensory 
organ and its associated brain region.
CONCLUSION: These results show the potential of three-dimensional MRI for
detecting and analyzing developmental defects in mouse models of
neurodevelopmental diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3657598
PMID: 23400959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Cell Sci. 2013 Mar 1;126(Pt 5):1093-8. doi: 10.1242/jcs.118273. Epub 2013 Jan
23.

Gbx2, a LIF/Stat3 target, promotes reprogramming to and retention of the
pluripotent ground state.

Tai CI(1), Ying QL.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research
at USC, Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of Medicine, University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) by
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) maintains mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC)
self-renewal and also facilitates reprogramming to ground state pluripotency.
Exactly how LIF/Stat3 signaling exerts these effects, however, remains elusive.
We identified gastrulation brain homeobox 2 (Gbx2) as a LIF/Stat3 downstream
target that, when overexpressed, allows long-term expansion of undifferentiated
mESCs in the absence of LIF/Stat3 signaling. Elevated Gbx2 expression also
enhanced reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem
cells. Moreover, overexpression of Gbx2 was sufficient to reprogram epiblast stem
cells to ground state ESCs. Our results reveal a novel function of Gbx2 in mESC
reprogramming and LIF/Stat3-mediated self-renewal.

PMID: 23345404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e47366. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047366. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Elongation factor 1 alpha1 and genes associated with Usher syndromes are
downstream targets of GBX2.

Roeseler DA(1), Sachdev S, Buckley DM, Joshi T, Wu DK, Xu D, Hannink M, Waters
ST.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri,
United States of America.

Gbx2 encodes a DNA-binding transcription factor that plays pivotal roles during
embryogenesis. Gain-and loss-of-function studies in several vertebrate species
have demonstrated a requirement for Gbx2 in development of the anterior
hindbrain, spinal cord, inner ear, heart, and neural crest cells. However, the
target genes through which GBX2 exerts its effects remain obscure. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with direct sequencing (ChIP-Seq) analysis 
in a human prostate cancer cell line, we identified cis-regulatory elements bound
by GBX2 to provide insight into its direct downstream targets. The analysis
revealed more than 286 highly significant candidate target genes, falling into
various functional groups, of which 51% are expressed in the nervous system.
Several of the top candidate genes include EEF1A1, ROBO1, PLXNA4, SLIT3, NRP1,
and NOTCH2, as well as genes associated with the Usher syndrome, PCDH15 and
USH2A, and are plausible candidates contributing to the developmental defects in 
Gbx2(-/-) mice. We show through gel shift analyses that sequences within the
promoter or introns of EEF1A1, ROBO1, PCDH15, USH2A and NOTCH2, are directly
bound by GBX2. Consistent with these in vitro results, analyses of Gbx2(-/-)
embryos indicate that Gbx2 function is required for migration of Robo1-expressing
neural crest cells out of the hindbrain. Furthermore, we show that GBX2 activates
transcriptional activity through the promoter of EEF1A1, suggesting that GBX2
could also regulate gene expression indirectly via EEF1A. Taken together, our
studies show that GBX2 plays a dynamic role in development and diseases.

PMCID: PMC3493575
PMID: 23144817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2012 Dec;139(24):4633-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.086991. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Gbx2 regulates thalamocortical axon guidance by modifying the LIM and Robo codes.

Chatterjee M(1), Li K, Chen L, Maisano X, Guo Q, Gan L, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, USA.

Combinatorial expression of transcription factors forms transcriptional codes to 
confer neuronal identities and connectivity. However, how these intrinsic factors
orchestrate the spatiotemporal expression of guidance molecules to dictate the
responsiveness of axons to guidance cues is less understood. Thalamocortical
axons (TCAs) represent the major input to the neocortex and modulate cognitive
functions, consciousness and alertness. TCAs travel a long distance and make
multiple target choices en route to the cortex. The homeodomain transcription
factor Gbx2 is essential for TCA development, as loss of Gbx2 abolishes TCAs in
mice. Using a novel TCA-specific reporter, we have discovered that thalamic axons
are mostly misrouted to the ventral midbrain and dorsal midline of the
diencephalon in Gbx2-deficient mice. Furthermore, conditionally deleting Gbx2 at 
different embryonic stages has revealed a sustained role of Gbx2 in regulating
TCA navigation and targeting. Using explant culture and mosaic analyses, we
demonstrate that Gbx2 controls the intrinsic responsiveness of TCAs to guidance
cues. The guidance defects of Gbx2-deficient TCAs are associated with abnormal
expression of guidance receptors Robo1 and Robo2. Finally, we demonstrate that
Gbx2 controls Robo expression by regulating LIM-domain transcription factors
through three different mechanisms: Gbx2 and Lhx2 compete for binding to the Lmo3
promoter and exert opposing effects on its transcription; repressing Lmo3 by Gbx2
is essential for Lhx2 activity to induce Robo2; and Gbx2 represses Lhx9
transcription, which in turn induces Robo1. Our findings illustrate the
transcriptional control of differential expression of Robo1 and Robo2, which may 
play an important role in establishing the topography of TCAs.

PMCID: PMC3509725
PMID: 23136391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47111. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047111. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Gbx2 plays an essential but transient role in the formation of thalamic nuclei.

Li K(1), Zhang J, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, United States of America.

Unlike the laminar arrangement of neurons in the neocortex, thalamic neurons
aggregate to form about dozens of nuclei, many of which make topographic
connections with specific areas in the neocortex. The molecular mechanisms
underlying the formation of thalamic nuclei remain largely unknown. Homeodomain
transcription factor Gbx2 is specifically expressed in the developing thalamus.
Deleting Gbx2 leads to severe disruption of the histogenesis of the thalamus in
mice, demonstrating an essential role of Gbx2 in this brain structure. Using
inducible genetic fate mapping, we have previously shown that the neuronal
precursors for different sets of thalamic nuclei have distinctive onset and
duration of Gbx2 expression, suggesting that the dynamic expression of Gbx2 plays
an important role in the specification and differentiation of thalamic nuclei.
Here, we showed that the Gbx2 lineage exclusively gives rise to neurons but not
glia in the thalamus. We performed conditional deletion to examine the temporal
requirements of Gbx2 in the developing thalamus in mice. Corresponding to the
dynamic and differential expression of Gbx2 in various thalamic nucleus groups,
deleting Gbx2 at different embryonic stages disrupts formation of distinct sets
of thalamic nuclei. Interestingly, different thalamic nuclei have remarkably
different requirements of Gbx2 for the survival of thalamic neurons. Furthermore,
although Gbx2 expression persists in many thalamic nuclei until adulthood, only
the initial expression of Gbx2 following neurogenesis is crucial for the
differentiation of thalamic nuclei. Our results indicate that the dynamic
expression of Gbx2 may act as an important determinant in coupling with other
developmental programs to generate distinct thalamic nuclei.

PMCID: PMC3464241
PMID: 23056596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Biol. 2012 Dec 15;372(2):249-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.09.019. Epub 2012 
Oct 4.

Genetic dissection of midbrain dopamine neuron development in vivo.

Ellisor D(1), Rieser C, Voelcker B, Machan JT, Zervas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Division of
Biology and Medicine, Brown University, 70 Ship St., Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Midbrain dopamine (MbDA) neurons are partitioned into medial and lateral cohorts 
that control complex functions. However, the genetic underpinnings of MbDA neuron
heterogeneity are unclear. While it is known that Wnt1-expressing progenitors
contribute to MbDA neurons, the role of Wnt1 in MbDA neuron development in vivo
is unresolved. We show that mice with a spontaneous point mutation in Wnt1 have a
unique phenotype characterized by the loss of medial MbDA neurons concomitant
with a severe depletion of Wnt1-expressing progenitors and diminished
LMX1a-expressing progenitors. Wnt1 mutant embryos also have alterations in a
hierarchical gene regulatory loop suggesting multiple gene involvement in the
Wnt1 mutant MbDA neuron phenotype. To investigate this possibility, we
conditionally deleted Gbx2, Fgf8, and En1/2 after their early role in patterning 
and asked whether these genetic manipulations phenocopied the depletion of MbDA
neurons in Wnt1 mutants. The conditional deletion of Gbx2 did not result in
re-positioning or distribution of MbDA neurons. The temporal deletion of Fgf8 did
not result in the loss of either LMX1a-expressing progenitors nor the initial
population of differentiated MbDA neurons, but did result in a complete loss of
MbDA neurons at later stages. The temporal deletion and species specific
manipulation of En1/2 demonstrated a continued and species specific role of
Engrailed genes in MbDA neuron development. Notably, our conditional deletion
experiments revealed phenotypes dissimilar to Wnt1 mutants indicating the unique 
role of Wnt1 in MbDA neuron development. By placing Wnt1, Fgf8, and En1/2 in the 
context of their temporal requirement for MbDA neuron development, we further
deciphered the developmental program underpinning MbDA neuron progenitors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3502751
PMID: 23041116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Jan;131(1):292-301. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs282. Epub 2012 Sep
14.

Comparative gene expression profiling in human-induced pluripotent stem
cell--derived cardiocytes and human and cynomolgus heart tissue.

Puppala D(1), Collis LP, Sun SZ, Bonato V, Chen X, Anson B, Pletcher M, Fermini
B, Engle SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Compound Safety Prediction, Pfizer, Inc., Groton, Connecticut 06340, USA.
Dinesh.Puppala@pfizer.com

Cardiotoxicity is one of the leading causes of drug attrition. Current in vitro
models insufficiently predict cardiotoxicity, and there is a need for alternative
physiologically relevant models. Here we describe the gene expression profile of 
human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiocytes (iCC) postthaw over a
period of 42 days in culture and compare this profile to human fetal and adult as
well as adult cynomolgus nonhuman primate (NHP, Macaca fascicularis) heart
tissue. Our results indicate that iCC express relevant cardiac markers such as
ion channels (SCN5A, KCNJ2, CACNA1C, KCNQ1, and KCNH2), tissue-specific
structural markers (MYH6, MYLPF, MYBPC3, DES, TNNT2, and TNNI3), and
transcription factors (NKX2.5, GATA4, and GATA6) and lack the expression of stem 
cell markers (FOXD3, GBX2, NANOG, POU5F1, SOX2, and ZFP42). Furthermore, we
performed a functional evaluation of contractility of the iCC and showed
functional and pharmacological correlations with myocytes isolated from adult NHP
hearts. These results suggest that stem cell-derived cardiocytes may represent a 
novel in vitro model to study human cardiac toxicity with potential ex vivo and
in vivo translation.

PMID: 22982684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Front Genet. 2012 Aug 7;3:141. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00141. eCollection 2012.

Identification of Stage-Specific Gene Expression Signatures in Response to
Retinoic Acid during the Neural Differentiation of Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells.

Akanuma H(1), Qin XY, Nagano R, Win-Shwe TT, Imanishi S, Zaha H, Yoshinaga J,
Fukuda T, Ohsako S, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Health Risk Research Section, Center for Environmental Risk Research, National
Institute for Environmental Studies Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

We have previously established a protocol for the neural differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells (mESCs) as an efficient tool to evaluate the
neurodevelopmental toxicity of environmental chemicals. Here, we described a
multivariate bioinformatic approach to identify the stage-specific gene sets
associated with neural differentiation of mESCs. We exposed mESCs (B6G-2 cells)
to 10(-8) or 10(-7)<U+2009>M of retinoic acid (RA) for 4<U+2009>days during embryoid body
formation and then performed morphological analysis on day of differentiation
(DoD) 8 and 36, or genomic microarray analysis on DoD 0, 2, 8, and 36. Three gene
sets, namely a literature-based gene set (set 1), an analysis-based gene set (set
2) using self-organizing map and principal component analysis, and an enrichment 
gene set (set 3), were selected by the combined use of knowledge from literatures
and gene information selected from the microarray data. A gene network analysis
for each gene set was then performed using Bayesian statistics to identify
stage-specific gene expression signatures in response to RA during mESC neural
differentiation. Our results showed that RA significantly increased the size of
neurosphere, neuronal cells, and glial cells on DoD 36. In addition, the gene
network analysis showed that glial fibrillary acidic protein, a neural marker,
remarkably up-regulates the other genes in gene set 1 and 3, and Gbx2, a neural
development marker, significantly up-regulates the other genes in gene set 2 on
DoD 36 in the presence of RA. These findings suggest that our protocol for
identification of developmental stage-specific gene expression and interaction is
a useful method for the screening of environmental chemical toxicity during
neurodevelopmental periods.

PMCID: PMC3413097
PMID: 22891073  [PubMed]


44. Front Neurosci. 2012 May 11;6:66. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2012.00066. eCollection
2012.

Patterning and compartment formation in the diencephalon.

Chatterjee M(1), Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center Farmington, CT, USA.

The diencephalon gives rise to structures that play an important role in
connecting the anterior forebrain with the rest of the central nervous system.
The thalamus is the major diencephalic derivative that functions as a relay
station between the cortex and other lower order sensory systems. Almost two
decades ago, neuromeric/prosomeric models were proposed describing the
subdivision and potential segmentation of the diencephalon. Unlike the laminar
structure of the cortex, the diencephalon is progressively divided into distinct 
functional compartments consisting principally of thalamus, epithalamus,
pretectum, and hypothalamus. Neurons generated within these domains further
aggregate to form clusters called nuclei, which form specific structural and
functional units. We review the recent advances in understanding the genetic
mechanisms that are involved in the patterning and compartment formation of the
diencephalon.

PMCID: PMC3349951
PMID: 22593732  [PubMed]


45. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(13):2618-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00083-12. Epub 2012 May 
7.

Gbx2 directly restricts Otx2 expression to forebrain and midbrain, competing with
class III POU factors.

Inoue F(1), Kurokawa D, Takahashi M, Aizawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Body Plan, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, 
Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

Otx2 plays essential roles in rostral brain development, and its counteraction
with Gbx2 has been suggested to determine the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB)
in vertebrates. We previously identified the FM enhancer that is conserved among 
vertebrates and drives Otx2 transcription in forebrain/midbrain from the early
somite stage. In this study, we found that the POU homeodomain of class III POU
factors (Brn1, Brn2, Brn4, and Oct6) associates with noncanonical target sequence
TAATTA in the FM enhancer. MicroRNA-mediated knockdown of Brn2 and Oct6
diminished the FM enhancer activity in anterior neural progenitor cells (NPCs)
differentiated from P19 cells. The class III POU factors associate with the FM
enhancer in forebrain and midbrain but not in hindbrain. We also demonstrated
that the Gbx2 homeodomain recognizes the same target TAATTA in the FM enhancer,
and Gbx2 associates with the FM enhancer in hindbrain. Gbx2 misexpression in the 
anterior NPCs repressed the FM enhancer activity and inhibited Brn2 association
with the enhancer, whereas Gbx2 knockdown caused ectopic Brn2 association in the 
posterior NPCs. These results suggest that class III POU factors and Gbx2 share
the same target site, TAATTA, in the FM enhancer and that their region-specific
binding restricts Otx2 expression at the MHB.

PMCID: PMC3434480
PMID: 22566684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Biol. 2012 Jul 1;367(1):55-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.04.025. Epub 2012
Apr 28.

Mutual repression between Gbx2 and Otx2 in sensory placodes reveals a general
mechanism for ectodermal patterning.

Steventon B(1), Mayor R, Streit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Guy's Campus,
Tower Wing Floor 27, London SE1 9RT, UK.

In the vertebrate head, central and peripheral components of the sensory nervous 
system have different embryonic origins, the neural plate and sensory placodes.
This raises the question of how they develop in register to form functional sense
organs and sensory circuits. Here we show that mutual repression between the
homeobox transcription factors Gbx2 and Otx2 patterns the placode territory by
influencing regional identity and by segregating inner ear and trigeminal
progenitors. Activation of Otx2 targets is necessary for anterior olfactory, lens
and trigeminal character, while Gbx2 function is required for the formation of
the posterior otic placode. Thus, like in the neural plate antagonistic
interaction between Otx2 and Gbx2 establishes positional information thus
providing a general mechanism for rostro-caudal patterning of the ectoderm. Our
findings support the idea that the Otx/Gbx boundary has an ancient evolutionary
origin to which different modules were recruited to specify cells of different
fates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3384001
PMID: 22564795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Growth Differ. 2012 Apr;54(3):373-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2012.01348.x.

Development and evolution of cerebellar neural circuits.

Hashimoto M(1), Hibi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai, Showa, Nagoya, Aichi, 466-8550, Japan.
mhashimoto@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

The cerebellum controls smooth and skillful movements and it is also involved in 
higher cognitive and emotional functions. The cerebellum is derived from the
dorsal part of the anterior hindbrain and contains two groups of cerebellar
neurons: glutamatergic and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic neurons. Purkinje 
cells are GABAergic and granule cells are glutamatergic. Granule and Purkinje
cells receive input from outside of the cerebellum from mossy and climbing
fibers. Genetic analysis of mice and zebrafish has revealed genetic cascades that
control the development of the cerebellum and cerebellar neural circuits. During 
early neurogenesis, rostrocaudal patterning by intrinsic and extrinsic factors,
such as Otx2, Gbx2 and Fgf8, plays an important role in the positioning and
formation of the cerebellar primordium. The cerebellar glutamatergic neurons are 
derived from progenitors in the cerebellar rhombic lip, which express the
proneural gene Atoh1. The GABAergic neurons are derived from progenitors in the
ventricular zone, which express the proneural gene Ptf1a. The mossy and climbing 
fiber neurons originate from progenitors in the hindbrain rhombic lip that
express Atoh1 or Ptf1a. Purkinje cells exhibit mediolateral compartmentalization 
determined on the birthdate of Purkinje cells, and linked to the precise neural
circuitry formation. Recent studies have shown that anatomy and development of
the cerebellum is conserved between mammals and bony fish (teleost species). In
this review, we describe the development of cerebellar neurons and neural
circuitry, and discuss their evolution by comparing developmental processes of
mammalian and teleost cerebellum.

© 2012 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2012 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 22524607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Front Neurosci. 2012 Feb 22;6:27. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2012.00027. eCollection
2012.

Mouse thalamic differentiation: gli-dependent pattern and gli-independent
prepattern.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Heide M, Zhou X, Blaess S, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University 
of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for thalamic development. The Gli
transcription factors act downstream of Shh - while Gli2 is the major activator
(GliA), Gli3 acts primarily as a repressor (GliR). The thalamus is remarkable
among dorsal structures because of its proximity to the mid-diencephalic
organizer, a unique dorsal Shh source. This lends complexity to the interactions 
between Shh, Gli2, and Gli3, suggesting the presence of a dorsal Gli activator
which elsewhere is found only ventrally, and making the dissection of thalamic
Gli functions particularly interesting. A current model based on mutant
phenotypes in telencephalon and midbrain postulates a degree of reciprocal
antagonism of Shh and Gli3 in dorsal brain regions. To approach the role of Gli
factors in thalamic specification we first analyzed mice deficient in Gli2 or
Gli3. In Gli2 mutants, the thalamus is small and poorly differentiated with the
exception of the medial and intralaminar nuclei which, in contrast, are
specifically and severely affected by Gli3 inactivation. Gbx2 expression is very 
reduced in the Gli3 mutant. Most thalamic nuclei are present in both mutants,
although incompletely differentiated, as reflected by the loss of specific
markers. The ventral posterior group, revealed by novel specific marker Hes1, is 
present in both mutants and extends axons to the telencephalon. To test the
Gli3/Shh interaction we generated a novel mutant deficient in Gli3 and
neuroepithelial Shh. The thalamus of the n-Shh/Gli3 double mutants is very large 
and very poorly differentiated except for a broad domain of Gbx2, Lhx2, and Calb2
expression. In utero electroporation experiments on wild type embryos suggest
that a stage-specific factor acting early is responsible for this prepattern. We 
show that, in the thalamus, GliA acts downstream of Shh to specify pattern and
size of the thalamic nuclei to the exception of the medial and intralaminar
groups. Gli3A can partially substitute for Gli2A in the Gli2 mutant. GliR is
essential for specification and growth of the medial and intralaminar nuclei,
contributes to the specification of other thalamic nuclei and reduces thalamic
size. GliA (from neuroepithelial Shh signaling) and GliR do not show reciprocal
antagonism in the thalamus, and their joint abolition does not rescue the wild
type phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3283895
PMID: 22371696  [PubMed]


49. Mol Biol Evol. 2011 Nov;28(11):3005-7. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msr231. Epub 2011 Sep 
22.

Loss-of-function mutation in a repressor module of human-specifically activated
enhancer HACNS1.

Sumiyama K(1), Saitou N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Population Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Japan. ksumiyam@lab.nig.ac.jp

The cis-regulatory element contributed to gaining humanness is of great interest 
in human evolutionary studies. A human-accelerated region exceeding neutral
evolutionary rates, termed HACNS1, was recently reported as a positively selected
sequence acquiring novel TF-binding sites responsible for human-specific gain of 
limb enhancer function. However, another possibility is loss of function in
repressor element in HACNS1. Signature of the human substitutions in the 81-bp
region infers that a GC-biased gene conversion (BGC) might create these seemingly
excessive substitutions. To evaluate the 81-bp function, we performed transgenic 
mouse assay of the HACNS1 construct lacking the 81-bp region. The deleted
construct showed similar enhancer activity to the intact human HACNS1, suggesting
that the function of the human 81-bp region is not an activating enhancer but
rather a disrupted repressor. This result infers that loss of function in the
HACNS1 81-bp region, possibly via a BGC, played an important role in
human-specific evolution.

PMID: 21940638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3745-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.070318. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Notch signalling stabilises boundary formation at the midbrain-hindbrain
organiser.

Tossell K(1), Kiecker C, Wizenmann A, Lang E, Irving C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower
Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

The midbrain-hindbrain interface gives rise to a boundary of particular
importance in CNS development as it forms a local signalling centre, the proper
functioning of which is essential for the formation of tectum and cerebellum.
Positioning of the mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB) within the neuroepithelium is
dependent on the interface of Otx2 and Gbx2 expression domains, yet in the
absence of either or both of these genes, organiser genes are still expressed,
suggesting that other, as yet unknown mechanisms are also involved in MHB
establishment. Here, we present evidence for a role for Notch signalling in
stabilising cell lineage restriction and regulating organiser gene expression at 
the MHB. Experimental interference with Notch signalling in the chick embryo
disrupts MHB formation, including downregulation of the organiser signal Fgf8.
Ectopic activation of Notch signalling in cells of the anterior hindbrain results
in an exclusion of those cells from rhombomeres 1 and 2, and in a simultaneous
clustering along the anterior and posterior boundaries of this area, suggesting
that Notch signalling influences cell sorting. These cells ectopically express
the boundary marker Fgf3. In agreement with a role for Notch signalling in cell
sorting, anterior hindbrain cells with activated Notch signalling segregate from 
normal cells in an aggregation assay. Finally, misexpression of the Notch
modulator Lfng or the Notch ligand Ser1 across the MHB leads to a shift in
boundary position and loss of restriction of Fgf8 to the MHB. We propose that
differential Notch signalling stabilises the MHB through regulating cell sorting 
and specifying boundary cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3152928
PMID: 21795283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20940. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020940. Epub 2011 Jun 16.

The lineage contribution and role of Gbx2 in spinal cord development.

Luu B(1), Ellisor D, Zervas M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology, Cell
Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Forging a relationship between progenitors with dynamically changing 
gene expression and their terminal fate is instructive for understanding the
logic of how cell-type diversity is established. The mouse spinal cord is an
ideal system to study these mechanisms in the context of developmental genetics
and nervous system development. Here we focus on the Gastrulation homeobox 2
(Gbx2) transcription factor, which has not been explored in spinal cord
development.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We determined the molecular identity of
Gbx2-expressing spinal cord progenitors. We also utilized genetic inducible fate 
mapping to mark the Gbx2 lineage at different embryonic stages in vivo in mouse. 
Collectively, we uncover cell behaviors, cytoarchitectonic organization, and the 
terminal cell fate of the Gbx2 lineage. Notably, both ventral motor neurons and
interneurons are derived from the Gbx2 lineage, but only during a short
developmental period. Short-term fate mapping during mouse spinal cord
development shows that Gbx2 expression is transient and is extinguished ventrally
in a rostral to caudal gradient. Concomitantly, a permanent lineage restriction
boundary ensures that spinal cord neurons derived from the Gbx2 lineage are
confined to a dorsal compartment that is maintained in the adult and that this
lineage generates inhibitory interneurons of the spinal cord. Using lineage
tracing and molecular markers to follow Gbx2-mutant cells, we show that the loss 
of Gbx2 globally affects spinal cord patterning including the organization of
interneuron progenitors. Finally, long-term lineage analysis reveals that the
presence and timing of Gbx2 expression in interneuron progenitors results in the 
differential contribution to subtypes of terminally differentiated interneurons
in the adult spinal cord.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We illustrate the complex cellular nature of Gbx2
expression and lineage contribution to the mouse spinal cord. In a broader
context, this study provides a direct link between spinal cord progenitors
undergoing dynamic changes in molecular identity and terminal neuronal fate.

PMCID: PMC3116860
PMID: 21698205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer. 2011 Jul 1;117(13):2898-909. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25818. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

CpG island methylation profiling in human salivary gland adenoid cystic
carcinoma.

Bell A(1), Bell D, Weber RS, El-Naggar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Institute, The University of Mississippi
Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi, USA. abell2@umc.edu

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is a fundamental epigenetic event associated with
physiologic and pathologic conditions, including cancer. Hypermethylation of CpG 
islands at active gene promoters leads to transcriptional repression, whereas
hypomethylation is associated with gene overexpression. The aim of this study was
to identify genes in adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of salivary gland strongly
deregulated by epigenetic CpG island methylation, to validate selected genes by
conventional techniques, and to correlate the findings with clinicopathologic
factors.
METHODS: The authors analyzed 16 matched normal and tumor tissues for aberrant
DNA methylation using the methylated CpG island amplification and microarray
method and the pyrosequencing technique.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis showed hypomethylation in 7 and hypermethylation in 
32 CpG islands. Hypomethylation was identified in CpG islands near FBXO17, PHKG1,
LOXL1, DOCK1, and PARVG. Hypermethylation was identified near genes encoding
predominantly transcription factors (EN1, FOXE1, GBX2, FOXL1, TBX4, MEIS1, LBX2, 
NR2F2, POU3F3, IRX3, TFAP2C, NKX2-4, PITX1, NKX2-5), and 13 genes with different 
functions (MT1H, EPHX3, AQPEP, BCL2L11, SLC35D3, S1PR5, PNLIPRP1, CLIC6, RASAL,
XRN2, GSTM5, FNDC1, INSRR). Four CpG islands by EN1, FOXE1, TBX4, and PITX1 were 
validated by pyrosequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: The highly methylated genes in tumor versus normal tissue are linked
to developmental, apoptotic, and other fundamental cellular pathways, suggesting 
that down-regulation of these genes is associated with ACC development and
progression. With EN1 hypermethylation showing potential as a possible biomarker 
for ACC in salivary gland, the biological and therapeutic implications of these
findings require further preclinical investigations.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3123690
PMID: 21692051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Neuroscience. 2011 Sep 29;192:793-805. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.04.039.
Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Ion channels and ionotropic receptors in human embryonic stem cell derived neural
progenitors.

Young A(1), Machacek DW, Dhara SK, Macleish PR, Benveniste M, Dodla MC, Sturkie
CD, Stice SL.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Bioscience Center, 425 River Road Room 450, Athens, GA 30602,
USA.

Human neural progenitor cells differentiated from human embryonic stem cells
offer a potential cell source for studying neurodegenerative diseases and for
drug screening assays. Previously, we demonstrated that human neural progenitors 
could be maintained in a proliferative state with the addition of leukemia
inhibitory factor and basic fibroblast growth factor. Here we demonstrate that 96
h after removal of basic fibroblast growth factor the neural progenitor cell
culture was significantly altered and cell replication halted. Fourteen days
after the removal of basic fibroblast growth factor, most cells expressed
microtubule-associated protein 2 and TUJ1, markers characterizing a post-mitotic 
neuronal phenotype as well as neural developmental markers Cdh2 and Gbx2.
Real-time PCR was performed to determine the ionotropic receptor subunit
expression profile. Differentiated neural progenitors express subunits of
glutamatergic, GABAergic, nicotinic, purinergic and transient receptor potential 
receptors. In addition, sodium and calcium channel subunits were also expressed. 
Functionally, virtually all the hNP cells tested under whole-cell voltage clamp
exhibited delayed rectifier potassium channel currents and some differentiated
cells exhibited tetrodotoxin-sensitive, voltage-dependent sodium channel current.
Action potentials could also be elicited by currents injection under whole-cell
current clamp in a minority of cells. These results indicate that removing basic 
fibroblast growth factor from the neural progenitor cell cultures leads to a
post-mitotic state, and has the capability to produce excitable cells that can
generate action potentials, a landmark characteristic of a neuronal phenotype.
This is the first report of an efficient and simple means of generating human
neuronal cells for ionotropic receptor assays and ultimately for electrically
active human neural cell assays for drug discovery.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3166353
PMID: 21672611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020315. Epub 2011 May 20.

Interaction between axons and specific populations of surrounding cells is
indispensable for collateral formation in the mammillary system.

Szabó NE(1), Zhao T, Çankaya M, Stoykova A, Zhou X, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Development Group, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: An essential phenomenon during brain development is the extension of 
long collateral branches by axons. How the local cellular environment contributes
to the initial sprouting of these branches in specific points of an axonal shaft 
remains unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The principal mammillary tract (pm) is a landmark
axonal bundle connecting ventral diencephalon to brainstem (through the
mammillotegmental tract, mtg). Late in development, the axons of the principal
mammillary tract sprout collateral branches at a very specific point forming a
large bundle whose target is the thalamus. Inspection of this model showed a
number of distinct, identified cell populations originated in the dorsal and the 
ventral diencephalon and migrating during development to arrange themselves into 
several discrete groups around the branching point. Further analysis of this
system in several mouse lines carrying mutant alleles of genes expressed in
defined subpopulations (including Pax6, Foxb1, Lrp6 and Gbx2) together with the
use of an unambiguous genetic marker of mammillary axons revealed: 1) a specific 
group of Pax6-expressing cells in close apposition with the prospective branching
point is indispensable to elicit axonal branching in this system; and 2)
cooperation of transcription factors Foxb1 and Pax6 to differentially regulate
navigation and fasciculation of distinct branches of the principal mammillary
tract.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results define for the first time a model system
where interaction of the axonal shaft with a specific group of surrounding cells 
is essential to promote branching. Additionally, we provide insight on the
cooperative transcriptional regulation necessary to promote and organize an
intricate axonal tree.

PMCID: PMC3098884
PMID: 21625468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Front Neuroanat. 2011 Apr 5;5:23. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2011.00023. eCollection
2011.

Comparison of Pretectal Genoarchitectonic Pattern between Quail and Chicken
Embryos.

Merchán P(1), Bardet SM, Puelles L, Ferran JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, Centre for Biomedical Research 
on Rare Diseases (CIBERER 736), School of Medicine, University of Murcia Murcia, 
Spain.

Regionalization of the central nervous system is controlled by local networks of 
transcription factors that establish and maintain the identities of
neuroepithelial progenitor areas and their neuronal derivatives. The conserved
cerebral Bauplan of vertebrates must result essentially from conserved patterns
of developmentally expressed transcription factors. We have previously produced
detailed molecular maps for the alar plate of prosomere 1 (the pretectal region) 
in chicken (Ferran et al., 2007, 2008, 2009). Here we compare the early molecular
signature of the pretectum of two closely related avian species of the family
Phasianidae, Coturnix japonica (Japanese quail) and Gallus gallus (chicken),
aiming to test conservation of the described pattern at a microevolutionary
level. We studied the developmental pretectal expression of Bhlhb4, Dbx1, Ebf1,
Gata3, Gbx2, Lim1, Meis1, Meis2, Pax3, Pax6, Six3, Tal2, and Tcf7l2 (Tcf4) mRNA, 
using in situ hybridization, and PAX7 immunohistochemistry. The genoarchitectonic
profile of individual pretectal domains and strata was produced, using comparable
section planes. Remarkable conservation of the combinatorial genoarchitectonic
code was observed, fundamented in a tripartite anteroposterior subdivision.
However, we found that at corresponding developmental stages the pretectal region
of G. gallus was approximately 30% larger than that of C. japonica, but seemed
relatively less mature. Altogether, our results on a conserved genoarchitectonic 
pattern highlight the importance of early developmental gene networks that
causally underlie the production of homologous derivatives in these two
evolutionarily closely related species. The shared patterns probably apply to
sauropsids in general, as well as to more distantly related vertebrate species.

PMCID: PMC3074437
PMID: 21503155  [PubMed]


56. Dev Dyn. 2011 Apr;240(4):828-38. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22589. Epub 2011 Feb 28.

Evolutionarily conserved function of Gbx2 in anterior hindbrain development.

Burroughs-Garcia J(1), Sittaramane V, Chandrasekhar A, Waters ST.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

The amino acid sequence across the DNA-binding homeodomain of Gbx2 is highly
conserved across multiple species. In mice, Gbx2 is essential for establishment
of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB), and in development of anterior
hindbrain structures, rhombomeres (r) 1-r3, and the r2/r3-derived cranial nerve
V. In contrast, studies in zebrafish have implicated gbx1 in establishment of the
MHB. Therefore, we tested potential roles for gbx2 in anterior hindbrain
development in zebrafish. gbx2 knockdown with antisense morpholino results in
increased cell death in r2, r3, and r5 and a truncation of the anterior
hindbrain, similar to the defect in Gbx2(-/-) mice. Moreover, there is abnormal
clustering of cranial nerve V cell bodies in r2 and r3 indicative of defects in
aspects of anterior hindbrain patterning. These phenotypes can be rescued by
expression of the mouse GBX2 protein. These results suggest that gbx2/Gbx2 has an
evolutionarily conserved role in anterior hindbrain development.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21360792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Development. 2011 Feb;138(4):725-34. doi: 10.1242/dev.055665.

Gbx2 and Fgf8 are sequentially required for formation of the midbrain-hindbrain
compartment boundary.

Sunmonu NA(1), Li K, Guo Q, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 263 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

In vertebrates, the common expression border of two homeobox genes, Otx2 and
Gbx2, demarcates the prospective midbrain-hindbrain border (MHB) in the neural
plate at the end of gastrulation. The presence of a compartment boundary at the
MHB has been demonstrated, but the mechanism and timing of its formation remain
unclear. We show by genetic inducible fate mapping using a Gbx2(CreER) knock-in
mouse line that descendants of Gbx2(+) cells as early as embryonic day (E) 7.5 do
not cross the MHB. Without Gbx2, hindbrain-born cells abnormally populate the
entire midbrain, demonstrating that Gbx2 is essential for specifying hindbrain
fate. Gbx2(+) and Otx2(+) cells segregate from each other, suggesting that
mutually exclusive expression of Otx2 and Gbx2 in midbrain and hindbrain
progenitors is responsible for cell sorting in establishing the MHB. The MHB
organizer gene Fgf8, which is expressed as a sharp transverse band immediately
posterior to the lineage boundary at the MHB, is crucial in maintaining the
lineage-restricted boundary after E7.5. Partial deletion of Fgf8 disrupts MHB
lineage separation. Activation of FGF pathways has a cell-autonomous effect on
cell sorting in midbrain progenitors. Therefore, Fgf8 from the MHB may signal the
nearby mesencephalic cells to impart distinct cell surface characteristics or
induce local cell-cell signaling, which consequently prevents cell movements
across the MHB. Our findings reveal the distinct function of Gbx2 and Fgf8 in a
stepwise process in the development of the compartment boundary at the MHB and
that Fgf8, in addition to its organizer function, plays a crucial role in
maintaining the lineage boundary at the MHB by restricting cell movement.

PMCID: PMC3026416
PMID: 21266408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurosci. 2010 Nov 3;30(44):14824-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3742-10.2010.

The mouse homeobox gene Gbx2 is required for the development of cholinergic
interneurons in the striatum.

Chen L(1), Chatterjee M, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut 06030-6403, USA.

Mammalian forebrain cholinergic neurons are composed of local circuit neurons in 
the striatum and projection neurons in the basal forebrain. These neurons are
known to arise from a common pool of progenitors that primarily resides in the
medial ganglionic eminence (MGE). However, little is known about the genetic
programs that differentiate these two types of cholinergic neurons. Using
inducible genetic fate mapping, here we examined the developmental fate of cells 
that express the homeodomain transcription factor Gbx2 in the MGE. We show that
the Gbx2 lineage-derived cells that undergo tangential migration exclusively give
rise to almost all cholinergic interneurons in the striatum, whereas those
undergoing radial migration mainly produce noncholinergic neurons in the basal
forebrain. Deletion of Gbx2 throughout the mouse embryo or specifically in the
MGE results in abnormal distribution and significant reduction of cholinergic
neurons in the striatum. We show that early-born (before embryonic day 12.5)
cholinergic interneurons preferentially populate the lateral aspect of the
striatum and mature earlier than late-born (after embryonic day 12.5) neurons,
which normally reside in the medial part of the striatum. In the absence of Gbx2,
early-born striatal cholinergic precursors display abnormal neurite outgrowth and
increased complexity, and abnormally contribute to the medial part of the
caudate-putamen, whereas late-born striatal cholinergic interneurons are mostly
missing. Together, our data demonstrate that Gbx2 is required for the development
of striatal cholinergic interneurons, perhaps by regulating tangential migration 
of the striatal cholinergic precursors.

PMCID: PMC3071646
PMID: 21048141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Evolution. 2011 Mar;65(3):907-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01126.x. Epub
2010 Oct 7.

Species differences in early patterning of the avian brain.

McGowan L(1), Kuo E, Martin A, Monuki ES, Striedter G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine
(UCI), California 92697, USA. lukemcgowan1@yahoo.com

The telencephalon is proportionately larger in parrots than in galliformes
(chicken-like birds), whereas the midbrain tectum is proportionately smaller. We 
here test the hypothesis that the adult species difference in midbrain proportion
is due to an evolutionary change in early brain patterning. In particular, we
compare the size of the early embryonic midbrain between parakeets (Melopsittacus
undulatus) and bobwhite quail (Colinus virgianus) by examining the expression
domains of transcription factors Pax6 and Gbx2, which are expressed in the
forebrain and hindbrain, respectively. Because these expression domains form
rostral and caudal borders with the presumptive midbrain when this region is
specified (Hamburger-Hamilton stages 9-11), they allow us to measure and compare 
the sizes of a molecularly defined presumptive midbrain in the two species. Based
on published data from older embryos, we predicted that the molecularly defined
midbrain territory is significantly larger in quail than parakeets. Indeed, our
data show that normalized midbrain length is 33% greater in quail and that the
midbrain to forebrain ratio is 28% greater. This is strong evidence of a
significant species difference in early brain patterning.

© 2010 The Author(s). Evolution© 2010 The Society for the Study of Evolution.

PMID: 20825476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Endod. 2010 Sep;36(9):1504-15. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2010.05.006.

Inherent differential propensity of dental pulp stem cells derived from human
deciduous and permanent teeth.

Govindasamy V(1), Abdullah AN, Ronald VS, Musa S, Ab Aziz ZA, Zain RB, Totey S,
Bhonde RR, Abu Kasim NH.

Author information: 
(1)Stempeutics Research Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

INTRODUCTION: Lately, several new stem cell sources and their effective isolation
have been reported that claim to have potential for therapeutic applications.
However, it is not yet clear which type of stem cell sources are most potent and 
best for targeted therapy. Lack of understanding of nature of these cells and
their lineage-specific propensity might hinder their full potential. Therefore,
understanding the gene expression profile that indicates their lineage-specific
proclivity is fundamental to the development of successful cell-based therapies.
METHODS: We compared proliferation rate, gene expression profile, and
lineage-specific propensity of stem cells derived from human deciduous (SCD) and 
permanent teeth (DPSCs) over 5 passages.
RESULTS: The proliferation rate of SCD was higher (cell number, 25 x 10(6)
cells/mL; percent colony-forming units [CFUs], 151.67 +/- 10.5; percent cells in 
S/G2 phase, 12.4 +/- 1.48) than that of DPSCs (cell number, 21 x 10(6) cells/mL; 
percent CFUs, 133 +/- 17.62; percent cells in S/G2 phase, 10.4 +/- 1.18). It was 
observed that fold expression of several pluripotent markers such as OCT4, SOX2, 
NANOG, and REX1 were higher (>2) in SCD as compared with DPSCs. However, DPSCs
showed higher expression of neuroectodermal markers PAX6, GBX2, and nestin (fold 
expression >100). Similarly, higher neurosphere formation and neuronal marker
expression (NF, GFAP) were found in the differentiated DPSCs into neuron-like
cells as compared with SCD.
CONCLUSIONS: This study thus demonstrates that both SCD and DPSCs exhibit
specific gene expression profile, with clear-cut inclination of DPSCs toward
neuronal lineage.

Copyright 2010 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 20728718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Stem Cells. 2010 Feb;28(2):191-200. doi: 10.1002/stem.265.

Heparan sulfation-dependent fibroblast growth factor signaling maintains
embryonic stem cells primed for differentiation in a heterogeneous state.

Lanner F(1), Lee KL, Sohl M, Holmborn K, Yang H, Wilbertz J, Poellinger L,
Rossant J, Farnebo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Lanner@Sickkids.ca

Embryonic stem (ES) cells continuously decide whether to maintain pluripotency or
differentiate. While exogenous leukemia inhibitory factor and BMP4 perpetuate a
pluripotent state, less is known about the factors initiating differentiation. We
show that heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans are critical coreceptors for signals
inducing ES cell differentiation. Genetic targeting of NDST1 and NDST2, two
enzymes required for N-sulfation of proteoglycans, blocked differentiation. This 
phenotype was rescued by HS presented in trans or by soluble heparin. NaClO(3)
(-), which reduces sulfation of proteoglycans, potently blocked differentiation
of wild-type cells. Mechanistically, N-sulfation was identified to be critical
for functional autocrine fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4) signaling. Microarray 
analysis identified the pluripotency maintaining transcription factors Nanog,
KLF2/4/8, Tbx3, and Tcf3 to be negatively regulated, whereas markers of
differentiation such as Gbx2, Dnmt3b, FGF5, and Brachyury were induced by
sulfation-dependent FGF receptor (FGFR) signaling. We show that several of these 
genes are heterogeneously expressed in ES cells, and that targeting of heparan
sulfation or FGFR-signaling facilitated a homogenous Nanog/KLF4/Tbx3 positive ES 
cell state. This finding suggests that the recently discovered heterogeneous
state of ES cells is regulated by HS-dependent FGFR signaling. Similarly,
culturing blastocysts with NaClO(3) (-) eliminated GATA6-positive primitive
endoderm progenitors generating a homogenous Nanog-positive inner cell mass.
Functionally, reduction of sulfation robustly improved de novo ES cell derivation
efficiency. We conclude that N-sulfated HS is required for FGF4 signaling to
maintain ES cells primed for differentiation in a heterogeneous state. Inhibiting
this pathway facilitates a more naïve ground state.

PMID: 19937756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Development. 2009 Oct;136(19):3267-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.036954.

The posteriorizing gene Gbx2 is a direct target of Wnt signalling and the
earliest factor in neural crest induction.

Li B(1), Kuriyama S, Moreno M, Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower
Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Wnt signalling is required for neural crest (NC) induction; however, the direct
targets of the Wnt pathway during NC induction remain unknown. We show here that 
the homeobox gene Gbx2 is essential in this process and is directly activated by 
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling. By ChIP and transgenesis analysis we show that the
Gbx2 regulatory elements that drive expression in the NC respond directly to
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling. Gbx2 has previously been implicated in
posteriorization of the neural plate. Here we unveil a new role for this gene in 
neural fold patterning. Loss-of-function experiments using antisense morpholinos 
against Gbx2 inhibit NC and expand the preplacodal domain, whereas Gbx2
overexpression leads to transformation of the preplacodal domain into NC cells.
We show that the NC specifier activity of Gbx2 is dependent on the interaction
with Zic1 and the inhibition of preplacodal genes such as Six1. In addition, we
demonstrate that Gbx2 is upstream of the neural fold specifiers Pax3 and Msx1.
Our results place Gbx2 as the earliest factor in the NC genetic cascade being
directly regulated by the inductive molecules, and support the notion that
posteriorization of the neural folds is an essential step in NC specification. We
propose a new genetic cascade that operates in the distinction between anterior
placodal and NC territories.

PMCID: PMC2808295
PMID: 19736322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Development. 2009 Sep;136(18):3173-83. doi: 10.1242/dev.028902.

Tbx1 controls cardiac neural crest cell migration during arch artery development 
by regulating Gbx2 expression in the pharyngeal ectoderm.

Calmont A(1), Ivins S, Van Bueren KL, Papangeli I, Kyriakopoulou V, Andrews WD,
Martin JF, Moon AM, Illingworth EA, Basson MA, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London
WC1N 1EH, UK.

Elucidating the gene regulatory networks that govern pharyngeal arch artery (PAA)
development is an important goal, as such knowledge can help to identify new
genes involved in cardiovascular disease. The transcription factor Tbx1 plays a
vital role in PAA development and is a major contributor to cardiovascular
disease associated with DiGeorge syndrome. In this report, we used various
genetic approaches to reveal part of a signalling network by which Tbx1 controls 
PAA development in mice. We investigated the crucial role played by the
homeobox-containing transcription factor Gbx2 downstream of Tbx1. We found that
PAA formation requires the pharyngeal surface ectoderm as a key signalling centre
from which Gbx2, in response to Tbx1, triggers essential directional cues to the 
adjacent cardiac neural crest cells (cNCCs) en route to the caudal PAAs.
Abrogation of this signal generates cNCC patterning defects leading to PAA
abnormalities. Finally, we showed that the Slit/Robo signalling pathway is
activated during cNCC migration and that components of this pathway are affected 
in Gbx2 and Tbx1 mutant embryos at the time of PAA development. We propose that
the spatiotemporal control of this tightly orchestrated network of genes
participates in crucial aspects of PAA development.

PMCID: PMC2730371
PMID: 19700621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genesis. 2009 Oct;47(10):667-73. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20546.

Misexpression of Gbx2 throughout the mesencephalon by a conditional
gain-of-function transgene leads to deletion of the midbrain and cerebellum in
mice.

Sunmonu NA, Chen L, Li JY.

The mouse homeobox gene, Gbx2, is expressed in discreet domains in the neural
tube and plays a key role in forebrain and hindbrain development. Previous
studies have demonstrated that mutual inhibition between Gbx2 and Otx2, which are
respectively expressed in the anterior and posterior parts of the neural plate,
positions the prospective midbrain-hindbrain junction. We describe here a
conditional Gbx2 gain-of-function transgenic mouse line, Gbx2-GOF, which
expresses Gbx2 and red fluorescence protein, mCherry, upon Cre-mediated
recombination. In the absence of Cre, beta-galactosidase is broadly expressed in 
mouse embryos and adult brains carrying the transgene. By combining Gbx2-GOF and 
En1(Cre) knock-in allele, we activated expression of Gbx2 and mCherry throughout 
the mesencephalon (mes) and rhombomere 1 (r1). The ectopic expression of Gbx2
causes an anterior shift of the mes/r1 junction at embryonic day 10.5.
Interestingly, we found that persistent expression of Gbx2 throughout the mes/r1 
region largely abolishes expression of the isthmic organizer gene Fgf8, leading
to deletion of the midbrain and cerebellum at later stages. Our data suggest that
the juxtaposition of the expression domains of Gbx2 and Otx2 within the mes/r1
area is essential for the maintenance of Fgf8 expression. Furthermore, the
Gbx2-GOF transgenic line is suitable for functional study of Gbx2 during
development.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2783588
PMID: 19603509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Neural Dev. 2009 Apr 2;4:12. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-12.

Zebrafish gbx1 refines the midbrain-hindbrain boundary border and mediates the
Wnt8 posteriorization signal.

Rhinn M(1), Lun K, Ahrendt R, Geffarth M, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Center, and Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, CRTD,
Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. rhinn@igbmc.fr

BACKGROUND: Studies in mouse, Xenopus and chicken have shown that Otx2 and Gbx2
expression domains are fundamental for positioning the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (MHB) organizer. Of the two zebrafish gbx genes, gbx1 is a likely
candidate to participate in this event because its early expression is similar to
that reported for Gbx2 in other species. Zebrafish gbx2, on the other hand, acts 
relatively late at the MHB. To investigate the function of zebrafish gbx1 within 
the early neural plate, we used a combination of gain- and loss-of-function
experiments.
RESULTS: We found that ectopic gbx1 expression in the anterior neural plate
reduces forebrain and midbrain, represses otx2 expression and repositions the MHB
to a more anterior position at the new gbx1/otx2 border. In the case of gbx1
loss-of-function, the initially robust otx2 domain shifts slightly posterior at a
given stage (70% epiboly), as does MHB marker expression. We further found that
ectopic juxtaposition of otx2 and gbx1 leads to ectopic activation of MHB markers
fgf8, pax2.1 and eng2. This indicates that, in zebrafish, an interaction between 
otx2 and gbx1 determines the site of MHB development. Our work also highlights a 
novel requirement for gbx1 in hindbrain development. Using cell-tracing
experiments, gbx1 was found to cell-autonomously transform anterior neural tissue
into posterior. Previous studies have shown that gbx1 is a target of Wnt8 graded 
activity in the early neural plate. Consistent with this, we show that gbx1 can
partially restore hindbrain patterning in cases of Wnt8 loss-of-function. We
propose that in addition to its role at the MHB, gbx1 acts at the transcriptional
level to mediate Wnt8 posteriorizing signals that pattern the developing
hindbrain.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide evidence that zebrafish gbx1 is involved in
positioning the MHB in the early neural plate by refining the otx2 expression
domain. In addition to its role in MHB formation, we have shown that gbx1 is a
novel mediator of Wnt8 signaling during hindbrain patterning.

PMCID: PMC2674439
PMID: 19341460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Development. 2009 Apr;136(8):1317-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.030510. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

Transcription factor Gbx2 acts cell-nonautonomously to regulate the formation of 
lineage-restriction boundaries of the thalamus.

Chen L(1), Guo Q, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 263 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

Relatively little is known about the development of the thalamus, especially its 
differentiation into distinct nuclei. We demonstrate here that Gbx2-expressing
cells in mouse diencephalon contribute to the entire thalamic nuclear complex.
However, the neuronal precursors for different thalamic nuclei display temporally
distinct Gbx2 expression patterns. Gbx2-expressing cells and their descendents
form sharp lineage-restriction boundaries delineating the thalamus from the
pretectum, epithalamus and prethalamus, revealing multiple compartmental
boundaries within the mouse diencephalon. Without Gbx2, cells originating from
the thalamus abnormally contribute to the epithalamus and pretectum. This
abnormality does not result from an overt defect in patterning or cell-fate
specification in Gbx2 mutants. Chimeric and genetic mosaic analysis demonstrate
that Gbx2 plays a cell-nonautonomous role in controlling segregation of
postmitotic thalamic neurons from the neighboring brain structures that do not
express Gbx2. We propose that, within the developing thalamus, the dynamic and
differential expression of Gbx2 may be involved in the specific segregation of
thalamic neurons, leading to partition of the thalamus into different nuclei.

PMCID: PMC2687463
PMID: 19279136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Neurosci. 2009 Feb 25;29(8):2453-66. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4524-08.2009.

The role of Sonic hedgehog of neural origin in thalamic differentiation in the
mouse.

Szabó NE(1), Zhao T, Zhou X, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genes and Behavior, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.

The specification of the intricate neuronal assemblies that characterize the
forebrain is not well understood. The ventral spinal cord is specified through a 
concentration gradient of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) protein secreted by the notochord.
Shh is expressed also in the forebrain neuroepithelium (neural Shh) and the
underlying notochord and prechordal plate. Neural Shh is essential for the
development of the prethalamus (ventral thalamus), but its effects on the
thalamus (dorsal thalamus) are still unclear. We hypothesized that neural Shh
would act on a previously regionalized dorsal diencephalic region to promote the 
emergence of specific thalamic nuclear and histological traits. To find out, we
generated a conditional mouse mutant line specifically lacking Shh expression in 
the diencephalic neuroepithelium. We show that the transcription factor Gbx2,
required for thalamic development downstream Shh, is expressed in our mutant in a
restricted thalamic region and is necessary and sufficient for the
differentiation of the medial and intralaminar thalamic nuclei. In the rest of
the thalamus, neural Shh is required to promote neuronal aggregation into nuclei 
as well as axonal extension. In this way, the individual thalamic nuclei show
differential dependence on Shh, Gbx2, or both for their differentiation.
Additionally, Gbx2 is required for the survival of thalamic neurons.

PMID: 19244520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Development. 2008 Sep;135(17):2905-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.019778.

Dlx genes pattern mammalian jaw primordium by regulating both lower jaw-specific 
and upper jaw-specific genetic programs.

Jeong J(1), Li X, McEvilly RJ, Rosenfeld MG, Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th street, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. juhee.jeong@ucsf.edu

Dlx transcription factors are implicated in patterning the mammalian jaw, based
on their nested expression patterns in the first branchial arch (primordium for
jaw) and mutant phenotypes; inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 (Dlx1/2-/-) causes
defects in the upper jaw, whereas Dlx5/6(-/-) results in homeotic transformation 
of the lower jaw into upper jaw. Therefore, the 'Dlx codes' appear to regionalize
the jaw primordium such that Dlx1/2 regulate upper jaw development, while Dlx5/6 
confer the lower jaw fate. Towards identifying the genetic pathways downstream of
Dlx5/6, we compared the gene expression profiles of the wild-type and Dlx5/6(-/-)
mouse mandibular arch (prospective lower jaw). We identified 20 previously
unrecognized Dlx5/6-downstream genes, of which 12 were downregulated and 8
upregulated in the mutant. We found a Dlx-regulated transcriptional enhancer in
close proximity to Gbx2, one of the Dlx5/6-downstream genes, strongly suggesting 
that Gbx2 is a direct target of Dlx5/6. We also showed that Pou3f3 is normally
expressed in the maxillary (prospective upper jaw) but not mandibular arch, is
upregulated in the mandibular arch of Dlx5/6(-/-), and is essential for formation
of some of the maxillary arch-derived skeleton. A comparative analysis of the
morphological and molecular phenotypes of various Dlx single and double mutants
revealed that Dlx1, 2, 5 and 6 act both partially redundantly and
antagonistically to direct differential expression of downstream genes in each
domain of the first branchial arch. We propose a new model for Dlx-mediated
mammalian jaw patterning.

PMID: 18697905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 30;282(48):34858-68. Epub 2007 Sep 25.

A phosphomimetic mutation in the Sall1 repression motif disrupts recruitment of
the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase complex and repression of Gbx2.

Lauberth SM(1), Bilyeu AC, Firulli BA, Kroll KL, Rauchman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

The multizinc finger transcription factor Sall1 is a critical developmental
regulator that mediates repression through the recruitment of the nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex. Although a short conserved peptide
motif in Sall1 is sufficient to recruit NuRD, its ability to regulate native
Sall1 target genes in vivo has not been demonstrated. In this report, we
demonstrate an in vivo role for the Sall1 repression motif and describe a novel
direct target gene of Sall1, Gbx2, that is directly repressed in a NuRD-dependent
fashion. The ability of Sall1 to repress Gbx2 was impaired in Xenopus embryos
expressing mutant forms of Sall1 that are defective for NuRD binding. Finally, we
demonstrate that protein kinase C phosphorylates serine 2 of the Sall1 repression
motif and reveal that a phosphomimetic mutation of serine 2 disrupts the ability 
of Sall1 to repress Gbx2 in cell culture and Xenopus embryos. Together, these
studies establish that Sall1 recruits NuRD via the Sall1 repression motif to
mediate repression of a native target gene and suggest a model in which dynamic
control of gene expression by Sall1 is modulated by serine phosphorylation of the
Sall1 repression motif.

PMID: 17895244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2007 Oct;134(20):3615-25. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Fgf3 is required for dorsal patterning and morphogenesis of the inner ear
epithelium.

Hatch EP(1), Noyes CA, Wang X, Wright TJ, Mansour SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
84112-5330, USA.

The inner ear, which contains sensory organs specialized for hearing and balance,
develops from an ectodermal placode that invaginates lateral to hindbrain
rhombomeres (r) 5-6 to form the otic vesicle. Under the influence of signals from
intra- and extraotic sources, the vesicle is molecularly patterned and undergoes 
morphogenesis and cell-type differentiation to acquire its distinct functional
compartments. We show in mouse that Fgf3, which is expressed in the hindbrain
from otic induction through endolymphatic duct outgrowth, and in the prospective 
neurosensory domain of the otic epithelium as morphogenesis initiates, is
required for both auditory and vestibular function. We provide new morphologic
data on otic dysmorphogenesis in Fgf3 mutants, which show a range of
malformations similar to those of Mafb (Kreisler), Hoxa1 and Gbx2 mutants, the
most common phenotype being failure of endolymphatic duct and common crus
formation, accompanied by epithelial dilatation and reduced cochlear coiling. The
malformations have close parallels with those seen in hearing-impaired patients. 
The morphologic data, together with an analysis of changes in the molecular
patterning of Fgf3 mutant otic vesicles, and comparisons with other mutations
affecting otic morphogenesis, allow placement of Fgf3 between hindbrain-expressed
Hoxa1 and Mafb, and otic vesicle-expressed Gbx2, in the genetic cascade initiated
by WNT signaling that leads to dorsal otic patterning and endolymphatic duct
formation. Finally, we show that Fgf3 prevents ventral expansion of r5-6
neurectodermal Wnt3a, serving to focus inductive WNT signals on the dorsal otic
vesicle and highlighting a new example of cross-talk between the two signaling
systems.

PMCID: PMC2366212
PMID: 17855431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 15;307(2):408-20. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

Distinct roles of Fgf8, Foxi1, Dlx3b and Pax8/2 during otic vesicle induction and
maintenance in medaka.

Aghaallaei N(1), Bajoghli B, Czerny T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

The development of the vertebrate inner ear is a complex process that has been
investigated in several model organisms. In this work, we examined genetic
interactions regulating early development of otic structures in medaka. We
demonstrate that misexpression of Fgf8, Dlx3b and Foxi1 during early gastrulation
is sufficient to produce ectopic otic vesicles. Combined misexpression strongly
increases the appearance of this phenotype. By using a heat-inducible promoter we
were furthermore able to separate the regulatory interactions among Fgf8, Foxi1, 
Dlx3b, Pax8 and Pax2 genes, which are active during different stages of early
otic development. In the preplacodal stage we suggest a central position of Foxi1
within a regulatory network of early patterning genes including Dlx3b and Pax8.
Different pathways are active after the placodal stage with Dlx3b playing a
central role. There Dlx3b regulates members of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach network and
also strongly affects the early dorsoventral marker genes Otx1 and Gbx2.

PMID: 17555740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2007 Jan;134(2):317-25. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Lmx1b is essential for Fgf8 and Wnt1 expression in the isthmic organizer during
tectum and cerebellum development in mice.

Guo C(1), Qiu HY, Huang Y, Chen H, Yang RQ, Chen SD, Johnson RL, Chen ZF, Ding
YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Shanghai
Institute for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, 
China.

Secreted factors FGF8 and WNT1 are essential either for the inductive activity of
the isthmus organizer or for the regionalization of the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (MHB). However, transcriptional regulation of these secreted factors
during development remains to be elucidated. Here we show that the LIM homeobox
gene Lmx1b is expressed in the anterior embryo as early as E7.5 and its
expression becomes progressively restricted to the isthmus at E9.0. Analysis of
gene expression in the MHB of the mutant embryos showed that many genes were lost
by E9.5. In the MHB of Lmx1b-/- embryos, the expression of Fgf8, which normally
occurs at the 4-somite stage, was completely absent, whereas Wnt1 was
downregulated before the 4-somite stage. Moreover, transcription factors En1 and 
Pax2 were also downregulated prior to the 4-somite stage, whereas Gbx2
downregulation occurred at the 4-somite stage. By contrast, Otx2 and Pax6
expression was not affected in Lmx1b-/- embryos. The requirement of specific
Lmx1b expression in the MHB was further confirmed by Wnt1-Cre-mediated
region-specific conditional knockout of Lmx1b. As a result of these molecular
defects, the development of the tectum and cerebellum was severely impaired in
Lmx1b-/- mice. Taken together, our results indicate that Lmx1b plays an essential
role in the development of the tectum and cerebellum by regulating expression of 
Fgf8, Wnt1 and several isthmus-related transcription factors in the MHB, and is a
crucial component of a cross-regulatory network required for the induction
activity of the isthmic organizer in the MHB.

PMID: 17166916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mech Dev. 2006 Dec;123(12):907-24. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Three enhancer regions regulate gbx2 gene expression in the isthmic region during
zebrafish development.

Islam ME(1), Kikuta H, Inoue F, Kanai M, Kawakami A, Parvin MS, Takeda H, Yamasu 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama 
University, Shimo-Okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama City, Saitama 338-8570, Japan.

In vertebrate embryos, positioning of the boundary between the midbrain and
hindbrain (MHB) and subsequent isthmus formation are dependent upon the
interaction between the Otx2 and Gbx genes. In zebrafish, sequential expression
of gbx1 and gbx2 in the anterior hindbrain contributes to this process, whereas
in mouse embryos, a single Gbx gene (Gbx2) is responsible for MHB development. In
the present study, to investigate the regulatory mechanism of gbx2 in the
MHB/isthmic region of zebrafish embryos, we cloned the gene and showed that its
organization is conserved among different vertebrates. Promoter analyses revealed
three enhancers that direct reporter gene expression after the end of epiboly in 
the anterior-most hindbrain, which is a feature of the zebrafish gbx2 gene. One
of the enhancers is located upstream of gbx2 (AMH1), while the other two
enhancers are located downstream of gbx2 (AMH2 and AMH3). Detailed analysis of
the AMH1 enhancer showed that it directs expression in the rhombomere 1 (r1)
region and the dorsal thalamus, as has been shown for gbx2, whereas no expression
was induced by the AMH1 enhancer in other embryonic regions in which gbx2 is
expressed. The AMH1 enhancer is composed of multiple regulatory subregions that
share the same spatial specificity. The most active of the regulatory subregions 
is a 291-bp region that contains at least two Pax2-binding sites, both of which
are necessary for the function of the main component (PB1-A region) of the AMH1
enhancer. In accordance with these results, enhancer activity in the PB1-A
region, as well as gbx2 expression in r1, was missing in no isthmus mutant
embryos that lacked functional pax2a. In addition, we identified an upstream
conserved sequence of 227bp that suppresses the enhancer activity of AMH1. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that gbx2 expression during the somitogenesis
stage in zebrafish is regulated by a complex mechanism involving Pax2 as well as 
activators and suppressors in the regions flanking the gene.

PMID: 17067785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jan;27(1):340-51. Epub 2006 Oct 23.

Gbx2 and Otx2 interact with the WD40 domain of Groucho/Tle corepressors.

Heimbucher T(1), Murko C, Bajoghli B, Aghaallaei N, Huber A, Stebegg R, Eberhard 
D, Fink M, Simeone A, Czerny T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

One of the earliest organizational decisions in the development of the vertebrate
brain is the division of the neural plate into Otx2-positive anterior and
Gbx2-positive posterior territories. At the junction of these two expression
domains, a local signaling center is formed, known as the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (MHB). This tissue coordinates or "organizes" the development of
neighboring brain structures, such as the midbrain and cerebellum. Correct
positioning of the MHB is thought to depend on mutual repression involving these 
two homeobox genes. Using a cell culture colocalization assay and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments, we show that engrailed homology region 1
(eh1)-like motifs of both transcription factors physically interact with the WD40
domain of Groucho/Tle corepressor proteins. In addition, heat shock-induced
expression of wild-type and mutant Otx2 and Gbx2 in medaka embryos demonstrates
that Groucho is required for the repression of Otx2 by Gbx2. On the other hand,
the repressive functions of Otx2 on Gbx2 do not appear to be dependent on
corepressor interaction. Interestingly, the association of Groucho with Otx2 is
also required for the repression of Fgf8 in the MHB. Therefore Groucho/Tle family
members appear to regulate key aspects in the MHB development of the vertebrate
brain.

PMCID: PMC1800652
PMID: 17060451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Sep;48(7):429-38.

Role of Gbx2 and Otx2 in the formation of cochlear ganglion and endolymphatic
duct.

Miyazaki H(1), Kobayashi T, Nakamura H, Funahashi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

The boundary of gene expression of transcription factors often plays a role in
making a signaling center in development. In the otic vesicle, Gbx2 is expressed 
in the dorso-medial region including the endolymphatic duct, and Otx2 in the
ventral region. Fgf10 is expressed between their expression boundaries, and the
cochleovestibular ganglion develops close to the medial side of the Fgf10
expressing domain. Similar expression patterns are observed in the central
nervous system, where Otx2 and Gbx2 expression abut at the mid-hindbrain
boundary, and the repressive interaction between Otx2 and Gbx2 defines the
mid-hindbrain boundary. These analogous expression patterns raise a question
about the role of the interaction between Gbx2 and Otx2 in the otic vesicle. To
address this, we misexpressed Gbx2 and Otx2 to the otic epithelium. Ectopic Gbx2 
expression could repress Otx2 expression and vice versa. In addition, Fgf10
expression was repressed and cochlear ganglion formation was interfered with.
Moreover, endolymphatic duct was severely hypomorphic in the Otx2 misexpressing
embryos. These results suggest that the interaction between Gbx2 and Otx2 in
developing inner ear defines Fgf10 expression domain to induce the cochlear
ganglion. It is also suggested that Gbx2 expression is important for the
formation of the endolymphatic duct.

PMID: 16961590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 15;301(2):504-17. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Pbx proteins cooperate with Engrailed to pattern the midbrain-hindbrain and
diencephalic-mesencephalic boundaries.

Erickson T(1), Scholpp S, Brand M, Moens CB, Waskiewicz AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, CW405, Biological Sciences Building,
University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada T6G2E9.

Pbx proteins are a family of TALE-class transcription factors that are well
characterized as Hox co-factors acting to impart segmental identity to the
hindbrain rhombomeres. However, no role for Pbx in establishing more anterior
neural compartments has been demonstrated. Studies done in Drosophila show that
Engrailed requires Exd (Pbx orthologue) for its biological activity. Here, we
present evidence that zebrafish Pbx proteins cooperate with Engrailed to
compartmentalize the midbrain by regulating the maintenance of the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) and the diencephalic-mesencephalic boundary
(DMB). Embryos lacking Pbx function correctly initiate midbrain patterning, but
fail to maintain eng2a, pax2a, fgf8, gbx2, and wnt1 expression at the MHB.
Formation of the DMB is also defective as shown by a caudal expansion of
diencephalic epha4a and pax6a expression into midbrain territory. These
phenotypes are similar to the phenotype of an Engrailed loss-of-function embryo, 
supporting the hypothesis that Pbx and Engrailed act together on a common genetic
pathway. Consistent with this model, we demonstrate that zebrafish Engrailed and 
Pbx interact in vitro and that this interaction is required for both the eng2a
overexpression phenotype and Engrailed's role in patterning the MHB. Our data
support a novel model of midbrain development in which Pbx and Engrailed proteins
cooperatively pattern the mesencephalic region of the neural tube.

PMCID: PMC1850147
PMID: 16959235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Dyn. 2006 Nov;235(11):2999-3006.

Sp5l is a mediator of Fgf signals in anteroposterior patterning of the
neuroectoderm in zebrafish embryo.

Sun Z(1), Zhao J, Zhang Y, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Department of 
Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

The neuroectoderm is patterned along the anterior-posterior axis in vertebrate
embryos. Fgf signals are required to induce the posterior neuroectodermal fates, 
but they repress the anterior fate. Sp5l/Spr2, an Sp1-like transcription factor
family member, has been shown to be required for development of mesoderm and
posterior neuroectoderm. We demonstrate here that repression of the anterior
neuroectodermal markers fez and otx1 by fgf17b or fgf3 coincides with induction
of sp5l in the anterior neuroectoderm, and that this repression is efficiently
rescued by simultaneous sp5l knockdown. On the other hand, sp5l knockdown is able
to inhibit inductive activity of ectopic Fgf signals on the expression of the
posterior neuroectodermal markers gbx2, hoxb1b, and krox20. Furthermore, effect
of overexpression of a dominant negative Fgf receptor on anteroposterior
patterning of the neuroectoderm is rescued by sp5l overexpression. Taken
together, these data suggest that sp5l mediates the functions of Fgf signals in
anteroposterior patterning of the neuroectoderm during zebrafish embryogenesis.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16958103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Genesis. 2006 Sep;44(9):425-37.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes are required for specification of the mammalian
vestibular apparatus.

Robledo RF(1), Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine.

The mammalian inner ear is a complex organ that develops from a surface ectoderm 
into distinct auditory and vestibular components. Congenital malformation of
these two components resulting from single or multiple gene defects is a common
clinical occurrence and is observed in patients with split hand/split foot
malformation, a malformation which is phenocopied by Dlx5/6 null mice. Analysis
of mice lacking Dlx5 and Dlx6 homeobox genes identified their restricted and
combined expression in the otic epithelium as a crucial regulator of vestibular
cell fates. Otic induction initiates without incident in Dlx5/6(-/-) embryos, but
dorsal otic derivatives including the semicircular ducts, utricle, saccule, and
endolymphatic duct fail to form. Dlx5 and Dlx6 seem to influence vestibular cell 
fates by restricting Pax2 and activating Gbx2 and Bmp4 expression domains. Given 
their proximity to the disease locus and the observed phenotype in Dlx5/6 null
mice, Dlx5/6 are likely candidates to mediate the inner ear defects observed in
patients with split hand/split foot malformation.

PMID: 16900517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):2845-54. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Metastasis-associated kinase modulates Wnt signaling to regulate brain patterning
and morphogenesis.

Kibardin A(1), Ossipova O, Sokol SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Wnt signaling is a major pathway regulating cell fate determination, cell
proliferation and cell movements in vertebrate embryos. Distinct branches of this
pathway activate beta-catenin/TCF target genes and modulate morphogenetic
movements in embryonic tissues by reorganizing the cytoskeleton. The selection of
different molecular targets in the pathway is driven by multiple phosphorylation 
events. Here, we report that metastasis-associated kinase (MAK) is a novel
regulator of Wnt signaling during morphogenetic movements, and eye and brain
development in Xenopus embryos. Injected MAK RNA suppressed Wnt transcriptional
reporters and activated Jun N-terminal kinase. Furthermore, MAK was recruited to 
the cell membrane by Frizzled 3, formed a complex with Dishevelled and
phosphorylated Dsh in vitro. The regional brain markers Otx2, En2 and Gbx2 were
affected in embryos with modulated MAK activity in a manner consistent with a
role for MAK in midbrain-hindbrain boundary formation. Confirming the inhibitory 
role for this kinase in Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, the midbrain patterning
defects in embryos depleted of MAK were rescued by the simultaneous depletion of 
beta-catenin. These findings indicate that MAK may function in different
developmental processes as a switch between the canonical and non-canonical
branches of Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC4428341
PMID: 16790480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6080-6.

Silencing of Peroxiredoxin 2 and aberrant methylation of 33 CpG islands in
putative promoter regions in human malignant melanomas.

Furuta J(1), Nobeyama Y, Umebayashi Y, Otsuka F, Kikuchi K, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji,
Tokyo, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands (CGI) is involved in silencing of
tumor suppressor genes and is also a potential cancer biomarker. Here, to
identify CGIs aberrantly methylated in human melanomas, we did a genome-wide
search using methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis. CGIs in 
putative promoter regions of 34 genes (ABHD9, BARHL1, CLIC5, CNNM1, COL2A1,
CPT1C, DDIT4L, DERL3, DHRS3, DPYS, EFEMP2, FAM62C, FAM78A, FLJ33790, GBX2, GPR10,
GPRASP1, HOXA9, HOXD11, HOXD12, HOXD13, p14ARF, PAX6, PRDX2, PTPRG, RASD1, RAX,
REC8L1, SLC27A3, TGFB2, TLX2, TMEM22, TMEM30B, and UNC5C) were found to be
methylated in at least 1 of 13 melanoma cell lines but not in two cultured normal
melanocytes. Among these genes, Peroxiredoxin 2 (PRDX2) was expressed in normal
melanocytes, and its expression was lost in melanomas with methylation. The loss 
of expression was restored by treatment of melanomas with a demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In surgical melanoma specimens, methylation of PRDX2 was 
detected in 3 of 36 (8%). Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis of PRDX2
showed that disappearance of immunoreactivity tends to associate with its
methylation. PRDX2 was recently reported to be a negative regulator of
platelet-derived growth factor signaling, and its silencing was suggested to be
involved in melanomas. On the other hand, 12 CGIs were methylated in >or=9 of the
13 melanoma cell lines and are considered as candidate melanoma biomarkers.

PMID: 16778180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):40-51. Epub 2006 May 9.

A Gbx homeobox gene in amphioxus: insights into ancestry of the ANTP class and
evolution of the midbrain/hindbrain boundary.

Castro LF(1), Rasmussen SL, Holland PW, Holland ND, Holland LZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS,
UK.

In the vertebrate central nervous system (CNS), mutual antagonism between
posteriorly expressed Gbx2 and anteriorly expressed Otx2 positions the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary (MHB), but does not induce MHB organizer genes such
as En, Pax2/5/8 and Wnt1. In the CNS of the cephalochordate amphioxus, Otx is
also expressed anteriorly, but En, Pax2/5/8 and Wnt1 are not expressed near the
caudal limit of Otx, raising questions about the existence of an MHB organizer in
amphioxus. To investigate the evolutionary origins of the MHB, we cloned the
single amphioxus Gbx gene. Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed that, as in 
vertebrates, amphioxus Gbx and the Hox cluster are on the same chromosome. From
analysis of linked genes, we argue that during evolution a single ancestral Gbx
gene duplicated fourfold in vertebrates, with subsequent loss of two duplicates. 
Amphioxus Gbx is expressed in all germ layers in the posterior 75% of the embryo,
and in the CNS, the Gbx and Otx domains abut at the boundary between the cerebral
vesicle (forebrain/midbrain) and the hindbrain. Thus, the genetic machinery to
position the MHB was present in the protochordate ancestors of the vertebrates,
but is insufficient for induction of organizer genes. Comparison with
hemichordates suggests that anterior Otx and posterior Gbx domains were probably 
overlapping in the ancestral deuterostome and came to abut at the MHB early in
the chordate lineage before MHB organizer properties evolved.

PMID: 16687133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Development. 2006 May;133(10):1991-2000.

A threshold requirement for Gbx2 levels in hindbrain development.

Waters ST(1), Lewandoski M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer and Developmental Biology, NCI-Frederick, National
Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Gbx2 is a homeobox gene that plays a crucial role in positioning the
mid/hindbrain organizer (isthmus), which regulates midbrain and cerebellar
development primarily through the secreted factor FGF8. In Gbx2 null homozygotes,
rhombomeres (r) 1-3 fail to develop and the isthmic expression of Fgf8 is reduced
and disorganized. These mutants fail to form a cerebellum, as it is derived from 
r1. Here, we analyze mice homozygous for a Gbx2 hypomorphic allele (Gbx2(neo)).
Quantitative RT-PCR and RNA in situ analyses indicate that the presence of a
neo-resistance cassette impairs normal Gbx2 splicing thus reducing wild-type Gbx2
mRNA levels to 6-10% of normal levels in all domains and stages examined. In Gbx2
hypomorphic mutants, gene marker and neuronal patterning analyses indicate that
reduced Gbx2 expression is sufficient to support the development of r3 but not
r2. The posterior region of r1, from which the lateral cerebellum develops, is
unaffected in these mutants. However, the anterior region of r1 is converted to
an isthmus-like tissue. Hence, instead of expressing r1 markers, this region
displays robust expression of Fgf8 and Fgf17, as well as the downstream FGF
targets Spry1 and Spry4. Additionally, we demonstrate that the cell division
regulator cyclin D2 is downregulated, and that cellular proliferation is reduced 
in both the normal isthmus and in the mutant anterior r1. As a result of this
transformation, the cerebellar midline fails to form. Thus, our studies
demonstrate different threshold requirements for the level of Gbx2 gene product
in different regions of the hindbrain.

PMID: 16651541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2006 May 1;293(1):13-24. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Loss of orphan nuclear receptor GCNF function disrupts forebrain development and 
the establishment of the isthmic organizer.

Chung AC(1), Xu X, Niederreither KA, Cooney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The isthmic organizer, which is located at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary, is
important for midbrain development. The mechanism by which the development of the
organizer is initiated and maintained is not well understood. Inactivation of the
gene encoding the orphan nuclear receptor, GCNF, diminishes the expression of
secreted signaling molecules, Fgf8 and Wnt1, the paired box genes Pax2/5, En1/2, 
and homeodomain transcription factor Gbx2; all of which are essential for isthmic
organizer function. In addition, full neuronal differentiation is not observed in
the midbrain region of GCNF-/- embryos. Increased cell death may contribute to
the loss of midbrain structure in GCNF-/- embryos. These results indicate that
GCNF is required for establishment of the isthmic organizer, thereby regulating
the midbrain development.

PMID: 16530751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 15;289(2):308-17. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Molecular mechanisms underlying inner ear patterning defects in kreisler mutants.

Choo D(1), Ward J, Reece A, Dou H, Lin Z, Greinwald J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Center for Hearing and
Deafness Research, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, OH 45229-3039, USA.
daniel.choo@cchmc.org

Prior studies have shown that kreisler mutants display early inner ear defects
that are related to abnormal hindbrain development and signaling. These defects
in kreisler mice have been linked to mutation of the kr/mafB gene. To investigate
potential relevance of kr/mafB and abnormal hindbrain development in inner ear
patterning, we analyzed the ear morphogenesis in kreisler mice using a paint-fill
technique. We also examined the expression patterns of a battery of genes
important for normal inner ear patterning and development. Our results indicate
that the loss of dorsal otic structures such as the endolymphatic duct and sac is
attributable to the downregulation of Gbx2, Dlx5 and Wnt2b in the dorsal region
of the otocyst. In contrast, the expanded expression domain of Otx2 in the
ventral otic region likely contributes to the cochlear phenotype seen in kreisler
mutants. Sensory organ development is also markedly disrupted in kreisler
mutants. This pattern of defects and gene expression changes is remarkably
similar to that observed in Gbx2 mutants. Taken together, the data show an
important role for hindbrain cues, and indirectly, kr/mafB, in guiding inner ear 
morphogenesis. The data also identify Gbx2, Dlx5, Wnt2b and Otx2 as key otic
genes ultimately affected by perturbation of the kr/mafB-hindbrain pathway.

PMID: 16325169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Dyn. 2005 Nov;234(3):767-71.

The homeodomain transcription factor Gbx1 identifies a subpopulation of late-born
GABAergic interneurons in the developing dorsal spinal cord.

John A(1), Wildner H, Britsch S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin-Buch, Germany.

The dorsal spinal cord processes somatosensory information and relays it to
higher brain centers and to motoneurons in the ventral spinal horn. These
functions reside in a large number of distinct sensory interneurons that are
organized in specific laminae within the dorsal spinal horn. Homeodomain and bHLH
transcription factors can control the development of neuronal cell types in the
dorsal horn. Here, we demonstrate that the murine homeodomain transcription
factor Gbx1 is expressed specifically in a subset of Lbx1(+) (class B) neurons in
the dorsal horn. Expression of Gbx1 in the dorsal spinal cord depends on Lbx1
function. Immunohistological analyses revealed that Gbx1 identifies a distinct
population of late-born, Lhx1/5(+), Pax2(+) neurons. In the perinatal period as
well as in the adult spinal cord, Gbx1 marks a subpopulation of GABAergic
neurons. The expression of Gbx1 suggests that it controls development of a
specific subset of GABAergic neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.

Developmental Dynamics 234:767-771, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16193514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Genes Dev. 2005 Sep 15;19(18):2116-21.

Hox genes specify vertebral types in the presomitic mesoderm.

Carapuço M(1), Nóvoa A, Bobola N, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal.

We show here that expression of Hoxa10 in the presomitic mesoderm is sufficient
to confer a Hox group 10 patterning program to the somite, producing vertebrae
without ribs, an effect not achieved when Hoxa10 is expressed in the somites. In 
addition, Hox group 11-dependent vertebral sacralization requires Hoxa11
expression in the presomitic mesoderm, while their caudal differentiation
requires that Hoxa11 is expressed in the somites. Therefore, Hox gene patterning 
activity is different in the somites and presomitic mesoderm, the latter being
very prominent for Hox gene-mediated patterning of the axial skeleton. This is
further supported by our finding that inactivation of Gbx2, a homeobox-containing
gene expressed in the presomitic mesoderm but not in the somites, produced
Hox-like phenotypes in the axial skeleton without affecting Hox gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1221883
PMID: 16166377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Brain Res Bull. 2005 Sep 15;66(4-6):491-4. Epub 2005 Mar 5.

A tripartite organization of the urbilaterian brain: developmental genetic
evidence from Drosophila.

Reichert H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Biozentrum/Pharmazentrum, University of Basel,
Switzerland. heinrich.reichert@unibas.ch

Developmental genetic studies suggest that the embryonic vertebrate brain has a
tripartite ground plan consisting of a forebrain/midbrain, a hindbrain, and an
intervening midbrain/hindbrain boundary region, which are characterized by the
specific expression of the Otx, Hox and Pax-2/5/8 genes. Recent studies in
Drosophila reveal similarities in the expression and function of these genes in
patterning the embryonic brains of flies and vertebrates. Thus, in Drosophila, as
is vertebrates, a Pax2/5/8 domain is located between an anterior otd/Otx2 region 
and a posterior Hox region of the embryonic brain. Moreover, in Drosophila, as in
vertebrates, this Pax2/5/8 domain is located at the interface of the otd/Otx2
domain and a posterior unplugged/Gbx2 domain. Furthermore, in Drosophila, as in
vertebrates, inactivation of otd/Otx2 or of unplugged/Gbx2 results in a
comparable mispositioning or loss of orthologous gene expression domains in the
embryonic brain. These developmental genetic similarities suggest that the
tripartite ground plan, which characterizes the developing vertebrate brain, is
also at the basis of the developing insect brain. This, in turn, implies that a
tripartite organization of the embryonic brain may characterize all extant
bilaterians, and thus may already have been established in the last common
urbilaterian ancestor of all bilaterians.

PMID: 16144638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2005 Sep;49(2):134-49. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

Specification of the meso-isthmo-cerebellar region: the Otx2/Gbx2 boundary.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Millet S, Bloch-Gallego E, Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U106,Hôpital de la Salpétrière, Pavillon Enfants et Adolescents, 75651 
Paris CEDEX 13, France. mhidalgo@unex.es

The midbrain/hindbrain (MH) territory containing the mesencephalic and
isthmocerebellar primordial is characterized by the expression of several
families of regulatory genes including transcription factors (Otx, Gbx, En, and
Pax) and signaling molecules (Fgf and Wnt). At earlier stages of avian neural
tube, those genes present a dynamic expression pattern and only at HH18-20
onwards, when the mesencephalic/metencephalic constriction is coincident with the
Otx2/Gbx2 boundary, their expression domains become more defined. This review
summarizes experimental data concerning the genetic mechanisms involved in the
specification of the midbrain/hindbrain territory emphasizing the chick/quail
chimeric experiments leading to the discovery of a secondary isthmic organizer.
Otx2 and Gbx2 co-regulation could determine the precise location of the MH
boundary and involved in the inductive events characteristic of the isthmic
organizer center.

PMID: 16111544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):554-69.

Microarray analysis detects differentially expressed genes in the pharyngeal
region of mice lacking Tbx1.

Ivins S(1), Lammerts van Beuren K, Roberts C, James C, Lindsay E, Baldini A,
Ataliotis P, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

22q11-deletion (DiGeorge/velocardiofacial) syndrome (22q11DS) is modeled by
mutation of murine transcription factor Tbx1. As part of efforts to identify
transcriptional targets of Tbx1, we analyzed the transcriptome of the pharyngeal 
region of Df1/+;Tbx1+/- embryos at 9.5 days of embryonic development using two
independent microarray platforms. In this model, embryos are null for Tbx1, with 
hemizygosity of genes in cis with Tbx1 on one chromosome providing a positive
control for array sensitivity. Reduced mRNA levels of genes deleted from Df1 were
detected on both platforms. Expression level filtering and statistical analysis
identified several genes that were consistently differentially expressed between 
mutant and wild type embryos. Real-time quantitative PCR and in situ
hybridization validated diminished expression of Pax9 and Gcm2, genes known to be
required for normal thymus and parathyroid gland morphogenesis, whereas Pax1,
Hoxa3, Eya1, and Foxn1, which are similarly required, were not down-regulated.
Gbx2, a gene required for normal arch artery development, was down-regulated
specifically in the pharyngeal endoderm and the posterior part of pharyngeal arch
1, and is a potential point of cross talk between the Tbx1 and Fgf8 controlled
pathways. These experiments highlight which genes and pathways potentially
affected by lack of Tbx1, and whose role may be explored further by testing for
epistasis using mouse mutants.

PMID: 16109395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Biol. 2005 Aug 1;284(1):233-45.

Loss of Gbx2 results in neural crest cell patterning and pharyngeal arch artery
defects in the mouse embryo.

Byrd NA(1), Meyers EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Cell Biology, Neonatal Perinatal Research
Institute, Genome Science Research Building II, Box 3471, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Several syndromes characterized by defects in cardiovascular and craniofacial
development are associated with a hemizygous deletion of chromosome 22q11 in
humans and involve defects in pharyngeal arch and neural crest cell development. 
Recent efforts have focused on identifying 22q11 deletion syndrome modifying
loci. In this study, we show that mouse embryos deficient for Gbx2 display
aberrant neural crest cell patterning and defects in pharyngeal arch-derived
structures. Gbx2(-/-) embryos exhibit cardiovascular defects associated with
aberrant development of the fourth pharyngeal arch arteries including interrupted
aortic arch type B, right aortic arch, and retroesophageal right subclavian
artery. Other developmental abnormalities include overriding aorta, ventricular
septal defects, cranial nerve, and craniofacial skeletal patterning defects.
Recently, Fgf8 has been proposed as a candidate modifier for 22q11 deletion
syndromes. Here, we demonstrate that Fgf8 and Gbx2 expression overlaps in regions
of the developing pharyngeal arches and that they interact genetically during
pharyngeal arch and cardiovascular development.

PMID: 15996652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Genes Dev. 2005 Jul 1;19(13):1612-23. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Wnt-dependent regulation of inner ear morphogenesis is balanced by the opposing
and supporting roles of Shh.

Riccomagno MM(1), Takada S, Epstein DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The inner ear is partitioned along its dorsal/ventral axis into vestibular and
auditory organs, respectively. Gene expression studies suggest that this
subdivision occurs within the otic vesicle, the tissue from which all inner ear
structures are derived. While the specification of ventral otic fates is
dependent on Shh secreted from the notochord, the nature of the signal
responsible for dorsal otic development has not been described. In this study, we
demonstrate that Wnt signaling is active in dorsal regions of the otic vesicle,
where it functions to regulate the expression of genes (Dlx5/6 and Gbx2)
necessary for vestibular morphogenesis. We further show that the source of Wnt
impacting on dorsal otic development emanates from the dorsal hindbrain, and
identify Wnt1 and Wnt3a as the specific ligands required for this function. The
restriction of Wnt target genes to the dorsal otocyst is also influenced by Shh. 
Thus, a balance between Wnt and Shh signaling activities is key in distinguishing
between vestibular and auditory cell types.

PMCID: PMC1172066
PMID: 15961523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Development. 2005 Jun;132(12):2861-71.

Knockdown of the complete Hox paralogous group 1 leads to dramatic hindbrain and 
neural crest defects.

McNulty CL(1), Peres JN, Bardine N, van den Akker WM, Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The Hox paralogous group 1 (PG1) genes are the first and initially most anterior 
Hox genes expressed in the embryo. In Xenopus, the three PG1 genes, Hoxa1, Hoxb1 
and Hoxd1, are expressed in a widely overlapping domain, which includes the
region of the future hindbrain and its associated neural crest. We used
morpholinos to achieve a complete knockdown of PG1 function. When Hoxa1, Hoxb1
and Hoxd1 are knocked down in combination, the hindbrain patterning phenotype is 
more severe than in the single or double knockdowns, indicating a degree of
redundancy for these genes. In the triple PG1 knockdown embryos the hindbrain is 
reduced and lacks segmentation. The patterning of rhombomeres 2 to 7 is lost,
with a concurrent posterior expansion of the rhombomere 1 marker, Gbx2. This
effect could be via the downregulation of other Hox genes, as we show that PG1
function is necessary for the hindbrain expression of Hox genes from paralogous
groups 2 to 4. Furthermore, in the absence of PG1 function, the cranial neural
crest is correctly specified but does not migrate into the pharyngeal arches.
Embryos with no active PG1 genes have defects in derivatives of the pharyngeal
arches and, most strikingly, the gill cartilages are completely missing. These
results show that the complete abrogation of PG1 function in Xenopus has a much
wider scope of effect than would be predicted from the single and double PG1
knockouts in other organisms.

PMID: 15930115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(2-3):231-5.

Isthmus organizer and regionalization of the mesencephalon and metencephalon.

Nakamura H(1), Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences and
Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The brain vesicles that are formed at an early stage of neural development are
the fundamentals of the brain plan. Heterotopic transplantation revealed that the
diencephalon could change its fate when juxtaposed to the isthmus
(mes-metencephalic boundary), which indicated that the isthmus functions as an
organizer for the mesencephalon and metencephalon. Fgf8 is identified as an
isthmus organizing signal. Misexpression of Fgf8a and Fgf8b indicated that a
strong Fgf8 signal organizes cerebellar development. The transcription factors
define the fate of the region. Overlapping expression of Otx2, En1 and Pax2 may
define the mesencephalic region and additional expression of Pax3/7 may instruct 
the mesencephalic region to differentiate into the tectum. The di-mesencephalic
boundary is determined by repressive interaction between Pax6 and En1/Pax2 and
the mes-metencephalic boundary is defined by repressive interaction between Otx2 
and Gbx2. Fgf8 is induced at the border of the Otx2 and Gbx2 expression domain,
overlapping with Gbx2 expression.

PMID: 15906236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Neurosci. 2005 May 11;25(19):4856-67.

Otx2 regulates subtype specification and neurogenesis in the midbrain.

Vernay B(1), Koch M, Vaccarino F, Briscoe J, Simeone A, Kageyama R, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire/Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, Université Louis Pasteur, 67404 Illkirch cedex, Strasbourg, France.

The transcription factor Otx2 is required to determine mesencephalic versus
metencephalic (cerebellum/pons) territory during embryogenesis. This function of 
Otx2 primarily involves positioning and maintaining the mid-hindbrain organizer
at the border between midbrain and anterior hindbrain. Otx2 expression is
maintained long after this organizer is established. We therefore generated
conditional mutants of Otx2 using the Cre/loxP system to study later roles during
rostral brain development. For inactivation of Otx2 in neuronal progenitor cells,
we crossed Otx2(flox/flox) animals with Nestin-Cre transgenic animals. In
Nestin-Cre/+; Otx2(flox/flox) embryos, Otx2 activity was lost from the ventral
midbrain starting at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5). In these mutant embryos, the
mid-hindbrain organizer was properly positioned at E12.5, although Otx2 is absent
from the midbrain. Hence, the Nestin-Cre/+; Otx2(flox/flox) animals represent a
novel mouse model for studying the role of Otx2 in the midbrain, independently of
abnormal development of the mid-hindbrain organizer. Our data demonstrate that
Otx2 controls the development of several neuronal populations in the midbrain by 
regulating progenitor identity and neurogenesis. Dorsal midbrain progenitors
ectopically expressed Math1 and generate an ectopic cerebellar-like structure.
Similarly, Nkx2.2 ectopic expression ventrally into tegmentum progenitors is
responsible for the formation of serotonergic neurons and hypoplasia of the red
nucleus in the midbrain. In addition, we discovered a novel role for Otx2 in
regulating neurogenesis of dopaminergic neurons. Altogether, these results
demonstrate that Otx2 is required from E10.5 onward to regulate neuronal subtype 
identity and neurogenesis in the midbrain.

PMID: 15888661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Stem Cells. 2005 May;23(5):663-80.

Correlation of murine embryonic stem cell gene expression profiles with
functional measures of pluripotency.

Palmqvist L(1), Glover CH, Hsu L, Lu M, Bossen B, Piret JM, Humphries RK,
Helgason CD.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Global gene expression profiling was performed on murine embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) induced to differentiate by removal of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) to
identify genes whose change in expression correlates with loss of pluripotency.
To identify appropriate time points for the gene expression analysis, the
dynamics of loss of pluripotency were investigated using three functional assays:
chimeric mouse formation, embryoid body generation, and colony-forming ability. A
rapid loss of pluripotency was detected within 24 hours, with very low residual
activity in all assays by 72 hours. Gene expression profiles of undifferentiated 
ESCs and ESCs cultured for 18 and 72 hours in the absence of LIF were determined 
using the Affymetrix GeneChip U74v2. In total, 473 genes were identified as
significantly differentially expressed, with approximately one third having
unknown biological function. Among the 275 genes whose expression decreased with 
ESC differentiation were several factors previously identified as important for, 
or markers of, ESC pluripotency, including Stat3, Rex1, Sox2, Gbx2, and Bmp4. A
significant number of the decreased genes also overlap with previously published 
mouse and human ESC data. Furthermore, several membrane proteins were among the
48 decreased genes correlating most closely with the functional assays, including
the stem cell factor receptor c-Kit. Through identification of genes whose
expression closely follows functional properties of ESCs during early
differentiation, this study lays the foundation for further elucidating the
molecular mechanisms regulating the maintenance of ESC pluripotency and
facilitates the identification of more reliable molecular markers of the
undifferentiated state.

PMID: 15849174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Development. 2005 May;132(10):2309-18. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Gbx2 is required for the morphogenesis of the mouse inner ear: a downstream
candidate of hindbrain signaling.

Lin Z(1), Cantos R, Patente M, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institutes on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20850, USA.

Gbx2 is a homeobox-containing transcription factor that is related to unplugged
in Drosophila. In mice, Gbx2 and Otx2 negatively regulate each other to establish
the mid-hindbrain boundary in the neural tube. Here, we show that Gbx2 is
required for the development of the mouse inner ear. Absence of the endolymphatic
duct and swelling of the membranous labyrinth are common features in Gbx2-/-
inner ears. More severe mutant phenotypes include absence of the anterior and
posterior semicircular canals, and a malformed saccule and cochlear duct.
However, formation of the lateral semicircular canal and its ampulla is usually
unaffected. These inner ear phenotypes are remarkably similar to those reported
in kreisler mice, which have inner ear defects attributed to defects in the
hindbrain. Based on gene expression analyses, we propose that activation of Gbx2 
expression within the inner ear is an important pathway whereby signals from the 
hindbrain regulate inner ear development. In addition, our results suggest that
Gbx2 normally promotes dorsal fates such as the endolymphatic duct and
semicircular canals by positively regulating genes such as Wnt2b and Dlx5.
However, Gbx2 promotes ventral fates such as the saccule and cochlear duct,
possibly by restricting Otx2 expression.

PMID: 15829521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Development. 2005 Apr;132(8):1971-81.

New regulatory interactions and cellular responses in the isthmic organizer
region revealed by altering Gbx2 expression.

Li JY(1), Lao Z, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. jali@uchc.edu

The mouse homeobox gene Gbx2 is first expressed throughout the posterior region
of the embryo during gastrulation, and becomes restricted to rhombomeres 1-3
(r1-3) by embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5). Previous studies have shown that r1-3 do not 
develop in Gbx2 mutants and that there is an early caudal expansion of the
midbrain gene Otx2 to the anterior border of r4. Furthermore, expression of Wnt1 
and Fgf8, two crucial components of the isthmic organizer, is no longer
segregated to adjacent domains in Gbx2 mutants. In this study, we extend the
phenotypic analysis of Gbx2 mutants by showing that Gbx2 is not only required for
development of r1-3, but also for normal gene expression in r4-6. To determine
whether Gbx2 can alter hindbrain development, we generated Hoxb1-Gbx2 (HG)
transgenic mice in which Gbx2 is ectopically expressed in r4. We show that Gbx2
is not sufficient to induce r1-3 development in r4. To test whether an Otx2/Gbx2 
interface can induce r1-3 development, we introduced the HG transgene onto a
Gbx2-null mutant background and recreated a new Otx2/Gbx2 border in the anterior 
hindbrain. Development of r3, but not r1 and r2, is rescued in Gbx2-/-; HG
embryos. In addition, the normal spatial relationship of Wnt1 and Fgf8 is
established at the new Otx2/Gbx2 border, demonstrating that an interaction
between Otx2 and Gbx2 is sufficient to produce the normal pattern of Wnt1 and
Fgf8 expression. However, the expression domains of Fgf8 and Spry1, a downstream 
target of Fgf8, are greatly reduced in mid/hindbrain junction area of Gbx2-/-; HG
embryos and the posterior midbrain is truncated because of abnormal cell death.
Interestingly, we show that increased cell death and a partial loss of the
midbrain are associated with increased expression of Fgf8 and Spry1 in Gbx2
conditional mutants that lack Gbx2 in r1 after E9.0. These results together
suggest that cell survival in the posterior midbrain is positively or negatively 
regulated by Fgf8, depending on Fgf8 expression level. Our studies provide new
insights into the regulatory interactions that maintain isthmic organizer gene
expression and the consequences of altered levels of organizer gene expression on
cell survival.

PMID: 15790971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2005 May;132(9):2115-24. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Role of the hindbrain in dorsoventral but not anteroposterior axial specification
of the inner ear.

Bok J(1), Bronner-Fraser M, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders, 5 Research
Court, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.

An early and crucial event in vertebrate inner ear development is the acquisition
of axial identities that in turn dictate the positions of all subsequent inner
ear components. Here, we focus on the role of the hindbrain in establishment of
inner ear axes and show that axial specification occurs well after otic placode
formation in chicken. Anteroposterior (AP) rotation of the hindbrain prior to
specification of this axis does not affect the normal AP orientation and
morphogenesis of the inner ear. By contrast, reversing the dorsoventral (DV) axis
of the hindbrain results in changing the DV axial identity of the inner ear.
Expression patterns of several ventrally expressed otic genes such as NeuroD,
Lunatic fringe (Lfng) and Six1 are shifted dorsally, whereas the expression
pattern of a normally dorsal-specific gene, Gbx2, is abolished. Removing the
source of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) by ablating the floor plate and/or notochord, or
inhibiting SHH function using an antibody that blocks SHH bioactivity results in 
loss of ventral inner ear structures. Our results indicate that SHH, together
with other signals from the hindbrain, are important for patterning the ventral
axis of the inner ear. Taken together, our studies suggest that tissue(s) other
than the hindbrain confer AP axial information whereas signals from the hindbrain
are necessary and sufficient for the DV axial patterning of the inner ear.

PMID: 15788455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Leukemia. 2005 May;19(5):841-6.

HLXB9 activates IL6 in Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines and is regulated by PI3K
signalling involving E2F3.

Nagel S(1), Scherr M, Quentmeier H, Kaufmann M, Zaborski M, Drexler HG, MacLeod
RA.

Author information: 
(1)DSMZ (Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen), Department of
Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

Multiple cytokines are secreted by Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cells, notably
interleukin-6 (IL6), which is believed to play a significant pathobiological role
in this and certain other tumors. Previous work on prostate carcinoma cells has
shown that IL6 expression is activated therein by the homeodomain protein GBX2,
which we found to be absent in HL cells. Instead, we observed expression of a
closely related gene, HLXB9, albeit restricted to HL cells coexpressing IL6.
Treatment of HL cell lines with antisense-oligonucleotides directed against
HLXB9, forced expression of recombinant HLXB9, and analysis of reporter gene
constructs containing IL6 promoter sequences all confirmed the potential of HLXB9
to drive expression of IL6. Chromosomal rearrangements of the HLXB9 locus at 7q36
were not detected in HL cells unlike AML subsets expressing HLXB9. However,
inhibition of certain signal transduction pathways revealed that the
phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) pathway contributes to HLXB9 expression.
AKT/phospho-AKT analysis revealed constitutively active PI3K signalling in HL
cell lines. Downstream analysis of PI3K revealed that E2F3 may mediate activation
of HLXB9. Taken together, our data show that the PI3K signalling pathway in HL
cells is constitutively activated and promotes HLXB9 expression, probably via
E2F3, thereby enhancing malignant expression of IL6.

PMID: 15772702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. NMR Biomed. 2004 Dec;17(8):613-9.

Manganese-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MEMRI) of mouse brain development.

Wadghiri YZ(1), Blind JA, Duan X, Moreno C, Yu X, Joyner AL, Turnbull DH.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Given the importance of genetically modified mice in studies of mammalian brain
development and human congenital brain diseases, MRI has the potential to provide
an efficient in vivo approach for analyzing mutant phenotypes in the early
postnatal mouse brain. The combination of reduced tissue contrast at the high
magnetic fields required for mice, and the changing cellular composition of the
developing mouse brain make it difficult to optimize MRI contrast in neonatal
mouse imaging. We have explored an easily implemented approach for
contrast-enhanced imaging, using systemically administered manganese (Mn) to
reveal fine anatomical detail in T1-weighted MR images of neonatal mouse brains. 
In particular, we demonstrate the utility of this Mn-enhanced MRI (MEMRI) method 
for analyzing early postnatal patterning of the mouse cerebellum. Through
comparisons with matched histological sections, we further show that MEMRI
enhancement correlates qualitatively with granule cell density in the developing 
cerebellum, suggesting that the cerebellar enhancement is due to uptake of Mn in 
the granule neurons. Finally, variable cerebellar defects in mice with a
conditional mutation in the Gbx2 gene were analyzed with MEMRI to demonstrate the
utility of this method for mutant mouse phenotyping. Taken together, our results 
indicate that MEMRI provides an efficient and powerful in vivo method for
analyzing neonatal brain development in normal and genetically engineered mice.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 15761950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genesis. 2005 Mar;41(3):110-5.

Synergistic activity of Sef and Sprouty proteins in regulating the expression of 
Gbx2 in the mid-hindbrain region.

Lin W(1), Jing N, Basson MA, Dierich A, Licht J, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

Sef and Sprouty proteins function as feedback antagonists of fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) signaling in zebrafish embryos. To study the role of Sef in mice, we
generated Sef homozygous mutant animals. These animals are viable and show normal
expression of mid-hindbrain genes at embryonic days 8.5 and 9.5. To investigate
the possibility of functional synergism between Sef and Sprouty proteins, we
electroporated Sprouty2(Y55A), which functions in a dominant-negative manner in
tissue culture cells into the mid-hindbrain region of wildtype and Sef mutant
embryos. The expression pattern of Gbx2, a downstream target of Fgf signaling,
was expanded or shifted in electroporated embryos, and this effect was
significantly enhanced in the Sef mutant background. Altogether, our results
demonstrate that Sef and Sproutys function synergistically to regulate Gbx2
expression in the anterior hindbrain.

PMID: 15729686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16484-98. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Differences in gene expression between wild type and Hoxa1 knockout embryonic
stem cells after retinoic acid treatment or leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
removal.

Martinez-Ceballos E(1), Chambon P, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes encode a family of transcription factors that regulate
embryonic patterning and organogenesis. In embryos, alterations of the normal
pattern of Hox gene expression result in homeotic transformations and
malformations. Disruption of the Hoxa1 gene, the most 3' member of the Hoxa
cluster and a retinoic acid (RA) direct target gene, results in abnormal
ossification of the skull, hindbrain, and inner ear deficiencies, and neonatal
death. We have generated Hoxa1(-/-) embryonic stem (ES) cells (named Hoxa1-15)
from Hoxa1(-/-) mutant blastocysts to study the Hoxa1 signaling pathway. We have 
characterized in detail these Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells by performing microarray
analyses, and by this technique we have identified a number of putative Hoxa-1
target genes, including genes involved in bone development (e.g. Col1a1,
Postn/Osf2, and the bone sialoprotein gene or BSP), genes that are expressed in
the developing brain (e.g. Nnat, Wnt3a, BDNF, RhoB, and Gbx2), and genes involved
in various cellular processes (e.g. M-RAS, Sox17, Cdkn2b, LamA1, Col4a1, Foxa2,
Foxq1, Klf5, and Igf2). Cell proliferation assays and Northern blot analyses of a
number of ES cell markers (e.g. Rex1, Oct3/4, Fgf4, and Bmp4) suggest that the
Hoxa1 protein plays a role in the inhibition of cell proliferation by RA in ES
cells. Additionally, Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells express high levels of various
endodermal markers, including Gata4 and Dab2, and express much less Fgf5 after
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal. Finally, we propose a model in which
the Hoxa1 protein mediates repression of endodermal differentiation while
promoting expression of ectodermal and mesodermal characteristics.

PMID: 15722554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Exp Brain Res. 2005 May;163(1):86-99. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Noggin and basic FGF were implicated in forebrain fate and caudal fate,
respectively, of the neural tube-like structures emerging in mouse ES cell
culture.

Chiba S(1), Kurokawa MS, Yoshikawa H, Ikeda R, Takeno M, Tadokoro M, Sekino H,
Hashimoto T, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 2-16-1
Sugao, 216-8511 Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Japan.

We developed neural tube-like structures accompanying neural crest-like cells by 
treating embryonic stem (ES) cells with retinoic acid. The structures contained
pseudostratified Nestin+Vimentin+ neuroepithelial cells surrounded by Masson
staining+ basement membrane. betaIIItubulin+Synaptophysin+ mature neurons and
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)+ glial cells dispersed outside of the
membrane. Addition of Noggin to the culture induced prominent proliferation of
the neuroepithelial cells, leading to epithelial hyperstratification of the
structures. mRNAs of transcription factors essential for forebrain development
such as Emx1/2 and Pax6 were specifically expressed and Islet1+Lim1/2-
motoneurons appeared by the addition of Noggin. In contrast, basic fibroblast
growth factor (bFGF) promoted enlargement of central lumen and elongation of the 
structures. mRNAs of caudal markers, Gbx2, Cdx2 and Hoxb4/9 were expressed and
Lim1/2+ spinal motoneurons appeared by the addition of bFGF. Addition of BMP-4
similarly brought about mild enlargement of central lumen of the structures.
Interestingly, the addition of BMP-4 induced Slug+ neural crest-like cells
surrounding the tube-like structures. mRNAs of Snail and dHand, other markers for
neural crest cells, were also expressed by the addition of BMP-4. These results
suggest that Noggin lead the neural-tube like structures to forebrain fate,
whereas bFGF was involved in the caudalization. BMP-4 was implicated in emergence
of the neural crest-like cells. Differentiation of ES cells by the present
methods may mimic neurulation and subsequent neural development of early embryos,
and elucidates the opposite effects of Noggin and bFGF for the neural tube
development.

PMID: 15703886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Comp Neurol. 2005 Feb 28;483(1):17-29.

A distinct preisthmic histogenetic domain is defined by overlap of Otx2 and Pax2 
gene expression in the avian caudal midbrain.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Martínez-de-la-Torre M, Alvarado-Mallart RM, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Sciences, University of Extremadura,
E06071 Badajoz, Spain.

Correlative in situ hybridization of Otx2, Pax2, Gbx2, and Fgf8 mRNA probes in
adjacent serial sections through the chicken midbrain and isthmus at early to
intermediate stages of development served to map in detail the area of overlap of
Otx2 and Pax2 transcripts in the caudal midbrain. The neuronal populations
developing within this preisthmic domain made up a caudal part of the midbrain
reticular formation, the interfascicular nucleus, and the magnocellular
(pre)isthmic nucleus, plus the corresponding part of the periaqueductal gray. The
torus semicircularis-the inferior colliculus homolog-expressed Otx2 in its
ventricular lining exclusively, but it never expressed Pax2. The parvicellular
isthmic nucleus, although placed inside the midbrain lobe, never expressed Otx2, 
and its cells rapidly down-regulated an early transient Pax2 signal; this pattern
is consistent with its reported isthmic origin and forward tangential
translocation. This analysis reveals the existence of four distinct midbrain
histogenetic domains along the longitudinal axis, at least for the alar plate.
These presumably result from step-like isthmic organizer effects on
Otx2-expressing midbrain neuroepithelium at different distances from a caudal
FGF8 morphogen source (isthmic Fgf8-positive domain). The final phenotypes of
these domains are histologically diverse and make up the griseum tectale
(rostrally), the optic tectum, the torus semicircularis, and the presently
characterized preisthmic domain (lying closest to the isthmic organizer).
Available comparative data for reptiles and mammals suggest the general validity 
of this scheme.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15672400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Feb;42(2):170-8.

Activation of HLXB9 by juxtaposition with MYB via formation of t(6;7)(q23;q36) in
an AML-M4 cell line (GDM-1).

Nagel S(1), Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of
Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

Mutation or dysregulation of related homeobox genes occurs in leukemia. Using
RT-PCR, we screened members of the EHG family of homeobox genes, comprising EN1
(at 2q14), GBX2 (at 2q36), and EN2, GBX1, and HLXB9 (at 7q36), for dysregulation 
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines indicated by chromosomal breakpoints
at these sites. Only one EHG-family gene was expressed, HLXB9, in cell line GDM-1
(AML-M4). Karyotypic analysis of GDM-1 revealed a unique t(6;7)(q23;q35), also
present in the patient. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis showed
chromosomal breakpoints close to the region upstream of HLXB9, at 7q36, a region 
rearranged in certain AML patients, and at 6q23 upstream of MYB, a gene activated
in leukemia. Detailed expression analysis suggested ectopic activation of HLXB9
occurred via juxtaposition with regions upstream of MYB, which was highly
expressed in GDM-1. Our data identified a cell line model for a novel leukemic
translocation involving MYB with HLXB9, further implicating HLXB9 in
leukemogenesis.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15540222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Neurosci. 2004 Oct 13;24(41):8917-23.

Fgf8 regulates the development of intra-neocortical projections.

Huffman KJ(1), Garel S, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Neurobiology
and Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143-0984, USA.

The process of generating functionally distinct neocortical areas requires the
formation of an intra-neocortical connectivity map. Here, we explore the early
development of murine intra-neocortical projections and find that axons from
rostral and caudal neurons remain, respectively, within large rostral and caudal 
domains of the neonatal neocortex. Despite evidence that thalamic input can
regulate neocortical areal properties, we found that the neonatal
intra-neocortical projection pattern was not perturbed when thalamic input was
absent in Gbx2 mutants. On the contrary, in Fgf8 hypomorphic mutants, the rostral
neocortex of which acquires more caudal molecular properties, caudally located
neurons ectopically project axons into the rostral cortex. Therefore, neocortical
patterning by Fgf8 also contributes to arealization through mediating early
development of intra-neocortical connectivity.

PMID: 15483110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Oct;4(6):659-69.

Otx2, Gbx2, and Fgf8 expression patterns in the chick developing inner ear and
their possible roles in otic specification and early innervation.

Sánchez-Calderón H(1), Martín-Partido G, Hidalgo-Sánchez M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Universidad de Extremadura, Avda. de Elvas
s/n, 06071 Badajoz, Spain.

The chick inner ear is a complex structure containing auditory and vestibular
sensory organs innervated by neurons of the acoustic-vestibular ganglion. The
molecular signals involved in the specification and initial innervation of the
otic epithelium are poorly understood. Here, we present a detailed description of
the Otx2, Gbx2, and Fgf8 gene expression patterns in the chick developing inner
ear, comparing them with the Bmp4 expression, a putative sensory-organ marker.
The Otx2 expression was detected in the ventro-lateral wall of the otic anlage
and could play a role in the segregation of the saccule and utricle maculae. The 
relationship between Gbx2 and Fgf8 expression changed during inner ear
development but was always related to the macula sacculi innervation and
endolymphatic duct formation. Our results also suggest that the maculae of the
saccule and lagena, and the medial portion of the macula utriculi could arise
within a broad Fgf8-positive domain previously observed at the otocyst stage. The
spatial and temporal relationships between these gene expression domains and the 
initial innervation of the epithelium by some subpopulations of otic axons
suggest that expression domain boundaries could be involved in the specification 
and early innervation of presumptive sensory patches.

PMID: 15465488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Sep 6;477(1):55-80.

Expression of regulatory genes during differentiation of thalamic nuclei in mouse
and monkey.

Jones EG(1), Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, Davis, California
95616, USA. ejones@ucdavis.edu

Expression patterns of genes implicated in development of the thalamus were
examined in mice and monkeys, using in situ hybridization with RNA probes
complementary to Cad6, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Gbx2, Id2, and Lef1 cDNAs. Expression
patterns were related to the evolving cytoarchitecture in mice at birth (P0) and 
in adulthood, and in fetal monkeys early and late in the period of gestation when
thalamic nuclei are becoming histologically differentiated out of a series of
pronuclear masses. At the earlier developmental stage, each gene was expressed in
a pattern that appeared to be pronucleus-specific and maintained a
nucleus-specific pattern into adulthood, with the possible exception of Gbx2.
Each gene displayed a unique expression pattern in the dorsal thalamus, ventral
thalamus, and epithalamus, and no gene was expressed throughout all three
divisions or in every nucleus of a division. With the exception of Dlx2, whose
expression disappeared at the later time point, all continued to be expressed
into adulthood at higher levels and with identical patterns. Despite late
appearance of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic cells in the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus of mice, no Dlx genes, which promote formation of a GABAergic 
phenotype elsewhere, were detected in dorsal thalamus. Each thalamic nucleus was 
distinguished by expression of a combination of genes, and homologous nuclei in
mouse and monkey exhibited the same combination. The presence of a centre médian 
nucleus and four pulvinar nuclei in monkeys was marked by patterns of expression 
not found in mice. The centre médian nucleus was marked by high expression of
Id2, which was expressed only weakly in very few nuclei of mice.

PMID: 15281080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMC Biol. 2004 Jun 15;2:14.

Segmental identity and cerebellar granule cell induction in rhombomere 1.

Eddison M(1), Toole L, Bell E, Wingate RJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th Floor,
New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. eddison@itsa.ucsf.edu
<eddison@itsa.ucsf.edu>

BACKGROUND: Cerebellar granule cell precursors are specifically generated within 
the hindbrain segment, rhombomere 1, which is bounded rostrally by the
midbrain/hindbrain isthmus and caudally by the boundary of the Hoxa2 expression
domain. While graded signals from the isthmus have a demonstrable patterning role
within this region, the significance of segmental identity for neuronal
specification within rhombomere 1 is unexplored. We examined the response of
granule cell precursors to the overexpression of Hoxa2, which normally determines
patterns of development specific to the hindbrain. How much does the development 
of the cerebellum, a midbrain/hindbrain structure, reflect its neuromeric origin 
as a hindbrain segment?
RESULTS: We show that a Gbx2-positive, Otx2-/Hoxa2-negative territory
corresponding to rhombomere 1 forms prior to an identifiable isthmic organiser.
Early global overexpression of Hoxa2 at embryonic day 0 has no effect on the
expression of isthmic signalling molecules or the allocation of rhombomere 1
territory, but selectively results in the loss of granule cell markers at
embryonic day 6 and the depletion of cell bodies from the external granule cell
layer. By comparison the trochlear nucleus and locus coeruleus form normally in
ventral rhombomere 1 under these conditions. Microsurgery, coupled with
electroporation, to target Hoxa2 overexpression to rhombic lip precursors,
reveals a profound, autonomous respecification of migration. Rhombic lip
derivatives, normally destined to occupy the external granule cell layer, violate
the cerebellar boundary to form a ventrolateral nucleus in a position comparable 
to that occupied by rhombic lip derived neurons in rhombomere 2.
CONCLUSIONS: Different overexpression strategies reveal that the recognition of
migration cues by granule cell precursors is dependent on their identity as
rhombomere 1 derivatives. Segmental patterning cues operate autonomously within
the rhombic lip precursor pool. By contrast, a subset of coextensive nuclei is
refractory to ectopic Hoxa2 and is presumably induced solely by isthmic organiser
activity. Thus, graded (isthmic) and segmental mechanisms may operate exclusively
of one another in the specification of different neuronal populations within
rhombomere 1. The early designation of an Otx2-negative, Hoxa2-negative region,
prior to the appearance of the isthmic organiser, is a key initial step in the
specification of the cerebellum.

PMCID: PMC446226
PMID: 15198802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nat Neurosci. 2004 Jun;7(6):605-12. Epub 2004 May 9.

The prepattern transcription factor Irx2, a target of the FGF8/MAP kinase
cascade, is involved in cerebellum formation.

Matsumoto K(1), Nishihara S, Kamimura M, Shiraishi T, Otoguro T, Uehara M, Maeda 
Y, Ogura K, Lumsden A, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and 
Cancer, Tohoku University 4-1, Seiryo, Aoba, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The cerebellum develops from the rhombic lip of the rostral hindbrain and is
organized by fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8) expressed by the isthmus. Here we 
report characterization of Irx2, a member of the Iroquois (Iro) and Irx class of 
homeobox genes, that is expressed in the presumptive cerebellum. When Irx2 is
misexpressed with Fgf8a in the chick midbrain, the midbrain develops into
cerebellum in conjunction with repression of Otx2 and induction of Gbx2. During
this event, signaling by the FGF8 and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
cascade modulates the activity of Irx2 by phosphorylation. Our data identify a
link between the isthmic organizer and Irx2, thereby shedding light on the roles 
of Iro and Irx genes, which are conserved in both vertebrates and invertebrates.

PMID: 15133517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cerebellum. 2004;3(1):16-20.

Retinoids and binding proteins in the cerebellum during lifetime.

Parenti R(1), Cicirata F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
parenti@mbox.unict.it

The vertebrate nervous system is one of the main sites where retinoids and
related binding proteins play their critical roles. The cerebellum is subjected
to the effects of retinoids over its lifetime. The retinoid binding proteins are 
differently expressed during life: CRBP I, expressed in the adult cerebellum, is 
possibly involved in plasticity during memory processes. CRABP I, expressed in
the embryonic cerebellum, is involved in the development of the organ and in
cellular differentiation. In particular, since the expression of CRABP I
coincides with earliest cerebellar differentiation, it is probably involved in
this critical step, participating in a complex network of regulatory genes
expressed in the mes/methencephalon such as Fgf8, Wnt1, En1/2, Pax2/5, Otx2 and
Gbx2. Finally, the way for metabolic synchronization of isthmic cell populations 
and the putative existence of alternative pathways for CRABP I to regulate RA are
discussed.

PMID: 15072263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Mar;19(5):1141-52.

Temporally induced Nurr1 can induce a non-neuronal dopaminergic cell type in
embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Sonntag KC(1), Simantov R, Kim KS, Isacson O.

Author information: 
(1)Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center of Excellence, McLean
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.

The nuclear transcription factor Nurr1 is involved in the development and
maintenance of the midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neuronal phenotype. We analysed the
cellular and biological effects of Nurr1 during embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation using the ROSA26-engineered Tet-inducible ES cell line J1-rtTA
that does not express transgenes in mature neurons. Induction of Nurr1 at
nestin-positive precursor and later stages of ES cell differentiation produced a 
non-neuronal DA cell type including functional DA transporters. In these cells,
we found a clear correlation between Nurr1 and TH gene expression and specific
midbrain DA cellular markers such as AADC, AHD2 and calbindin. Nurr1 did not
alter gene expression of non-DA neuronal phenotypes and did not influence other
midbrain developmental transcription factors, such as Otx1, Otx2, En-1, GBX2,
Pitx3 and lmx1b. In addition, Nurr1 expression was required for maintenance of
the DA phenotype and mediated up-regulation of the tyrosine kinase Ret and
associated trophic factor GDNF-family receptors alpha 1, 2, and 4. This
demonstrates that Nurr1 is sufficient to induce and maintain a midbrain-like DA
biochemical and functional cellular phenotype independent of neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2614072
PMID: 15016073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Neurobiol. 2004 Apr;59(1):48-56.

Polarity and laminar formation of the optic tectum in relation to retinal
projection.

Nakamura H(1), Sugiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences and
Institute of Development Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The mes-metencephalic boundary (isthmus) works as an organizer for the tectum,
and the organizing molecule may be Fgf8. The region where Otx2, En1, and Pax2 are
expressed overlappingly may differentiate into the mesencephalon. The
di-mesencephalic and mes-metencephalic boundaries are determined by repressive
interaction of Pax6 and En1/Pax2 and of Otx2 and Gbx2, respectively. The optic
tectum is a visual center in lower vertebrates. The tectum and the retina should 
be regionalized and be positionally specialized for the proper retinotopic
projection. Gradient of En2 plays a crucial role in rostrocaudal polarity
formation of the tectum. En2 confers caudal characteristics of the retina by
inducing ephrinA2 and A5, which are the repellant molecules for the growth cones 
of temporal retinal ganglion cells. Grg4 antagonizes the isthmus-related genes,
and is involved in the formation of di-mesencephalic boundary and tectal polarity
formation at an early phase of development. Then, Grg4 plays a role in tectal
laminar formation by controlling the migration pathway. Migration pathway of
tectal postmitotic cells changes after E5. The late migratory cells split the
early migratory neurons to form laminae h-j of SGFS. Grg4 is expressed in the
ventricular layer after E5, and forces postmitotic cells to follow the late
migratory pathway, though retinal fibers terminate at laminae a-f of SGFS.
Misexpression of Grg4 disrupts the lamina g, and in such tecta retinal arbors
invade deep into the tectal layer, indicating that lamina g is a nonpermissive
lamina for the retinal arbors.

Copyright 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 59: 48-56, 2004

PMID: 15007826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Dyn. 2004 Feb;229(2):334-9.

Isolation and expression of the homeobox gene Gbx1 during mouse development.

Rhinn M(1), Lun K, Werner M, Simeone A, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden,
Germany.

In zebrafish, gbx1 and otx2 are among the earliest genes expressed in the
neuroectoderm, dividing it into an anterior and a posterior domain with a common 
border that marks the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) primordium. Here, we
describe the sequence and expression pattern of Gbx1 in mouse. The first
transcripts are found at embryonic day 7.75 in the hindbrain. Later on,
expression of Gbx1 is detectable in the hindbrain (rhombomeres 2 to 7), spinal
cord, optic vesicles, and in the ventral telencephalon. In mouse, Gbx1 expression
is not observed at the MHB as is the case during early zebrafish development. We 
suggest that an evolutionary switch occurred: in mouse Gbx2 is involved in the
early specification of the MHB primordium, whereas in zebrafish, gbx1 is required
instead of gbx2.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14745958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Dec;3(6):727-33.

Slitrk6 expression profile in the mouse embryo and its relationship to that of
Nlrr3.

Aruga J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, 351-0198, Saitama, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.go.jp

Slitrk6 is a member of the Slitrk family of proteins, which are integral membrane
proteins possessing two leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domains and a carboxy-terminal 
domain partially similar to that in the trk neurotrophin receptor proteins. Here,
I show that Slitrk6 is uniquely expressed in various organs, different from other
Slitrk genes which are predominantly expressed in neural tissues. In the
developing mouse embryo, Slitrk6 expression was detected in the otic cyst,
lateral trunk epidermis and its underlying mesenchymal tissue, limb bud,
maxillary process, pharyngeal arches, cochlea, retina, tongue, tooth primordium, 
central nervous system (CNS), and the visceral organ primordia including of the
lung, gastrointestinal tract (particularly in the enteric neurons) and pancreas. 
The expression in these organs occurred in a spatially restricted manner. In the 
CNS, the expression was highly compartmentalized in the dorsal thalamus,
cerebellum and medulla. The expression compartment in the thalamus in which
Slitrk6 was expressed was closely related to the Gbx2-expressing prosomere 2.
Interestingly, the Slitrk6 expression in the CNS, cochlea, tongue, tooth
primordial, and other organs was partially complementary to the expression of
Nlrr3, which belongs to another family of neuronal LRR-containing transmembrane
proteins. The complementary expression of the two proteins in the dorsal thalamus
persisted from E13.5 to the adult stage.

PMID: 14643680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 2003 Dec;130(25):6175-85. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

FGF17b and FGF18 have different midbrain regulatory properties from FGF8b or
activated FGF receptors.

Liu A(1), Li JY, Bromleigh C, Lao Z, Niswander LA, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Developmental Biology Program, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Early patterning of the vertebrate midbrain and cerebellum is regulated by a
mid/hindbrain organizer that produces three fibroblast growth factors (FGF8,
FGF17 and FGF18). The mechanism by which each FGF contributes to patterning the
midbrain, and induces a cerebellum in rhombomere 1 (r1) is not clear. We and
others have found that FGF8b can transform the midbrain into a cerebellum fate,
whereas FGF8a can promote midbrain development. In this study we used a chick
electroporation assay and in vitro mouse brain explant experiments to compare the
activity of FGF17b and FGF18 to FGF8a and FGF8b. First, FGF8b is the only protein
that can induce the r1 gene Gbx2 and strongly activate the pathway inhibitors
Spry1/2, as well as repress the midbrain gene Otx2. Consistent with previous
studies that indicated high level FGF signaling is required to induce these gene 
expression changes, electroporation of activated FGFRs produce similar gene
expression changes to FGF8b. Second, FGF8b extends the organizer along the
junction between the induced Gbx2 domain and the remaining Otx2 region in the
midbrain, correlating with cerebellum development. By contrast, FGF17b and FGF18 
mimic FGF8a by causing expansion of the midbrain and upregulating midbrain gene
expression. This result is consistent with Fgf17 and Fgf18 being expressed in the
midbrain and not just in r1 as Fgf8 is. Third, analysis of gene expression in
mouse brain explants with beads soaked in FGF8b or FGF17b showed that the
distinct activities of FGF17b and FGF8b are not due to differences in the amount 
of FGF17b protein produced in vivo. Finally, brain explants were used to define a
positive feedback loop involving FGF8b mediated upregulation of Fgf18, and two
negative feedback loops that include repression of Fgfr2/3 and direct induction
of Spry1/2. As Fgf17 and Fgf18 are co-expressed with Fgf8 in many tissues, our
studies have broad implications for how these FGFs differentially control
development.

PMID: 14602678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Dev Dyn. 2003 Nov;228(3):433-50.

gbx2 Homeobox gene is required for the maintenance of the isthmic region in the
zebrafish embryonic brain.

Kikuta H(1), Kanai M, Ito Y, Yamasu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regulation Biology, Faculty of Science, Saitama University,
Saitama, Japan.

We isolated cDNA clones for the zebrafish gbx2 gene, which is implicated in the
establishment of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) in other vertebrates.
Spatially localized expression of gbx2 was observed at the MHB from 90% epiboly
through to the hatching stage. Comparisons with the expression of otx2, wnt1, and
krox20 showed that gbx2 is expressed in the anterior hindbrain. Ectopic
expression of gbx2 by mRNA injection caused cyclopia or truncation of the fore-
and midbrain and severely affected isthmic and cerebellar structures, while
hindbrain formation was not significantly affected. At the molecular level, gbx2 
suppressed the expression of otx2 in the fore/midbrain, six3 in the anterior
forebrain, and MHB-specific genes such as eng2 and wnt1. In contrast, gbx2 did
not down-regulate the expression of the hindbrain marker genes. Therefore, gbx2
specifically suppressed the formation of the entire fore/midbrain. Meanwhile,
misexpression of otx2 suppressed the expression of gbx2 in the embryonic brain.
Abrogation of gbx2 expression with an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide
disrupted the midbrain/anterior hindbrain region, and these loss-of-function
effects were rescued by activating the Gbx2 protein immediately after the end of 
gastrulation. Taken together, these results suggest that the zebrafish gbx2 gene 
is essential for the maintenance of MHB and/or the formation of the isthmic
structure during somitogenesis, rather than for the MHB establishment during
gastrulation. We also suggest that other factors, including gbx1, is required for
the establishment of the MHB during gastrulation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14579382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mech Dev. 2003 Oct;120(10):1097-111.

Differential activities of Sonic hedgehog mediated by Gli transcription factors
define distinct neuronal subtypes in the dorsal thalamus.

Hashimoto-Torii K(1), Motoyama J, Hui CC, Kuroiwa A, Nakafuku M, Shimamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Morphogenesis, Department of Embryogenesis, Institute of Molecular
Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto 860-0811,
Japan.

The dorsal thalamus (DT) is a pivotal region in the vertebrate brain that relays 
inputs from the peripheral sensory organs to higher cognitive centers. It
consists of clusters of neurons with relevant functions, called brain nuclei.
However, the mechanisms underlying development of the DT, including specification
of the neuronal subtypes and morphogenesis of the nuclear structures, remain
largely unknown. As a first step to this end, we focused on two transcription
factors Sox14 and Gbx2 that are expressed in the specific brain nuclei in the
chick DT. The onset of their expression was found in distinct populations of the 
postmitotic cells in the prosomere 2, which was regulated by the differential
activities of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in a manner consistent with the action as a
morphogen. Furthermore, both gain- and loss-of-function results strongly suggest 
that such distinct inductive activities are mediated selectively by different Gli
factors. These results suggest that cooperation of the differential expression of
Gli factors and the activity gradient of Shh signaling generates the distinct
thalamic neurons at the specific locations.

PMID: 14568100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5579-87. Epub 2003 Oct 1.

Wnt signaling is required at distinct stages of development for the induction of 
the posterior forebrain.

Braun MM(1), Etheridge A, Bernard A, Robertson CP, Roelink H.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurobiology and Behavior, Department of Biological Structure, Box 
357420, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

One of the earliest manifestations of anteroposterior pattering in the developing
brain is the restricted expression of Six3 and Irx3 in the anterior and posterior
forebrain, respectively. Consistent with the role of Wnts as posteriorizing
agents in neural tissue, we found that Wnt signaling was sufficient to induce
Irx3 and repress Six3 expression in forebrain explants. The position of the zona 
limitans intrathalamica (zli), a boundary-cell population that develops between
the ventral (vT) and dorsal thalamus (dT), is predicted by the apposition of Six3
and Irx3 expression domains. The expression patterns of several inductive
molecules are limited by the zli, including Wnt3, which is expressed posterior to
the zli in the dT. Wnt3 and Wnt3a were sufficient to induce the dT marker Gbx2
exclusively in explants isolated posterior to the presumptive zli. Blocking the
Wnt response allowed the induction of the vT-specific marker Dlx2 in prospective 
dT tissue. Misexpression of Six3 in the dT induced Dlx2 expression and inhibited 
the expression of both Gbx2 and Wnt3. These results demonstrate a dual role for
Wnt signaling in forebrain development. First, Wnts directed the initial
expression of Irx3 and repression of Six3 in the forebrain, delineating posterior
and anterior forebrain domains. Later, continued Wnt signaling resulted in the
induction of dT specific markers, but only in tissues that expressed Irx3.

PMID: 14522868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mech Dev. 2003 Aug;120(8):919-36.

Cloning, expression and relationship of zebrafish gbx1 and gbx2 genes to Fgf
signaling.

Rhinn M(1), Lun K, Amores A, Yan YL, Postlethwait JH, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and
Genetics, University of Dresden, Pfotenhauer Strasse 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany.

The organizer at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) forms at the interface
between Otx2 and Gbx2 expressing cell populations, but how these gene expression 
domains are set up and integrated with the remaining machinery controlling MHB
development is unclear. Here we report the isolation, mapping, chromosomal
synteny and spatiotemporal expression of gbx1 and gbx2 in zebrafish. We focus in 
particular on the expression of these genes during development of the
midbrain-hindbrain territory. Our results suggest that these genes function in
this area in a complex fashion, as evidenced by their highly dynamic expression
patterns and relation to Fgf signaling. Analysis of gbx1 and gbx2 expression
during formation of the MHB in mutant embryos for pax2.1, fgf8 and pou2 (noi,
ace, spg), as well as Fgf-inhibition experiments, show that gbx1 acts upstream of
these genes in MHB development. In contrast, gbx2 activation requires ace (fgf8) 
function, and in the hindbrain primordium, also spg (pou2). We propose that in
zebrafish, gbx genes act repeatedly in MHB development, with gbx1 acting during
the positioning period of the MHB at gastrula stages, and gbx2 functioning after 
initial formation of the MHB, from late gastrulation stages onwards.
Transplantation studies furthermore reveal that at the gastrula stage, Fgf8
signals from the hindbrain primordium into the underlying mesendoderm. Apart from
the general involvement of gbx genes in MHB development reported also in other
vertebrates, these results emphasize that early MHB development can be divided
into multiple steps with different genetic requirements with respect to gbx gene 
function and Fgf signaling. Moreover, our results provide an example for
switching of a specific gene function of gbx1 versus gbx2 between orthologous
genes in zebrafish and mammals.

PMID: 12963112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Aug;3(4):497-501.

OTX1 compensates for OTX2 requirement in regionalisation of anterior
neuroectoderm.

Acampora D(1), Annino A, Puelles E, Alfano I, Tuorto F, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, 4th Floor, King's
College London, Guy's Campus, London Bridge, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Otx genes play a relevant role in specification, maintenance and patterning of
anterior neuroectoderm. OTX1 and OTX2 proteins share extensive codogenic
similarity even though in OTX1 these regions of homology are separated by
stretches of amino acid insertions. From 1 to 3 somites stage onwards, Otx1 and
Otx2 are largely coexpressed, but only Otx2 is expressed during gastrulation. To 
determine whether OTX1 and OTX2 gene products share common biochemical
properties, mouse models replacing Otx1 with Otx2 and vice versa have been
generated. These studies have indicated a remarkable functional equivalence
between the two proteins. Nevertheless, it was still debated whether OTX1 is
functionally equivalent to OTX2 in early anterior neuroectoderm. To address this 
issue we generated a new mouse model (hOtx1(2FL)) replacing only the coding
sequence and introns of Otx2 with the human Otx1 codogenic sequence.
hOtx1(2FL/2FL) and hOtx1(2FL/-) mice were viable, fertile and exhibited an
apparently normal behaviour. hOtx1 mRNA was correctly transcribed under the Otx2 
transcriptional control and, similarly, the hOTX1 protein was properly
distributed and quantitatively very similar if not identical to that of OTX2.
Patterning and regionalisation of forebrain and midbrain were unaffected as
revealed by the expression of diagnostic genes which are highly sensitive to
reduction of OTX proteins, such as Fgf8, Pax2 and Gbx2.

PMID: 12915318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Jun;3(3):313-7.

Cloning and embryonic expression analysis of the mouse Gbx1 gene.

Waters ST(1), Wilson CP, Lewandoski M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer and Developmental Biology, NCI-Frederick, National
Institute of Health, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

We report the cloning of a cDNA encoding the complete mouse Gbx1 coding region as
well as a comparative expression analysis of Gbx1 and Gbx2 during murine
development. Gbx1 is expressed first during gastrulation and later in a dynamic
pattern in the central nervous system, including rhombomeres 3 and 5, optic
vesicles, and the medial ganglionic eminence. Gbx1 expression is not upregulated 
in Gbx2 null homozygotes. Therefore, the only regions of potential genetic
redundancy are where Gbx1 and 2 are normally coexpressed: the primitive streak,
regions of the ventricular zone of the neural tube and the medial ganglionic
eminence. Finally, we demonstrate that neither Gbx1 nor Gbx2 require FGF8 for
expression during gastrulation, contrary to previous published reports.

PMID: 12799077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cereb Cortex. 2003 Jun;13(6):661-9.

Choreography of early thalamocortical development.

Molnár Z(1), Higashi S, López-Bendito G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South Parks
Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK. zoltan.molnar@anat.ox.ac.uk

Thalamic axons, which carry most of the information from the sensory environment,
are amongst the first projections to reach the cerebral cortex during embryonic
development. It has been proposed that the scaffold of early generated cells in
the ventral thalamus, internal capsule and preplate play a pivotal role in their 
deployment through sharp gene expression boundaries. These ideas were recently
evaluated in various strains of mutant mice. In Tbr1, Gbx2, Pax6 KO both thalamic
and corticofugal projections fail to traverse the striatocortical junction. In
both Emx2 and Pax6 KO brains, the misrouted thalamic afferents are accompanied by
displacements of the pioneering projections from the internal capsule. Regardless
of their altered route, thalamic afferents in the reeler and L1 KO mice seem to
be able to redistribute themselves on the cortical sheet and establish normal
periphery-related representation in the somatosensory cortex. Early neural
activity delivered through the thalamic projections is thought to be involved in 
the realignment process of thalamic axons at the time of their accumulation in
the subplate layer. However, axonal growth and the early topographic arrangement 
of thalamocortical fiber pathways appear normal in the Snap25 KO, where action
potential mediated synaptic vesicle release is disrupted. We therefore suggest
that intercellular communication mediated by constitutive secretion of
transmitters or growth factors might play a dominant role during early
thalamocortical development.

PMID: 12764042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Development. 2003 Jun;130(12):2633-44.

The isthmic organizer signal FGF8 is required for cell survival in the
prospective midbrain and cerebellum.

Chi CL(1), Martinez S, Wurst W, Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Program in Developmental Biology, School of
Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143-0452, USA.

Numerous studies have demonstrated that the midbrain and cerebellum develop from 
a region of the early neural tube comprising two distinct territories known as
the mesencephalon (mes) and rostral metencephalon (met; rhombomere 1),
respectively. Development of the mes and met is thought to be regulated by
molecules produced by a signaling center, termed the isthmic organizer (IsO),
which is localized at the boundary between them. FGF8 and WNT1 have been
implicated as key components of IsO signaling activity, and previous studies have
shown that in Wnt1(-/-) embryos, the mes/met is deleted by the 30 somite stage ( 
approximately E10) (McMahon, A. P. and Bradley, A. (1990) Cell 62, 1073-1085). We
have studied the function of FGF8 in mouse mes/met development using a
conditional gene inactivation approach. In our mutant embryos, Fgf8 expression
was transiently detected, but then was eliminated in the mes/met by the 10 somite
stage ( approximately E8.75). This resulted in a failure to maintain expression
of Wnt1 as well as Fgf17, Fgf18, and Gbx2 in the mes/met at early somite stages, 
and in the absence of the midbrain and cerebellum at E17.5. We show that a major 
cause of the deletion of these structures is ectopic cell death in the mes/met
between the 7 and 30 somite stages. Interestingly, we found that the prospective 
midbrain was deleted at an earlier stage than the prospective cerebellum. We
observed a remarkably similar pattern of cell death in Wnt1 null homozygotes, and
also detected ectopic mes/met cell death in En1 null homozygotes. Our data show
that Fgf8 is part of a complex gene regulatory network that is essential for cell
survival in the mes/met.

PMID: 12736208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Biol. 2003 May 15;257(2):221-32.

Constructing the mammalian neocortex: the role of intrinsic factors.

Job C(1), Tan SS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Development Laboratory, Howard Florey Institute, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2003 Jul 1;259(1):188-91.

The mammalian neocortex is subdivided into regions that are specialised for the
processing of particular forms of information. These regions are distinct in
terms of their cytoarchitecture, electrophysiology, and connectivity. How this
regional diversity is generated through development is currently a topic of
considerable interest and has centered upon two main issues. First, to what
extent are these regions prespecified by intrinsic genetic mechanisms? Second,
what is the influence of extrinsic activity in transmitting signals that
ultimately shape functional regions? Historically, experimental evidence has
tended to emphasise the role of extrinsic influences, but the identification and 
analysis of several genes that are expressed asymmetrically in the developing
neocortex have tempered this viewpoint. We review current literature from the
standpoint that intrinsic influences act early in neocortical development to
generate molecular patterning whose main role is the guidance of long-range
projections from the dorsal thalamus. Extrinsic influences appear to generate
receptive fields for peripheral input, the summation of which determines the
areal extent of particular neocortical region.

PMID: 12729554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Development. 2003 Jun;130(11):2365-73.

An urbilaterian origin of the tripartite brain: developmental genetic insights
from Drosophila.

Hirth F(1), Kammermeier L, Frei E, Walldorf U, Noll M, Reichert H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Biozentrum/Pharmazentrum, University of Basel,
Klingelbergstrasse 50, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. frank.hirth@unibas.ch

Studies on expression and function of key developmental control genes suggest
that the embryonic vertebrate brain has a tripartite ground plan that consists of
a forebrain/midbrain, a hindbrain and an intervening midbrain/hindbrain boundary 
region, which are characterized by the specific expression of the Otx, Hox and
Pax2/5/8 genes, respectively. We show that the embryonic brain of the fruitfly
Drosophila melanogaster expresses all three sets of homologous genes in a similar
tripartite pattern. Thus, a Pax2/5/8 expression domain is located at the
interface of brain-specific otd/Otx2 and unpg/Gbx2 expression domains anterior to
Hox expression regions. We identify this territory as the
deutocerebral/tritocerebral boundary region in the embryonic Drosophila brain.
Mutational inactivation of otd/Otx2 and unpg/Gbx2 result in the loss or
misplacement of the brain-specific expression domains of Pax2/5/8 and Hox genes. 
In addition, otd/Otx2 and unpg/Gbx2 appear to negatively regulate each other at
the interface of their brain-specific expression domains. Our studies demonstrate
that the deutocerebral/tritocerebral boundary region in the embryonic Drosophila 
brain displays developmental genetic features similar to those observed for the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary region in vertebrate brain development. This suggests
that a tripartite organization of the embryonic brain was already established in 
the last common urbilaterian ancestor of protostomes and deuterostomes.

PMID: 12702651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5269-77.

Role of Lmx1b and Wnt1 in mesencephalon and metencephalon development.

Matsunaga E(1), Katahira T, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging &
Cancer, and Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi
4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The isthmus is the organizing center for the tectum and cerebellum. Fgf8 and Wnt1
are secreted molecules expressed around the isthmus. The function of Fgf8 has
been well analyzed, and now accepted as the most important organizing signal.
Involvement of Wnt1 in the isthmic organizing activity was suggested by analysis 
of Wnt1 knockout mice. But its role in isthmic organizing activity is still
obscure. Recently, it has been shown that Lmx1b is expressed in the isthmic
region and that it may occupy higher hierarchical position in the gene expression
cascade in the isthmus. We have carried out misexpression experiment of Lmx1b and
Wnt1, and considered their role in the isthmic organizing activity. Lmx1b or Wnt1
misexpression caused expansion of the tectum and cerebellum. Fgf8 was repressed
in a cells that misexpress Lmx1b, but Fgf8 expression was induced around
Lmx1b-misexpressing cells. As Lmx1b induced Wnt1 and Wnt1 induced Fgf8 expression
in turn, Wnt1 may be involved in non cell-autonomous induction of Fgf8 expression
by Lmx1b. Wnt1 could not induce Lmx1b expression so that Lmx1b may be put at the 
higher hierarchical position than Wnt1 in gene expression cascade in the isthmus.
We have examined the relationship among isthmus related genes, and discuss the
mechanism of the formation and maintenance of isthmic organizing activity.

PMID: 12399317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Neuron. 2002 Sep 26;36(1):31-43.

Changing requirements for Gbx2 in development of the cerebellum and maintenance
of the mid/hindbrain organizer.

Li JY(1), Lao Z, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

We examined whether Gbx2 is required after embryonic day 9 (E9) to repress Otx2
in the cerebellar anlage and position the midbrain/hindbrain organizer. In
contrast to Gbx2 null mutants, mice lacking Gbx2 in rhombomere 1 (r1) after E9
(Gbx2-CKO) are viable and develop a cerebellum. A Gbx2-independent pathway can
repress Otx2 in r1 after E9. Mid/hindbrain organizer gene expression, however,
continues to be dependent on Gbx2. We found that Fgf8 expression normally
correlates with the isthmus where cells undergo low proliferation and that in
Gbx2-CKO mutants this domain is expanded. We propose that Fgf8 permits lateral
cerebellar development through repression of Otx2 and also suppresses medial
cerebellar growth in Gbx2-CKO embryos. Our work has uncovered distinct
requirements for Gbx2 during cerebellum formation and provided a model for how a 
transcription factor can play multiple roles during development.

PMID: 12367504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2880-9.

Developmentally-related candidate retinoic acid target genes regulated early
during neuronal differentiation of human embryonal carcinoma.

Freemantle SJ(1), Kerley JS, Olsen SL, Gross RH, Spinella MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School,
Hanover, New Hampshire, NH 03755, USA.

Embryonal carcinoma is a model of embryonic development as well as tumor cell
differentiation. In response to all-trans retinoic acid (RA), the human embryonal
carcinoma (EC) cell line, NT2/D1, differentiates toward a neuronal lineage with
associated loss of cell growth and tumorigenicity. Through the use of cDNA-based 
microarrays we sought to identify the early downstream targets of RA during
differentiation commitment of NT2/D1 cells. A total of 57 genes were induced and 
37 genes repressed by RA. RA regulated genes were restricted at 8 h with 27 genes
induced and five repressed. The total number of RA-responsive transcripts
increased at 24 and 48 h and their pattern of expression was more symmetrical.
For a given time point less than 1% of the 9128 cDNAs on the expression array
were regulated by RA. Many of these gene products are associated with
developmental pathways including those of TGF-beta (Lefty A, NMA, follistatin),
homeo domain (HoxD1, Meis2, Meis1, Gbx2), IGF (IGFBP3, IGFBP6, CTGF), Notch
(manic fringe, ADAM11), Hedgehog (patched) and Wnt (Frat2, secreted
frizzled-related protein 1) signaling. In addition a large cassette of genes
induced by RA at 24-48 h are associated with cell adhesion, cytoskeletal and
matrix remodeling, growth suppression and intracellular signaling cascades. The
majority of repressed genes are associated with protein/RNA processing, turnover 
or metabolism. The early induced genes identified may play a regulatory role in
RA-mediated growth suppression and terminal differentiation and may have
physiologic or pharmacologic importance during normal human development and
retinoid-based cancer therapy or prevention.

PMID: 11973648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Comp Neurol. 2002 May 20;447(1):8-17.

Cortical and thalamic axon pathfinding defects in Tbr1, Gbx2, and Pax6 mutant
mice: evidence that cortical and thalamic axons interact and guide each other.

Hevner RF(1), Miyashita-Lin E, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94143-0984, USA.

During development, cortical areas establish precise reciprocal projections with 
corresponding thalamic nuclei. Pioneer axons from the cortex and thalamus first
meet in the intermediate zone of the subcortical telencephalon (subpallium).
Their close interactions in the subpallium suggest that they may use each other
for guidance. To test this hypothesis, the development of corticothalamic and
thalamocortical connections was studied in mice with mutations of transcription
factor genes expressed specifically in the cortex (Tbr1), the dorsal thalamus
(Gbx2), or both (Pax6). In Tbr1 mutants, cortical pioneer axons entered the
subpallium at the appropriate time, but most stopped growing without entering the
diencephalon. Surprisingly, thalamic axons (which do not express Tbr1) deviated
into the external capsule and amygdala regions, without entering the cortex.
Conversely, in most Gbx2 mutants, thalamic axons were reduced in number and grew 
no farther than the subpallium. Cortical axons (which do not express Gbx2) grew
into the subpallium but did not enter the diencephalon. In one Gbx2- /- case,
sparse thalamocortical and corticothalamic projections both developed, but in no 
case did one projection reach its target and not the other. In Pax6 mutants,
neither corticothalamic nor thalamocortical axons reached their targets. These
results suggest that thalamocortical and corticothalamic projections may not form
independently. After reaching the subpallium, each projection may require a
molecularly intact reciprocal projection for further guidance. This type of
mechanism ensures that thalamocortical and corticothalamic axons project
reciprocally. However, the exact nature of the interaction between cortical and
thalamic pioneer axons remains to be elucidated.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11967891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1609-21.

The homeoprotein Xiro1 is required for midbrain-hindbrain boundary formation.

Glavic A(1), Gómez-Skarmeta JL, Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Laboratory of Developmental
Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile.

The isthmic organizer, which patterns the anterior hindbrain and midbrain, is one
of the most studied secondary organizers. In recent years, new insights have been
reported on the molecular nature of its morphogenetic activity. Studies in chick,
mouse and zebrafish have converged to show that mutually repressive interactions 
between the homeoproteins encoded by Otx and Gbx genes position this organizer in
the neural primordia. We present evidence that equivalent, in addition to novel, 
interactions between these and other genes operate in Xenopus embryos to position
the isthmic organizer. We made use of fusion proteins in which we combined Otx2
or Gbx2 homeodomains with the E1A activation domain or the EnR repressor element 
which were then injected into embryos. Our results show that Otx2 and Gbx2 are
likely to be transcriptional repressors, and that these two proteins repress each
other transcription. Our experiments show that the interaction between these two 
proteins is required for the positioning of the isthmic organizer genes Fgf8,
Pax2 and En2. In this study we also developed a novel in vitro assay for the
study of the formation of this organizer. We show that conjugating animal caps
previously injected with Otx2 and Gbx2 mRNAs recreate the interactions required
for the induction of the isthmic organizer. We have used this assay to determine 
which cells produce and which cells receive the Fgf signal. Finally, we have
added a novel genetic element to this process, Xiro1, which encode another
homeoprotein. We show that the Xiro1 expression domain overlaps with territories 
expressing Otx2, Gbx2 and Fgf8. By expressing wild-type or dominant negative
forms of Xiro1, we show that this gene activates the expression of Gbx2 in the
hindbrain. In addition, Xiro1 is required in the Otx2 territory to allow cells
within this region to respond to the signals produced by adjacent Gbx2 cells.
Moreover, Xiro1 is absolutely required for Fgf8 expression at the isthmic
organizer. We discuss a model where Xiro1 plays different roles in regulating the
genetic cascade of interactions between Otx2 and Gbx2 that are necessary for the 
specification of the isthmic organizer.

PMID: 11923198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Brain Res Bull. 2002 Feb-Mar 1;57(3-4):435-8.

Gbx2 expression in the late embryonic chick dorsal thalamus.

Martínez-de-la-Torre M(1), Garda AL, Puelles E, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
margaret@um.es

The expression pattern of the transcription factor gene Gbx2 in the forebrain of 
chicken embryos (embryonic day 14) was mapped using digoxigenin-labeled
riboprobes and compared with the expression of the transcription factors Pax6 and
Nkx2.2. The topographic analysis of Gbx2 expression on coronal and sagittal
sections discriminated the positions and boundaries of diverse neuronal nuclei
belonging to the dorsal thalamus from neighboring territories (the epithalamus,
ventral thalamus, pretectum, and the underlying basal plate). The differential
expression of Gbx2 within the dorsal thalamus clearly corresponds with the
existence of four primary subdivisions identified in a previous study from this
laboratory [13]: the anteroventral region and dorsal, intermediate, and ventral
tiers. The subhabenular region turned out not to express Gbx2; this possibly
implies it needs to be distinguished as a fifth separate dorsal thalamus
subdivision.

PMID: 11923005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Brain Res Bull. 2002 Feb-Mar 1;57(3-4):321-3.

Differential expression of Otx2, Gbx2, Pax2, and Fgf8 in the developing
vestibular and auditory sensory organs.

Sánchez-Calderón H(1), Martín-Partido G, Hidalgo-Sánchez M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de
Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain.

The vertebrate inner ear is a complex organ with vestibular and auditory sensory 
functions, which derives from a single ectoderm structure, the otic placode. The 
development and regional patterning of the otic primordium is determined by the
restricted expression of several genes. Here, we show the expression pattern of
three transcription factors (Otx2, Gbx2, Pax2) and of a member of the fibroblast 
growth factor family (Fgf8) in the developing chick inner ear, and we correlate
these patterns with the developing sensory and nonsensory elements.

PMID: 11922981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mech Dev. 2002 Apr;113(1):107-10.

The expression of gbx-2 during zebrafish embryogenesis.

Su Y(1), Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Science Laboratory of the MOE, Department of Biological Sciences and
Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, People's Republic of China.

Gbx-2 is a homeobox gene essential for normal development of the midbrain and the
anterior hindbrain. Zebrafish gbx-2 shares an overall similarity of 67.8, 68.1,
60.6 and 66.5% in amino acid sequence to human, mouse, chick and Xenopus Gbx-2,
respectively. The expression of zebrafish gbx-2 is initially, before the
completion of epiboly, restricted to the prospective posterior midbrain. The
expression remains detectable until the end of pharyngula period. The gbx-2 mRNA 
is also detected in the otic vesicles, the dorsoposterior telencephalon, the
rostral branchial arches, the pronephric duct and median fin fold.

PMID: 11900984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Development. 2002 Feb;129(4):917-33.

Spiel-ohne-grenzen/pou2 mediates regional competence to respond to Fgf8 during
zebrafish early neural development.

Reim G(1), Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular, Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden,
Pfotenhauer Str. 108, 01307 Dresden, FR of Germany.

Neural patterning of the vertebrate brain starts within the ectoderm during
gastrulation and requires the activity of organizer cell populations in the
neurectoderm. One such organizer is located at the prospective midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (MHB) and controls development of the midbrain and the anterior
hindbrain via the secreted signaling molecule Fgf8. However, little is known
about how the ability of neural precursors to respond to Fgf8 is regulated. We
have studied the function of the zebrafish spiel-ohne-grenzen (spg) gene in early
neural development. Genetic mapping and molecular characterization presented in
the accompanying paper revealed that spg mutations disrupt the pou2 gene, which
encodes a POU domain transcription factor that is specifically expressed in the
MHB primordium, and is orthologous to mammalian Oct3/Oct4. We show that embryos
homozygous for spg/pou2 have severe defects in development of the midbrain and
hindbrain primordium. Key molecules that function in the formation of the MHB,
such as pax2.1, spry4, wnt1, her5, eng2 and eng3, and in hindbrain development,
such as krox20, gbx2, fkd3 and pou2, are all abnormal in spg mutant embryos. By
contrast, regional definition of the future MHB in the neuroectoderm by
complementary expression of otx2 and gbx1, before the establishment of the
complex regulatory cascade at the MHB, is normal in spg embryos. Moreover, the
Fgf8 and Wnt1 signaling pathways are activated normally at the MHB but become
dependent on spg towards the end of gastrulation. Therefore, spg plays a crucial 
role both in establishing and in maintaining development of the MHB primordium.
Transplantation chimeras show that normal spg function is required within the
neuroectoderm but not the endomesoderm. Importantly, gain-of-function experiments
by mRNA injection of fgf8 and pou2 or Fgf8 bead implantations, as well as
analysis of spg-ace double mutants show that spg embryos are insensitive to Fgf8,
although Fgf receptor expression and activity of the downstream MAP kinase
signaling pathway appear intact. We suggest that spg/pou2 is a transcription
factor that mediates regional competence to respond to Fgf8 signaling.

PMID: 11861475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mech Dev. 2002 Mar;112(1-2):141-51.

Gbx2 interacts with Otx2 and patterns the anterior-posterior axis during
gastrulation in Xenopus.

Tour E(1), Pillemer G, Gruenbaum Y, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Anterior-posterior patterning of the embryo requires the activity of multiple
homeobox genes among them Hox, caudal (Cdx, Xcad) and Otx2. During early
gastrulation, Otx2 and Xcad2 establish a cross-regulatory network, which is an
early event in the anterior-posterior patterning of the embryo. As gastrulation
proceeds and the embryo elongates, a new domain forms, which expresses neither,
Otx2 nor Xcad2 genes. Early transcription of the Xenopus Gbx2 homologue, Xgbx2a, 
is spatially restricted between Otx2 and Xcad2. When overexpressed, Otx2 and
Xcad2 repress Xgbx2a transcription, suggesting their role in setting the early
Xgbx2a expression domain. Homeobox genes have been shown to play crucial roles in
the specification of the vertebrate brain. The border between the transcription
domains of Otx2 and Gbx2 is the earliest known marker of the region where the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary (MHB) organizer will develop. Xgbx2a is a negative
regulator of Otx2 and a weak positive regulator of Xcad2. Using obligatory
activator and repressor versions of Xgbx2a, we demonstrate that, during early
embryogenesis, Xgbx2a acts as a transcriptional repressor. In addition, taking
advantage of hormone-inducible versions of Xgbx2a and its antimorph, we show that
the ability of Xgbx2a to induce head malformations is restricted to gastrula
stages and correlates with its ability to repress Otx2 during the same
developmental stages. We therefore suggest that the earliest known step of the
MHB formation, the establishment of Otx2/Gbx2 boundary, takes place via mutual
inhibitory interactions between these two genes and this process begins as early 
as at midgastrulation.

PMID: 11850185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Dyn. 2002 Jan;223(1):141-7.

Temporal sequence of gene expression leading caudal prosencephalon to develop a
midbrain/hindbrain phenotype.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-106, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Pavillon Enfants et Adolescents,
Paris, France. mhildago@unex.es

Transplantation of prosomeres 1-2 into the cerebellar plate were used, by using
chick/quail chimeras, to analyse the temporal sequence of the genetic cascade
leading the graft to develop a midbrain/hindbrain phenotype. Our results show
that (1) at Hamburger and Hamilton (HH) stage 13, Pax2 and En2 are already
induced within the graft, before all other genes of the cascade, whereas
misexpression of Fgf8 is also observed within the contiguous host cerebellar
plate; (2) within the graft, Otx2 repression and Gbx2 induction (see
Hidalgo-Sánchez et al. [1999] Development 126:3191-3203) are secondary events
that affect, from stages HH14-15, the areas in contact with the host
Gbx2/Fgf8-expressing cerebellar plate; (3) at these stages, the repressed Otx2
territory extends beyond the areas induced to express Gbx2, with the two
territories not abutting before HH17-18; (4) Fgf8 expression becomes
progressively induced within the Otx2-repressed/Gbx2-induced territory, starting 
at HH15-16. Our results support the hypothesis that the host-Gbx2/graft-Otx2
interface could trigger the genetic cascade induced within the graft and that the
Gbx2-induced domain could play a key role during the establishment of the induced
intragraft midbrain/hindbrain boundary.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11803577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Development. 2002 Jan;129(1):83-93.

Early subdivisions in the neural plate define distinct competence for inductive
signals.

Kobayashi D(1), Kobayashi M, Matsumoto K, Ogura T, Nakafuku M, Shimamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Regionalization of the embryonic brain is achieved through multi-step processes
that operate sequentially and/or simultaneously. Localized sources of various
signaling molecules act as organizing centers that pattern neighboring fields to 
create molecularly distinct domains. We investigated the mechanisms underlying
the regionally distinct competence for two such organizing signals, Fibroblast
growth factor 8 (Fgf8) and Sonic hedgehog (Shh), using chick embryos. First, we
demonstrated that FGF receptor 1 (Fgfr1) and Fgfr3, expressed differentially in
the developing brain, possess an equivalent potential to induce the regionally
distinct Fgf8-responsive genes, depending on the anterior-posterior dimension of 
the brain. Next we found that homeodomain transcription factors Six3 and Irx3 can
alter the regional responses to both Fgf8 and Shh in the forebrain. Six3 confers 
the ability to express Bf1, a gene essential for the telencephalon and eye
development, and Nkx2.1, which is required for development of the hypothalamus.
In contrast, Irx3 confers the ability to express En2 and Nkx6.1 in response to
Fgf8 and Shh, respectively. Furthermore, an alteration in the region-specific
response to Fgf8 upon misexpression of Irx3 resulted in transformation of
diencephalic and possibly telencephalic tissues into the optic tectum. Finally,
we demonstrated that Six3 and Irx3 can mutually repress their expression, which
may contribute to the establishment of their complementary expression domains in 
the neural plate. These repressive interactions are specific, as Six3 did not
repress Gbx2, and Irx3 did not disturb Otx2 expression. These findings provide
evidence that the early embryonic forebrain is demarcated into two domains with
distinct genetic programs, which argues against the authentic telendiencephalic
subdivision.

PMID: 11782403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):4979-91.

Otx2 and Gbx2 are required for refinement and not induction of mid-hindbrain gene
expression.

Li JY(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Otx2 and Gbx2 are among the earliest genes expressed in the neuroectoderm,
dividing it into anterior and posterior domains with a common border that marks
the mid-hindbrain junction. Otx2 is required for development of the forebrain and
midbrain, and Gbx2 for the anterior hindbrain. Furthermore, opposing interactions
between Otx2 and Gbx2 play an important role in positioning the mid-hindbrain
boundary, where an organizer forms that regulates midbrain and cerebellum
development. We show that the expression domains of Otx2 and Gbx2 are initially
established independently of each other at the early headfold stage, and then
their expression rapidly becomes interdependent by the late headfold stage. As we
demonstrate that the repression of Otx2 by retinoic acid is dependent on an
induction of Gbx2 in the anterior brain, molecules other than retinoic acid must 
regulate the initial expression of Otx2 in vivo. In contrast to previous
suggestions that an interaction between Otx2- and Gbx2-expressing cells may be
essential for induction of mid-hindbrain organizer factors such as Fgf8, we find 
that Fgf8 and other essential mid-hindbrain genes are induced in a correct
temporal manner in mouse embryos deficient for both Otx2 and Gbx2. However,
expression of these genes is abnormally co-localized in a broad anterior region
of the neuroectoderm. Finally, we find that by removing Otx2 function,
development of rhombomere 3 is rescued in Gbx2(-/-) embryos, showing that Gbx2
plays a permissive, not instructive, role in rhombomere 3 development. Our
results provide new insights into induction and maintenance of the mid-hindbrain 
genetic cascade by showing that a mid-hindbrain competence region is initially
established independent of the division of the neuroectoderm into an anterior
Otx2-positive domain and posterior Gbx2-positive domain. Furthermore, Otx2 and
Gbx2 are required to suppress hindbrain and midbrain development, respectively,
and thus allow establishment of the normal spatial domains of Fgf8 and other
genes.

PMID: 11748135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):3-13.

Otx2 can activate the isthmic organizer genetic network in the Xenopus embryo.

Tour E(1), Pillemer G, Gruenbaum Y, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Development and differentiation of the vertebrate caudal midbrain and anterior
hindbrain are dependent on the isthmic organizer signals at the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary (MHB). The future MHB forms at the boundary between
the Otx2 and Gbx2 expression domains. Recent studies in mice and chick suggested 
that the apposition of Otx2- and Gbx2-expressing cells is instrumental for the
positioning and early induction of the MHB genetic cascade. We show that Otx2 and
Gbx2 perform different roles in this process. We find that ectopically expressed 
Otx2 on its own can induce a substantial part of the MHB genetic network, namely 
En2, Wnt1, Pax-2, Fgf8 and Gbx2, in a concentration-dependent manner. This
induction does not require protein synthesis and ends during neurulation. In
contrast, Gbx2 is a negative regulator of Otx2 and the MHB genes. Based on the
temporal patterns of expression of the genes involved, we propose that Otx2 might
be the early inducer of the isthmic organizer genetic network while Gbx2
restricts Otx2 expression along the anterior-posterior axis and establishes an
Otx2 gradient.

PMID: 11744364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Development. 2001 Dec;128(23):4789-800.

Regionalisation of anterior neuroectoderm and its competence in responding to
forebrain and midbrain inducing activities depend on mutual antagonism between
OTX2 and GBX2.

Martinez-Barbera JP(1), Signore M, Boyl PP, Puelles E, Acampora D, Gogoi R,
Schubert F, Lumsden A, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Guy's
Campus, New Hunt's House, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The anterior neural ridge (ANR), and the isthmic organiser (IsO) represent two
signalling centres possessing organising properties necessary for forebrain (ANR)
as well as midbrain and rostral hindbrain (IsO) development. An important
mediator of ANR and IsO organising property is the signalling molecule FGF8.
Previous work has indicated that correct positioning of the IsO and Fgf8
expression in this domain is controlled by the transcription factors Otx2 and
Gbx2. In order to provide novel insights into the roles of Otx2 and Gbx2, we have
studied mutant embryos carrying different dosages of Otx2, Otx1 and Gbx2. Embryos
deficient for both OTX2 and GBX2 proteins (hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2); Gbx2(-/-)) show
abnormal patterning of the anterior neural tissue, which is evident at the
presomite-early somite stage prior to the onset of Fgf8 neuroectodermal
expression. Indeed, hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2); Gbx2(-/-) embryos exhibit broad
co-expression of early forebrain, midbrain and rostral hindbrain markers such as 
hOtx1, Gbx2, Pax2, En1 and Wnt1 and subsequently fail to activate forebrain and
midbrain-specific gene expression. In this genetic context, Fgf8 is expressed
throughout the entire anterior neural plate, thus indicating that its activation 
is independent of both OTX2 and GBX2 function. Analysis of hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2);
Gbx2(-/-) and Otx1(+/-); Otx2(+/-) mutant embryos also suggests that FGF8 cannot 
repress Otx2 without the participation of GBX2. Finally, we report that embryos
carrying a single strong hypomorphic Otx2 allele (Otx2(lambda)) in an Otx2 and
Gbx2 null background (Otx2(lambda)/-; Gbx2(-/-)) recover both the headless
phenotype exhibited by Otx2(lambda)/- embryos and forebrain- and
midbrain-specific gene expression that is not observed in hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2);
Gbx2(-/-) mutants. Together, these data provide novel genetic evidence indicating
that OTX2 and GBX2 are required for proper segregation of early regional
identities anterior and posterior to the mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB) and for
conferring competence to the anterior neuroectoderm in responding to forebrain-, 
midbrain- and rostral hindbrain-inducing activities.

PMID: 11731459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nat Neurosci. 2001 Dec;4(12):1175-81.

Distinct regulators control the expression of the mid-hindbrain organizer signal 
FGF8.

Ye W(1), Bouchard M, Stone D, Liu X, Vella F, Lee J, Nakamura H, Ang SL,
Busslinger M, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco,
California 94080, USA.

Local expression of FGF8 at the mid/hindbrain boundary (MHB) governs the
development of multiple neurons and support cells. Here we show that the
paired-domain protein Pax2 is necessary and sufficient for the induction of FGF8 
in part by regulating the expression of Pax5&8. A network of transcription and
secreted factors, including En1, Otx2, Gbx2, Grg4 and Wnt1&4, that is established
independently of Pax2, further refines the expression domain and level of FGF8 at
the MHB through opposing effects on Pax2 activity. Our results indicate that the 
expression of local organizing factors is controlled by combinatorial interaction
between inductive and modulatory factors.

PMID: 11704761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Prog Neurobiol. 2001 Dec;65(5):473-88.

Regionalisation and acquisition of polarity in the optic tectum.

Nakamura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, 980-8575, Sendai, Japan.
makamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The optic tectum differentiates from the alar plate of the mesencephalon and
receives retinal fibres in a precise retinotopic manner. Here, mechanisms of
tectum polarisation and regionalisation are reviewed. Misexpression of Pax2, Pax5
or En can change the fate of the presumptive diencephalon to that of the tectum. 
Ephrin A2 and A5 are expressed in a gradient in the tectum, caudal high and
rostral low, and may play important roles in the formation of a precise
retinotectal projection map. Retinal fibres that express receptors for these
ligands, and which come from the temporal retina, are repulsed by the ligands and
do not invade the caudal tectum. Both En1 and En2 can regulate posterior
characteristics in the tectum by inducing ephrin A2 and A5. Transplantation
experiments in chick have indicated that the mes/metencephalic boundary works as 
an organiser for the tectum and the cerebellum. Fgf8 is a candidate signalling
molecule in the organiser. Pax2/5, En, and Fgf8 are in a positive feedback loop
for their expression such that misexpression of one of these genes in the
diencephalon turns on the feedback loop and can result in induction of an optic
tectum. Otx2 and Gbx2 appear to repress each other's expression and contribute to
defining the posterior border of the tectum. Misexpression of Otx2 in the
metencephalon can change the fate of its alar plate to a tectum, and
misexpression of Gbx2 in the mesencephalon can cause anterior shifting of the
caudal limit of the tectum. The anterior border of the tectum may be determined
as a result of repressive interactions between Pax6 and En1/Pax2. Along the
dorsoventral axis of the mesencephalon, Shh contributes to ventralize the tissue;
that is, Shh can change the fate of the presumptive tectum to that of the
tegmentum that is the ventral structure. It is proposed that the brain vesicle
that expresses Otx2, Pax2, and En1 may differentiate into the tectum.

PMID: 11689282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Development. 2001 Nov;128(21):4165-76.

spiel ohne grenzen/pou2 is required during establishment of the zebrafish
midbrain-hindbrain boundary organizer.

Belting HG(1), Hauptmann G, Meyer D, Abdelilah-Seyfried S, Chitnis A, Eschbach C,
Söll I, Thisse C, Thisse B, Artinger KB, Lunde K, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Biologie I, Hauptstrasse 1, 
D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The vertebrate midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) organizes patterning and
neuronal differentiation in the midbrain and anterior hindbrain. Formation of
this organizing center involves multiple steps, including positioning of the MHB 
within the neural plate, establishment of the organizer and maintenance of its
regional identity and signaling activities. Juxtaposition of the Otx2 and Gbx2
expression domains positions the MHB. How the positional information is
translated into activation of Pax2, Wnt1 and Fgf8 expression during MHB
establishment remains unclear. In zebrafish spiel ohne grenzen (spg) mutants, the
MHB is not established, neither isthmus nor cerebellum form, the midbrain is
reduced in size and patterning abnormalities develop within the hindbrain. In spg
mutants, despite apparently normal expression of otx2, gbx1 and fgf8 during late 
gastrula stages, the initial expression of pax2.1, wnt1 and eng2, as well as
later expression of fgf8 in the MHB primordium are reduced. We show that spg
mutants have lesions in pou2, which encodes a POU-domain transcription factor.
Maternal pou2 transcripts are distributed evenly in the blastula, and zygotic
expression domains include the midbrain and hindbrain primordia during late
gastrulation. Microinjection of pou2 mRNA can rescue pax2.1 and wnt1 expression
in the MHB of spg/pou2 mutants without inducing ectopic expression. This
indicates an essential but permissive role for pou2 during MHB establishment.
pou2 is expressed normally in noi/pax2.1 and ace/fgf8 zebrafish mutants, which
also form no MHB. Thus, expression of pou2 does not depend on fgf8 and pax2.1.
Our data suggest that pou2 is required for the establishment of the normal
expression domains of wnt1 and pax2.1 in the MHB primordium.

PMCID: PMC4027960
PMID: 11684654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. FEBS Lett. 2001 Oct 26;507(2):205-9.

The two Xenopus Gbx2 genes exhibit similar, but not identical expression patterns
and can affect head formation.

Tour E(1), Pillemer G, Gruenbaum Y, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

Gbx2 homeobox genes are important for formation and function of the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary, namely the isthmic organizer. Two Gbx2 genes were
identified in Xenopus laevis, differing in 13 amino acids, including a change in 
the homeodomain. Xgbx2a is activated earlier during gastrulation and reaches
higher levels of expression while Xgbx2b is expressed later, at lower levels and 
has an additional domain in the ventral blood islands. Their overexpression
results in microcephalic embryos with shortened axes and defects in brain and
notochord formation. Both genes encode functionally homologous proteins, which
differ primarily in their temporal and spatial expression patterns.

PMID: 11684099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Development. 2001 Jul;128(13):2461-9.

Inductive signal and tissue responsiveness defining the tectum and the
cerebellum.

Sato T(1), Araki I, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The mes/metencephalic boundary (isthmus) has an organizing activity for
mesencephalon and metencephalon. The candidate signaling molecule is Fgf8 whose
mRNA is localized in the region where the cerebellum differentiates. Responding
to this signal, the cerebellum differentiates in the metencephalon and the tectum
differentiates in the mesencephalon. Based on the assumption that strong Fgf8
signal induces the cerebellum and that the Fgf8b signal is stronger than that of 
Fgf8a, we carried out experiments to misexpress Fgf8b and Fgf8a in chick embryos.
Fgf8a did not affect the expression pattern of Otx2, Gbx2 or Irx2. En2 expression
was upregulated in the mesencephalon and in the diencephalon by Fgf8a.
Consequently, Fgf8a misexpression resulted in the transformation of the
presumptive diencephalon to the fate of the mesencephalon. In contrast, Fgf8b
repressed Otx2 expression, but upregulated Gbx2 and Irx2 expression in the
mesencephalon. As a result, Fgf8b completely changed the fate of the
mesencephalic alar plate to cerebellum. Quantitative analysis showed that Fgf8b
signal is 100 times stronger than Fgf8a signal. Co-transfection of Fgf8b with
Otx2 indicates that Otx2 is a key molecule in mesencephalic generation. We have
shown by RT-PCR that both Fgf8a and Fgf8b are expressed, Fgf8b expression
prevailing in the isthmic region. The results all support our working hypothesis 
that the strong Fgf8 signal induces the neural tissue around the isthmus to
differentiate into the cerebellum.

PMID: 11493563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Neurosci. 2001 Jul 1;21(13):4699-711.

Boundary formation and compartition in the avian diencephalon.

Larsen CW(1), Zeltser LM, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College
London, London SE1 1UL, England.

The diencephalon comprises three functionally distinct regions: synencephalon,
dorsal thalamus, and ventral thalamus. Patterning of the diencephalon has been
proposed to involve subdivision of its anteroposterior axis into segments,
neuromeres or prosomeres (Bergquist and Kallen, 1954; Vaage, 1969; Figdor and
Stern, 1993; Rubenstein et al., 1994; Redies et al., 2000; Yoon et al., 2000).
However, the number and sequence of diencephalic neuromeres, or even their
existence, are uncertain. We have examined the proposed subdivisions by
morphology, gene expression, acquisition of boundary-specific phenotypes, and
cell lineage restriction. We find that at stage 16 in chick the diencephalon is
divided into synencephalon and parencephalon. The synencephalon exhibits
neuromeric morphology, expresses Prox, and acquires neuromere boundary properties
at its interface with both the midbrain and the parencephalon. Although the
mesencephalic/synencephalic boundary restricts cell mixing, the
synencephalic/parencephalic boundary does not. Similarly, there is no lineage
restriction between the parencephalon and the more rostral forebrain (secondary
prosencephalon). Subdivision of the parencephalon into ventral and dorsal
thalamus involves the formation of a narrow intraparencephalic territory, the
zona limitans intrathalamica (zli). This is correlated with the acquisition of
cell lineage restriction at both anterior and posterior borders of the zli, the
appearance of boundary-specific properties, and Gbx2 and Dlx2 expression in
dorsal thalamic and ventral thalamic territories, respectively. At stage 22, the 
synencephalon is divided into two domains, distinguished by differential gene
expression and tissue morphology, but associated with neither a boundary
phenotype nor cell lineage restriction. Our results suggest that the diencephalon
does not have an overt segmental pattern.

PMID: 11425897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 1;235(1):12-32.

Complementary functions of Otx2 and Cripto in initial patterning of mouse
epiblast.

Kimura C(1), Shen MM, Takeda N, Aizawa S, Matsuo I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphogenesis, Division of Transgenic Technology, Vertebrate
Body Plan Group, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Center for
Animal Resources and Development , Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan.

The development of the mammalian antero-posterior (A-P) axis is proposed to be
established by distinct anterior and posterior signaling centers, anterior
visceral endoderm and primitive streak, respectively. Knock-out studies in mice
have shown that Otx2 and Cripto have crucial roles in the generation and/or
functions of these anterior and posterior centers, respectively. In both Otx2 and
Cripto single mutants, the initial formation of the A-P axis takes place in a
proximal-distal (P-D) orientation, but subsequent axis rotation fails to occur.
To examine the developmental consequences of the lack of these two genes, we have
analyzed the Otx2(-/-);Cripto(-/-) double homozygous mutant phenotype. In the
double mutants, the expression of the A-P axis markers Cer-l, Lim1, and Wnt3 was 
not induced, while expression of Fgf8 and T was expanded throughout the epiblast,
indicating that the double mutants could not form the A-P axis even in its
initial P-D orientation. In addition, the double mutants displayed defects in
differentiation of the visceral endoderm overlying the epiblast, as well as in
the extraembryonic ectoderm. Furthermore, differentiation of neuroectoderm was
accelerated as judged by the reduction of Oct4 expression and emergence of Sox1
and Gbx2 expression in the double mutant epiblast. The resulting ectoderm only
displayed characteristics of anterior hindbrain, implicating it as a ground state
in the mammalian body plan. Our results indicate that complementary functions of 
Otx2 and Cripto are essential for initial patterning of the A-P axis in the mouse
embryo.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11412024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Soc Biol. 2000;194(3-4):113-8.

[Formation of the boundary between the midbrain and the hindbrain: involvement of
Otx2 and Gbx2 genes].

[Article in French]

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Millet S, Bloch-Gallego E, Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)Depto. Biología Celular, Universidad de Extremadura, Avda. de Elvas s.n. 06071
Badajoz, Espagne.

We have studied the neuromeric organisation of the mesencephalic-metencephalic
(mes-met) territory of the avian neural tube using chick/quail transplantation
experiments and analysing the expression of various regulatory genes in chimeric 
and normal embryos. Homotopic grafts demonstrate the presence of an
interneuromeric boundary separating the mesencephalic and cerebellar territories 
(the mes-met or midbrain/hindbrain boundary). This boundary is characterised from
HH10 onwards by the confrontation of the Otx2-Wnt1 and Gbx2-Fgf8 expressing
domains, while En2 and Pax2 genes are expressed at both sides of the mes-met
boundary. The evolution of the position of the Otx2/Gbx2 boundary with respect to
the vesicles and constriction observed within the mes-met domain between stages
HH10 and HH20, allows us to redefine the fate map of this region and to propose a
new nomenclature for HH10. Transplantation between the prosencephalic
neuroepithelium and the mes-met domain shows the possibility of inducing a
mes-met phenotype within the two caudal-most prosomeres, preceded by its
characteristic genetic cascade. The induction selectively takes place along the
boundary between the graft (Otx2 positive) and the host cerebellar territory
(expressing high levels of Gbx2); this includes the induction inside the graft of
a new Otx2/Gbx2 boundary. Conversely, no induction is ever observed when the
graft is confronted to the host Otx2 expressing domain. Although Fgf8 may be
involved in the inductive events, our data strongly suggest that confrontation
between Otx2 and Gbx2 is essential as an organiser of the mes-met domain.

PMID: 11324311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Neurosci. 2001 Apr 15;21(8):2711-25.

Combinatorial expression patterns of LIM-homeodomain and other regulatory genes
parcellate developing thalamus.

Nakagawa Y(1), O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

The anatomical and functional organization of dorsal thalamus (dTh) and ventral
thalamus (vTh), two major regions of the diencephalon, is characterized by their 
parcellation into distinct cell groups, or nuclei, that can be histologically
defined in postnatal animals. However, because of the complexity of dTh and vTh
and difficulties in histologically defining nuclei at early developmental stages,
our understanding of the mechanisms that control the parcellation of dTh and vTh 
and the differentiation of nuclei is limited. We have defined a set of regulatory
genes, which include five LIM-homeodomain transcription factors (Isl1, Lhx1,
Lhx2, Lhx5, and Lhx9) and three other genes (Gbx2, Ngn2, and Pax6), that are
differentially expressed in dTh and vTh of early postnatal mice in distinct but
overlapping patterns that mark nuclei or subsets of nuclei. These genes exhibit
differential expression patterns in dTh and vTh as early as embryonic day 10.5,
when neurogenesis begins; the expression of most of them is detected as
progenitor cells exit the cell cycle. Soon thereafter, their expression patterns 
are very similar to those that we observe postnatally, indicating that unique
combinations of these genes mark specific cell groups from the time they are
generated to their later differentiation into nuclei. Our findings suggest that
these genes act in a combinatorial manner to control the specification of
nuclei-specific properties of thalamic cells and the differentiation of nuclei
within dTh and vTh. These genes may also influence the pathfinding and targeting 
of thalamocortical axons through both cell-autonomous and non-autonomous
mechanisms.

PMID: 11306624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Int J Dev Biol. 2001;45(1):367-71.

The isthmic organizer and brain regionalization.

Martínez S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Universidad Miguel Hernandez, Alicante, Spain.
smartinez@mussol.umh.es

Distinct neural identities are acquired through progressive restriction of
developmental potential under the influence of local environmental signals.
Evidence for the localization of such morphogenetic signals at specific locations
of the developing neural primordium has suggested the concept of "secondary
organizer regions", which regulate the identity and regional polarity of
neighboring neuroepithelial areas one step further. In recent years, the most
studied secondary organizer has been the isthmic organizer, which is localized at
the hind-midbrain transition and controls anterior hindbrain and midbrain
regionalization. Otx2 and Gbx2 expression is fundamental for positioning the
organizer and for the establishment of molecular interactions that induce Fgf8
expression and then, stabilize the autoregulative loop of En1, Wnt1 and Pax2
expression. Temporospatial patterns of such gene expressions are necessary for
the correct development of the organizer which, by a planar mechanism of
induction, controls the normal development of the rostral hindbrain from r2 to
the midbrain-diencephalic boundary. Fgf8 appears as the active diffusible
molecule for isthmic morphogenetic activity and has been suggested to be the
morphogenetic effector in other inductive activities revealed in other
neuroepithelial regions.

PMID: 11291867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2001 Feb;2(2):99-108.

Neural plate patterning: upstream and downstream of the isthmic organizer.

Wurst W(1), Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mammalian Genetics, Ingolstädter Landstrasse 1, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany. wurst@mpipsykl.mpg.de

Two organizing centres operate at long-range distances within the anterior neural
plate to pattern the forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain. Important progress has
been made in understanding the formation and function of one of these organizing 
centres, the isthmic organizer, which controls the development of the midbrain
and anterior hindbrain. Here we review our current knowledge on the identity,
localization and maintenance of the isthmic organizer, as well as on the
molecular cascades that underlie the activity of this organizing centre.

PMID: 11253000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Curr Biol. 2001 Feb 6;11(3):204-7.

Cell mixing between the embryonic midbrain and hindbrain.

Jungbluth S(1), Larsen C, Wizenmann A, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, SE1 1UL,
London, UK.

Segmentation is a mechanism that controls spatial organization along the
anteroposterior axis of the neural tube and is particularly well characterized
for the hindbrain region [1]. The generation of distinct and regionally specific 
structures from each rhombomere is achieved with the almost complete absence of
cell mixing between neighboring rhombomeres [2, 3]. Here, we have examined cell
mingling at the isthmus, where Otx2-expressing midbrain cells abut
Gbx2-expressing hindbrain cells [4]. The sharp line of demarcation between the
two expression domains suggests that this interface would be a compartment
boundary, with no intermixing of cells, but this has not been directly tested. We
have used short-term reaggregation assays to compare the adhesive properties of
cells derived from midbrain and anterior hindbrain and cell labeling in vivo
directly to monitor cell behavior at the midbrain/hindbrain boundary.
Interestingly, our data demonstrate that, in contrast to the rhombomeres,
differential adhesion does not seem to operate between the midbrain and anterior 
hindbrain and that cells move between the two territories. We conclude that these
two subdivisions are not maintained by cell lineage restriction but by cells
maintaining labile fates.

PMID: 11231158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):111-8.

Neuroepithelial co-expression of Gbx2 and Otx2 precedes Fgf8 expression in the
isthmic organizer.

Garda AL(1), Echevarría D, Martínez S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Fac. de Medicina, Campus de San Juan (UMH),
E-03550 -, Alicante, Spain.

The most studied secondary neural organizer is the isthmic organizer, which is
localized at the mid-hindbrain transition of the neural tube and controls the
anterior hindbrain and midbrain regionalization. Otx2 and Gbx2 expressions are
fundamental for positioning the organizer and the establishment of molecular
interactions that induce Fgf8. We present here evidences demonstrating that Otx2 
and Gbx2 have an overlapping expression in the isthmic region. This area is the
transversal domain where expression of Fgf8 is induced. The Fgf8 protein produced
in the isthmus stabilizes and up-regulates Gbx2 expression, which, in turn,
down-regulates Otx2 expression. The inductive effect of the Gbx2/Otx2 limit keeps
Fgf8 expression stable and thus maintains its positive role in the expression of 
Pax2, En1,2 and Wnt1.

PMID: 11231064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Trends Neurosci. 2001 Jan;24(1):32-9.

Regionalization of the optic tectum: combinations of gene expression that define 
the tectum.

Nakamura H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer,
Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, 980-8575, Sendai, Japan.
nakamura@idac.tohoku.ac.jp

The optic tectum differentiates from the alar plate of the mesencephalon. Here,
the molecular mechanisms for differentiation of the tectum are reviewed.
Mis-expression of Pax2, Pax5 or En can change the fate of the presumptive
diencephalon to become the tectum. En, Fgf8, Pax2 and Pax5, exist in a positive
feedback loop for their expression so that mis-expression of any of these genes
acts on the feedback loop resulting in induction of the optic tectum in the
diencephalon. Otx2 and Gbx2 can repress the expression of each other and
contribute to the formation of the posterior border of the tectum. Mis-expression
of Otx2 in the metencephalon changed the fate of its alar plate to the tectum.
The anterior border of the tectum might be determined as a result of repressive
interaction of Pax6 with En1 and Pax2. Along the dorsoventral axis of the
mesencephalon, Shh contributes to the ventralization of the tissue, that is, the 
area affected by Shh differentiates into the tegmentum. It is proposed that the
brain vesicle that expresses Otx2, Pax2 and En1 might differentiate into the
tectum.

PMID: 11163885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Development. 2001 Jan;128(2):181-91.

EN and GBX2 play essential roles downstream of FGF8 in patterning the mouse
mid/hindbrain region.

Liu A(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Fgf8, which is expressed at the embryonic mid/hindbrain junction, is required for
and sufficient to induce the formation of midbrain and cerebellar structures. To 
address through what genetic pathways FGF8 acts, we examined the epistatic
relationships of mid/hindbrain genes that respond to FGF8, using a novel mouse
brain explant culture system. We found that En2 and Gbx2 are the first genes to
be induced by FGF8 in wild-type E9.5 diencephalic and midbrain explants treated
with FGF8-soaked beads. By examining gene expression in En1/2 double mutant mouse
embryos, we found that Fgf8, Wnt1 and Pax5 do not require the En genes for
initiation of expression, but do for their maintenance, and Pax6 expression is
expanded caudally into the midbrain in the absence of EN function. Since E9.5
En1/2 double mutants lack the mid/hindbrain region, forebrain mutant explants
were treated with FGF8 and, significantly, the EN transcription factors were
found to be required for induction of Pax5. Thus, FGF8-regulated expression of
Pax5 is dependent on EN proteins, and a factor other than FGF8 could be involved 
in initiating normal Pax5 expression in the mesencephalon/metencephalon. The En
genes also play an important, but not absolute, role in repression of Pax6 in
forebrain explants by FGF8. Previous Gbx2 gain-of-function studies have shown
that misexpression of Gbx2 in the midbrain can lead to repression of Otx2.
However, in the absence of Gbx2, FGF8 can nevertheless repress Otx2 expression in
midbrain explants. In contrast, Wnt1 is initially broadly induced in Gbx2 mutant 
explants, as in wild-type explants, but not subsequently repressed in cells near 
FGF8 that normally express Gbx2. Thus GBX2 acts upstream of, or parallel to, FGF8
in repressing Otx2, and acts downstream of FGF8 in repression of Wnt1. This is
the first such epistatic study performed in mouse that combines gain-of-function 
and loss-of-function approaches to reveal aspects of mouse gene regulation in the
mesencephalon/metencephalon that have been difficult to address using either
approach alone.

PMID: 11124114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochem Cell Biol. 2000;78(5):577-84.

Regulation and function of FGF8 in patterning of midbrain and anterior hindbrain.

Mason I(1), Chambers D, Shamim H, Walshe J, Irving C.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, UK.
ivor.mason@kcl.ac.uk

In this article, an adjunct to a platform presentation at the Winternational 2000
Symposium, we summarize the recent findings of this group concerning the
regulation and functions of FGF8 expressed at the isthmus of the developing
brain. We show that several different FGF8 isoforms, ectopically expressed in
midbrain or posterior forebrain, are able to mimic the proliferative and
patterning functions previously attributed to the isthmus in tissue grafting
studies. Moreover, we also show that FGF8 protein is sufficient to induce an
ectopic isthmic organiser (Fgf-8+, Gbx2+) in anterior midbrain. We also provide
evidence that isthmic FGF8 patterns anterior hindbrain, repressing Hox-a2
expression and setting aside a territory of the brain that includes the
cerebellar anlage. We show that these effects of FGF8 are likely to be mediated
via FGFR1 and be modulated by the putative FGF antagonist, Sprouty2, identified
using a differential display screen. Finally, we provide evidence that the onset 
of Fgf8 expression is regulated by En1 and that its expression at the isthmus is 
subsequently maintained by a specific and direct interaction between rhombomere 1
and midbrain.

PMID: 11103948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;12(6):736-41.

Otx2, Gbx2 and Fgf8 interact to position and maintain a mid-hindbrain organizer.

Joyner AL(1), Liu A, Millet S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New
York, New York 10016, USA. joyner@saturn.med.nyu.edu

A decade ago, chick-quail transplantation studies demonstrated that the junction 
between the midbrain and hindbrain has the properties of an organizing center
capable of patterning the midbrain and cerebellum. Many of the genes that
function to pattern these tissues have been identified and extensively studied.
Recent experiments have shown that Otx2, Gbx2 and Fgf8 genes play a major role in
the positioning and functioning of this organizing center.

PMID: 11063941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Biol. 2000 Sep 15;225(2):370-80.

Anterior neural induction by nodes from rabbits and mice.

Knoetgen H(1), Teichmann U, Wittler L, Viebahn C, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Zellbiologie, Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysikalische
Chemie, Göttingen, D-37077, Germany.

The organizer of vertebrate embryos represents the major regulatory center for
the formation of the embryonic axis during gastrulation. The early blastopore lip
of amphibia and Hensen's node of the chick at the full-length primitive streak
stage possess both a head- and a trunk-inducing potential. In mice, a
head-inducing activity was identified in the extraembryonic, anterior visceral
endoderm (AVE) by tissue ablation and genetic experiments. Evidence for a similar
activity in the AVE from the rabbit was obtained by transplanting below the avian
epiblast. However, it was still unclear whether the AVE is the exclusive origin
of anterior neural induction or if this activity is recapitulated by the node
and/or its derivatives. We report here that nodes from both rabbit and mouse
embryos can induce a complete neural axis including forebrain structures upon
grafting to chick hosts. Thus, in rabbits and mice not only the AVE, but also the
node, possesses a potential for the induction of anterior neural tissue.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10985856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mech Dev. 2000 Jul;95(1-2):225-9.

Pax2, Otx2, Gbx2 and Fgf8 expression in early otic vesicle development.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Alvarado-Mallart R, Alvarez IS.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 106, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, 47, Bld. de l'Hôpital, 75651,
Cedex 13, Paris, France.

The inner ear is a suitable system to study the mechanisms involved in the
specification of different functional domains during morphogenesis. Using single 
and double in situ hybridization (ISH) we show that three transcription factors
(Otx2, Gbx2and Pax2) and a member of the fibroblast growth factor family (Fgf8)
could participate in the compartmentalization of the otic vesicle and in the
formation of the acoustic-vestibular ganglion.

PMID: 10906468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Trends Genet. 2000 Jun;16(6):237-40.

Positioning the isthmic organizer where Otx2 and Gbx2meet.

Simeone A(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR, Via G. Marconi 12,
80125 Naples, Italy. simeone@iigbna.iigb.an.cnr.it

Regional diversity along the anterior-posterior axis of the central nervous
system is established during gastrulation and is subsequently refined by local
organizing centres that are located at genetically defined positions. The isthmic
organizer possesses midbrain- and cerebellum-inducing properties, and its
positioning at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary is a crucial event that controls
midbrain and cerebellum development. Recent work has shown that two transcription
factors, Otx2 and Gbx2, are instrumental in positioning the isthmic organizer at 
the midbrain-hindbrain boundary.

PMID: 10827447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 1;60(5):1225-8.

Inhibition of constitutively activated Stat3 signaling pathway suppresses growth 
of prostate cancer cells.

Ni Z(1), Lou W, Leman ES, Gao AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Overexpression of interleukin 6, a downstream target of the GBX2 homeobox gene,
has been linked to the progression of prostate cancer. The Janus kinase-signal
transducers and activators of transcription signaling pathway transmits
interleukin 6-mediated signals from cell surface receptors to the target genes in
the nucleus and is critical in mediating cellular growth and differentiation. We 
demonstrate that cells derived from both rat and human prostate cancers have
constitutively activated Stat3, with Stat3 activation being correlated with
malignant potential. Blockade of activated Stat3 by ectopic expression of a
dominant-negative Stat3 in human prostate cancer cells significantly suppresses
their growth in vitro and their tumorigenicity in vivo. Furthermore, the Janus
kinase inhibitor, tyrphostin AG490, inhibited the constitutive activation of
Stat3 and suppressed the growth of human prostate cancer cells. These results
indicate that activation of Stat3 signaling is essential in the progression of
prostate cancer cells and suggest that targeting Stat3 signaling may yield a
potential therapeutic intervention for prostate cancer.

PMID: 10728680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):43-52.

Interaction between Otx2 and Gbx2 defines the organizing center for the optic
tectum.

Katahira T(1), Sato T, Sugiyama S, Okafuji T, Araki I, Funahashi J, Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

Otx2 is expressed in the mesencephalon and prosencephalon, and Gbx2 is expressed 
in the rhombencephalon around stage 10. Loss-of-function studies of these genes
in mice have revealed that Otx2 is indispensable for the development of the
anterior brain segment, and that Gbx2 is required for the development of the
isthmus. We carried out gain-of-function experiments of these genes in chick
embryos with a newly developed gene transfer system, in ovo electroporation. When
Otx2 was ectopically expressed caudally beyond the midbrain-hindbrain boundary
(MHB), the alar plate of the metencephalon differentiated into the optic tectum
instead of differentiating into the cerebellum. On the other hand, when Gbx2 was 
ectopically expressed at the mesencephalon, the caudal limit of the tectum
shifted rostrally. We looked at the effects of misexpression on the isthmus- and 
tectum-related molecules. Otx2 and Gbx2 interacted to repress each other's
expression. Ectopic Otx2 and Gbx2 repressed endogenous expression of Fgf8 in the 
isthmus, but induced Fgf8 expression at the interface between Otx2 and Gbx2
expression. Thus, it is suggested that interaction between Otx2 and Gbx2
determines the site of Fgf8 expression and the posterior limit of the tectum.

PMID: 10704829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Feb;6(2):493-7.

Enhanced GBX2 expression stimulates growth of human prostate cancer cells via
transcriptional up-regulation of the interleukin 6 gene.

Gao AC(1), Lou W, Isaacs JT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. gaoac@msx.upmc.edu

Previous studies demonstrated that the GBX2 homeobox gene is consistently
overexpressed in cultured human prostate cancer cell lines. In this study, the
human GBX2 cDNA was cloned and a quantitative reverse transcription-PCR method
used to demonstrate that GBX2 mRNA expression is enhanced in approximately 70% of
human prostate cancer tissues compared with normal human prostate tissues.
Purified recombinant GBX2 protein binds specifically to an ATTA motif within the 
promoter of the interleukin 6 (IL-6) gene. Using an antisense approach,
down-regulation of the expression of GBX2 correlated with decreased expression of
IL-6 and an inhibition of tumorigenicity of PC3 human prostate cancer cells. In
addition, in vitro growth of the antisense clones was partially restored by
exogenous addition of recombinant IL-6 protein to the culture media. These data
demonstrated that enhanced GBX2 expression results in a stimulation of malignant 
growth of prostate cancer cells and that part of this stimulation involves
up-regulation in the transcription of the IL-6 gene.

PMID: 10690529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4827-38.

FGF8 can activate Gbx2 and transform regions of the rostral mouse brain into a
hindbrain fate.

Liu A(1), Losos K, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. joyner@saturn.med.nyu.edu

The mid/hindbrain junction region, which expresses Fgf8, can act as an organizer 
to transform caudal forebrain or hindbrain tissue into midbrain or cerebellar
structures, respectively. FGF8-soaked beads placed in the chick forebrain can
similarly induce ectopic expression of mid/hindbrain genes and development of
midbrain structures (Crossley, P. H., Martinez, S. and Martin, G. R. (1996)
Nature 380, 66-68). In contrast, ectopic expression of Fgf8a in the mouse
midbrain and caudal forebrain using a Wnt1 regulatory element produced no
apparent patterning defects in the embryos examined (Lee, S. M., Danielian, P.
S., Fritzsch, B. and McMahon, A. P. (1997) Development 124, 959-969). We show
here that FGF8b-soaked beads can not only induce expression of the mid/hindbrain 
genes En1, En2 and Pax5 in mouse embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) caudal forebrain
explants, but also can induce the hindbrain gene Gbx2 and alter the expression of
Wnt1 in both midbrain and caudal forebrain explants. We also show that
FGF8b-soaked beads can repress Otx2 in midbrain explants. Furthermore, Wnt1-Fgf8b
transgenic embryos in which the same Wnt1 regulatory element is used to express
Fgf8b, have ectopic expression of En1, En2, Pax5 and Gbx2 in the dorsal hindbrain
and spinal cord at E10.5, as well as exencephaly and abnormal spinal cord
morphology. More strikingly, Fgf8b expression in more rostral brain regions
appears to transform the midbrain and caudal forebrain into an anterior hindbrain
fate through expansion of the Gbx2 domain and repression of Otx2 as early as the 
7-somite stage. These findings suggest that normal Fgf8 expression in the
anterior hindbrain not only functions to maintain development of the entire
mid/hindbrain by regulating genes like En1, En2 and Pax5, but also might function
to maintain a metencephalic identity by regulating Gbx2 and Otx2 expression.

PMID: 10518499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nature. 1999 Sep 9;401(6749):164-8.

The caudal limit of Otx2 expression positions the isthmic organizer.

Broccoli V(1), Boncinelli E, Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-Research Centre for Environment and Health, Institute of Mammalian
Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany.

The homeobox gene Otx2 is expressed in the anterior neural tube with a sharp
limit at the midbrain/hindbrain junction (the isthmic organizer). Otx2
inactivation experiments have shown that this gene is essential for the
development of its expression domain. Here we investigate whether the caudal
limit of Otx2 expression is instrumental in positioning the isthmic organizer and
in specifying midbrain versus hindbrain fate, by ectopically expressing Otx2 in
the presumptive anterior hindbrain using a knock-in strategy into the En1 locus. 
Transgenic offspring display a cerebellar ataxia. Morphological and histological 
studies of adult transgenic brains reveal that most of the anterior cerebellar
vermis is missing, whereas the inferior colliculus is complementarily enlarged.
During early neural pattern formation expression of the midbrain markers Wnt1 and
Ephrin-A5, the isthmic organizer markers Pax2 and Fgf-8 and the hindbrain marker 
Gbx2 are shifted caudally in the presumptive hindbrain territory. These findings 
show that the caudal limit of Otx2 expression is sufficient for positioning the
isthmic organizer and encoding caudal midbrain fate within the mid/hindbrain
domain.

PMID: 10490025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Nature. 1999 Sep 9;401(6749):161-4.

A role for Gbx2 in repression of Otx2 and positioning the mid/hindbrain
organizer.

Millet S(1), Campbell K, Epstein DJ, Losos K, Harris E, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

The mid/hindbrain (MHB) junction can act as an organizer to direct the
development of the midbrain and anterior hindbrain. In mice, Otx2 is expressed in
the forebrain and midbrain and Gbx2 is expressed in the anterior hindbrain, with 
a shared border at the level of the MHB organizer. Here we show that, in Gbx2-/- 
mutants, the earliest phenotype is a posterior expansion of the Otx2 domain
during early somite stages. Furthermore, organizer genes are expressed at the
shifted Otx2 border, but not in a normal spatial relationship. To test whether
Gbx2 is sufficient to position the MHB organizer, we transiently expressed Gbx2
in the caudal Otx2 domain and found that the Otx2 caudal border was indeed
shifted rostrally and a normal appearing organizer formed at this new Otx2
border. Transgenic embryos then showed an expanded hindbrain and a reduced
midbrain at embryonic day 9.5-10. We propose that formation of a normal MHB
organizer depends on a sharp Otx2 caudal border and that Gbx2 is required to
position and sharpen this border.

PMID: 10490024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Science. 1999 Aug 6;285(5429):906-9.

Early neocortical regionalization in the absence of thalamic innervation.

Miyashita-Lin EM(1), Hevner R, Wassarman KM, Martinez S, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0984, USA.

There is a long-standing controversy regarding the mechanisms that generate the
functional subdivisions of the cerebral neocortex. One model proposes that
thalamic axonal input specifies these subdivisions; the competing model
postulates that patterning mechanisms intrinsic to the dorsal telencephalon
generate neocortical regions. Gbx-2 mutant mice, whose thalamic differentiation
is disrupted, were investigated. Despite the lack of cortical innervation by
thalamic axons, neocortical region-specific gene expression (Cadherin-6, EphA-7, 
Id-2, and RZR-beta) developed normally. This provides evidence that patterning
mechanisms intrinsic to the neocortex specify the basic organization of its
functional subdivisions.

PMID: 10436162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3191-203.

Fgf8 and Gbx2 induction concomitant with Otx2 repression is correlated with
midbrain-hindbrain fate of caudal prosencephalon.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Simeone A, Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 106, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Bld. de l'Hôpital, France.

Chick/quail transplantation experiments were performed to analyse possible
factors involved in the regionalisation of the midbrain-hindbrain domain. The
caudal prosomeres, expressing Otx2, were transplanted at stage HH10 into
rostrocaudal levels of the midbrain-hindbrain domain, either straddling the
intra-metencephalic constriction (type 1 grafts), or at rostral and medial levels
of pro-rhombomere A1 (type 2 and 3 grafts, respectively); thus, in all
situations, one border of the graft was in contact with the host Gbx2- and
Fgf8-expressing domains. The area containing the graft, recognised by QCPN
immunohistochemistry, was first analysed 48 hours after transplantation for Otx2,
Gbx2, En2 and Fgf8. Although in all three situations, a large part of the graft
maintained Otx2 expression, another part became Otx2 negative and was induced to 
express Gbx2 and Fgf8. These inductive events occurred exclusively at the
interface between the Otx2-positive transplanted domain and the ipsilateral host 
Gbx2-positive rhombomere 1, creating a new Otx2-Gbx2 boundary within the grafted 
territory. In type 1 and 2 grafts, the induced Fgf8 domain is in continuity with 
the host Fgf8 isthmic domain, whereas for type 3 grafts, these two domains are
separate. High levels of En2 expression were also induced in the area expressing 
Gbx2 and Fgf8, and Wnt1 and Pax2 expressions, analysed in type 3 grafts, were
induced at the intragraft Otx2-Gbx2 new boundary. Moreover, at later embryonic
stages, the graft developed meso-isthmo-cerebellar structures. Thus, gene
expressions induced in the grafted prosencephalon not only mimicked the pattern
observed in the normal midbrain-hindbrain domain, but is followed by
midbrain-hindbrain cytodifferentiation, indicating that not only Fgf8 but also
confrontation of Otx2 and Gbx2 may play an essential role during
midbrian-hindbrain regionalisation.

PMID: 10375509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mech Dev. 1999 Apr;82(1-2):29-39.

Pax2/5 and Pax6 subdivide the early neural tube into three domains.

Schwarz M(1), Alvarez-Bolado G, Dressler G, Urbánek P, Busslinger M, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg, 37077, Göttingen, 
Germany.

The nested expression patterns of the paired-box containing transcription factors
Pax2/5 and Pax6 demarcate the midbrain and forebrain primordium at the neural
plate stage. We demonstrate that, in Pax2/5 deficient mice, the
mesencephalon/metencephalon primordium is completely missing, resulting in a
fusion of the forebrain to the hindbrain. Morphologically, in the alar plate the 
deletion is characterized by the substitution of the tectum (dorsal midbrain) and
cerebellum (dorsal metencephalon) by the caudal diencephalon and in the basal
plate by the replacement of the midbrain tegmentum by the ventral metencephalon
(pons). Molecularly, the loss of the tectum is demonstrated by an expanded
expression of Pax6, (the molecular determinant of posterior commissure), and a
rostral shift of the territory of expression of Gbx2 and Otp (markers for the
pons), towards the caudal diencephalon. Our results suggest that an intact
territory of expression of Pax2/5 in the neural plate, nested between the rostral
and caudal territories of expression of Pax6, is necessary for defining the
midbrain vesicle.

PMID: 10354469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):175-8.

Comparative analysis of Otx2, Gbx2, Pax2, Fgf8 and Wnt1 gene expressions during
the formation of the chick midbrain/hindbrain domain.

Hidalgo-Sánchez M(1), Millet S, Simeone A, Alvarado-Mallart RM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 106, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, 47, Bld. de l'Hôpital, 75651,
Paris CEDEX 13, France.

The patterns of the Gbx2, Pax2, Wnt1, and Fgf8 gene expression were analyzed in
the chick with respect to the caudal limit of the Otx2 anterior domain, taken as 
a landmark of the midbrain/hindbrain (MH) boundary. The Gbx2 anterior boundary is
always concomitant with the Otx2 posterior boundary. The ring of Wnt1 expression 
is included within the Otx2 domain and Fgf8 transcripts included within the Gbx2 
neuroepithelium. Pax2 expression is centred on the MH boundary with a double
decreasing gradient. We propose a new nomenclature to differentiate the vesicles 
and constrictions observed in the avian MH domain at stage HH10 and HH20, based
on the localization of the Gbx2/Otx2 common boundary.

PMID: 10330495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Cell Sci. 1999 Mar;112 ( Pt 5):601-12.

Formation of a primitive ectoderm like cell population, EPL cells, from ES cells 
in response to biologically derived factors.

Rathjen J(1), Lake JA, Bettess MD, Washington JM, Chapman G, Rathjen PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaide
5005, South Australia.

The primitive ectoderm of the mouse embryo arises from the inner cell mass
between 4.75 and 5.25 days post coitum, around the time of implantation.
Positioned at a pivotal time in development, just prior to formation of the three
germ layers of the embryo proper, the primitive ectoderm responds directly to the
signals generated during gastrulation. We have identified a conditioned medium,
MEDII, which caused the homogeneous conversion of ES cells to a morphologically
distinct cell population, termed early primitive ectoderm-like (EPL) cells. EPL
cells expressed the pluripotent cell markers Oct4, SSEA1 and alkaline
phosphatase. However, the formation of EPL cells was accompanied by alterations
in Fgf5, Gbx2 and Rex1 expression, a loss in chimaera forming ability, changes in
factor responsiveness and modified differentiation capabilities, all consistent
with the identification of EPL cells as equivalent to the primitive ectoderm
population of the 5.5 to 6.0 days post coitum embryo. EPL cell formation could be
reversed in the presence of LIF and withdrawal of MEDII, which suggested that EPL
cell formation was not a terminal differentiation event but reflected the ability
of pluripotent cells to adopt distinct cell states in response to specific
factors. Partial purification of MEDII revealed the presence of two separable
biological activities, both of which were required for the induction and
maintenance of EPL cells. We show here the first demonstration of uniform
differentiation of ES cells in response to biological factors. The formation of
primitive ectoderm, both in vivo and in vitro, appears to be an obligatory step
in the differentiation of the inner cell mass or ES cells into cell lineages of
the embryonic germ layers. EPL cells potentially represent a model for the
development of lineage specific differentiation protocols and analysis of
gastrulation at a molecular level. An understanding of the active components of
MEDII may provide a route for the identification of factors which induce
primitive ectoderm formation in vivo.

PMID: 9973595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mech Dev. 1998 Aug;76(1-2):151-5.

Expression of the homeobox gene GBX2 during chicken development.

Niss K(1), Leutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrueck-Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Roessle-Strasse 10, 13122,
Berlin, Germany.

We have examined the expression pattern of the GBX2 gene during chicken
embryogenesis. First transcripts are found in the epiblast of a HH st. 3+ embryo.
With the onset of neurogenesis, transcripts mark the posterior neuroectoderm.
Later on, expression is detectable in the isthmic region, the hindbrain and the
neural tube. We show that GBX2 transcripts, as well as the protein, mark the
presumptive hindbrain region. After establishment of the brain vesicles GBX2
transcripts were also detected in distinct domains of the diencephalon. In
addition to neural sites of expression, GBX2 was found in several domains
including the otic vesicle, the somitic mesoderm, the lateral foregut endoderm,
the ventral limb bud ectoderm and in the feather buds.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 9767154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Dev Dyn. 1998 Aug;212(4):563-79.

Anterior structural defects by misexpression of Xgbx-2 in early Xenopus embryos
are associated with altered expression of cell adhesion molecules.

King MW(1), Ndiema M, Neff AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Terre Haute Center for
Medical Education, Indiana University School of Medicine, 47809, USA.
memwk@thcme.indstate.edu

The RNA of the noncluster homeobox gene, Xgbx-2, is localized during neurulation 
to a narrow band of tissue at the midbrain hindbrain boundary (anterior
hindbrain). The localized expression of Xgbx-2 within the nervous system prompted
us to assess its function during early development by injection of synthetic
Xgbx-2 RNA into the animal pole region of both dorsal blastomeres at the
four-cell stage. Injection of Xgbx-2 RNA leads to dose-dependent alterations in
anterior dorsal structures. These defects include abnormal eye development
including reduced and missing eyes, reduced or missing cement glands, and
abnormal brain development. Additionally, coinjection with lineage label (either 
beta-galactosidase or green fluorescent protein) shows there is a dose-dependent 
misplacement of cells. These misplaced cells can be found in such locations as
the blastocoele, gastrocoele, or ventricles in the brain. In some spawnings,
misplaced cells are expelled from the embryo into the periviteline space. In
general, the phenotype of Xgbx-2 RNA-injected embryos is strikingly similar to
the phenotypes observed when dominant-negative RNA constructs of Ca2+-dependent
cell-adhesion molecules are injected into similar regions of early embryos.
Xgbx-2 misexpression enhanced the dissociation of animal hemisphere cells, and
inhibited Ca2+-dependent cell adhesion in dissociated animal hemisphere cells in 
vitro. Additionally, when the expression of various calcium-dependent cadherins
was tested, it was shown that misexpression of Xgbx-2 prevents N-cadherin
expression during early neurulation. These observations suggest that the
transcription factor, Xgbx-2, functions normally in the regionalization of the
neural tube (specifically the anterior hindbrain) by regulating differential cell
adhesion and subsequently cell identity.

PMID: 9707329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cancer Res. 1998 Apr 1;58(7):1391-4.

Down-regulation of homeobox gene GBX2 expression inhibits human prostate cancer
clonogenic ability and tumorigenicity.

Gao AC(1), Lou W, Isaacs JT.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, 
Department of Urology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Previously, we have demonstrated that GBX genes, a homeobox-containing human
family of DNA-binding transcription factors consisting of GBX1 and GBX2, are
overexpressed in a panel of human prostatic cancer cell lines (ie., TSU-pr1, PC3,
DU145, and LNCaP) compared to normal prostate. In the present studies, specific
primer sets were designed for reverse transcription-PCR detection of the
expression of GBX1 versus GBX2 in human prostate cancer. These studies
demonstrated that the GBX2 gene, but not the GBX1 gene, is consistently
overexpressed in this panel of human prostate cancer cell lines compared to
normal human prostate. Using a quantitative-competitive PCR analysis, GBX2 mRNA
was expressed as 3 x 10(3) copies/microg RNA in normal prostate tissue and 4 x
10(4) copies/microg RNA in the immortalized normal neonatal prostate epithelial
cell line 267B-1, as compared to 6 x 10(5), 5 x 10(5), 3 x 10(5), and 1 x 10(5)
copies/microg RNA in TSU-pr1, DU145, LNCaP, and PC3 prostate cancer cell lines,
respectively. To examine the importance of GBX2 expression for prostate cancer
malignancy, GBX2-overexpressing TSU-pr1 and PC3 human prostatic cancer cells were
transfected with a eukaryotic expression vector containing an antisense GBX2
homeobox domain cDNA. Stable transfectant clones with 5-10-fold decreased levels 
of GBX2 mRNA expression were obtained. When tested in vitro, the clonogenic
ability of the GBX2 antisense transfectants was reduced by approximately 50% in
both cell lines. When implanted s.c. into nude mice, the tumorigenicity of the
antisense GBX2 transfectants from both human prostatic cancer cell lines was
inhibited by more than 70% compared to the parental cells. These results suggest 
that expression of GBX2 gene is required for malignant growth of human prostate
cells.

PMID: 9537237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Genomics. 1997 Dec 1;46(2):223-33.

The mouse homeobox gene, Gbx2: genomic organization and expression in pluripotent
cells in vitro and in vivo.

Chapman G(1), Remiszewski JL, Webb GC, Schulz TC, Bottema CD, Rathjen PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.

The Gbx2 homeodomain is widely conserved in metazoans. We investigated the mouse 
Gbx2 locus by isolation and characterization of genomic clones and by physical
localization to the genome. The Gbx2 gene contained a single intron that
separated the proposed functional protein domains. This organization was
conserved with human GBX2. Physical localization of Gbx2 to Chromosome 1C5-E1
indicated that the genomic relationship between the linked Gbx2 and En1 genes
differs between mouse and human, making it unlikely to be of functional
significance. We also extended the known expression pattern of Gbx2 beyond the
gastrulation stage embryo and the developing CNS to pluripotent cells in vitro
and in vivo. Gbx2 expression was demonstrated in undifferentiated embryonic stem 
cells but was downregulated in differentiated cell populations. In the embryo,
Gbx2 expression was detected before primitive streak formation, in the inner cell
mass of the preimplantation embryo. Gbx2 is therefore a candidate control gene
for cell pluripotency and differentiation in the embryo.

PMID: 9417909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell. 1997 Oct 17;91(2):185-95.

The homeobox gene GBX2, a target of the myb oncogene, mediates autocrine growth
and monocyte differentiation.

Kowenz-Leutz E(1), Herr P, Niss K, Leutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

The homeobox gene GBX2 was identified as a target gene of the v-Myb oncoprotein
encoded by the avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV). GBX2 activation by c-Myb
requires signal transduction emanating from the cell surface while the
leukemogenic AMV v-Myb constitutively induces the GBX2 gene. Mutations in the DNA
binding domain of AMV-Myb render it independent of signaling events and
concomitantly abrogate the collaboration between Myb and CCAAT Enhancer Binding
Proteins (C/EBP), which are involved in granulocyte differentiation. Ectopic
expression of GBX2 in growth factor-dependent myeloblasts induces monocytic
features and independence from exogenous cytokines, reflecting distinct features 
of AMV-transformed cells. Our results suggest that Myb or factors it interacts
with contribute to hematopoietic lineage choice and differentiation in a signal
transduction-dependent fashion.

PMID: 9346236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Development. 1997 Aug;124(15):2923-34.

Specification of the anterior hindbrain and establishment of a normal
mid/hindbrain organizer is dependent on Gbx2 gene function.

Wassarman KM(1), Lewandoski M, Campbell K, Joyner AL, Rubenstein JL, Martinez S, 
Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Program in Developmental Biology, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0452, USA.

Analysis of mouse embryos homozygous for a loss-of-function allele of Gbx2
demonstrates that this homeobox gene is required for normal development of the
mid/hindbrain region. Gbx2 function appears to be necessary at the neural plate
stage for the correct specification and normal proliferation or survival of
anterior hindbrain precursors. It is also required to maintain normal patterns of
expression at the mid/hindbrain boundary of Fgf8 and Wnt1, genes that encode
signaling molecules thought to be key components of the mid/hindbrain (isthmic)
organizer. In the absence of Gbx2 function, isthmic nuclei, the cerebellum, motor
nerve V, and other derivatives of rhombomeres 1-3 fail to form. Additionally, the
posterior midbrain in the mutant embryos appears to be extended caudally and
displays abnormalities in anterior/posterior patterning. The failure of anterior 
hindbrain development is presumably due to the loss of Gbx2 function in the
precursors of the anterior hindbrain. However, since Gbx2 expression is not
detected in the midbrain it seems likely that the defects in midbrain
anterior/posterior patterning result from an abnormal isthmic signaling center.
These data provide genetic evidence for a link between patterning of the anterior
hindbrain and the establishment of the mid/hindbrain organizer, and identify Gbx2
as a gene required for these processes to occur normally.

PMID: 9247335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Prostate. 1996 Dec;29(6):395-8.

Expression of homeobox gene-GBX2 in human prostatic cancer cells.

Gao AC(1), Isaacs JT.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute,
Department of Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox genes encode transcription factors involved in the genetic
control of normal development and differentiation, as well as in malignant
transformation. To begin to assess the possible role of homeobox genes in
prostatic cell carcinogenesis, we surveyed initially for expression of
homeobox-containing genes in the TSU-PR1 cell line.
METHODS: This was performed by RT-PCR using degenerate oligodeoxyribonucleotide
primers to the homeobox-binding sequence to generate partial cDNAs which were
cloned and sequenced.
RESULTS: Using this method, expression of 14 members of homeobox-containing genes
were detected in TSU-PR1 cells. All of these expressed genes correspond to
previously identified homeobox genes located within the HOXA, B, C, and D
clusters. We further examined the expression of these homeobox genes in different
human prostatic cell lines by using whole cDNA slot blot and Northern blot
analysis. One of the sequences corresponding to the human GBX2 homeobox gene is
overexpressed in TSU-PR1, LNCaP, PC-3, and DU145 metastatic prostate cell lines
relative to the normal prostate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the homeobox gene GBX2 may participate in
metastatic progression in prostatic cancer.

PMID: 8977637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Genomics. 1996 Feb 1;31(3):335-42.

Characterization and sequence analysis of the human homeobox-containing gene
GBX2.

Lin X(1), Swaroop A, Vaccarino FM, Murtha MT, Haas M, Ji X, Ruddle FH, Leckman
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to amplify portion of homeobox genes
present in a human 11-week fetal brain cDNA library. One of these PCR products
was determined by sequencing to be the Gastrulation and brain specific-2 gene
(GBX2). Screening this human fetal brain cDNA library with probes specific for
GBX2 led to the identification of a 2151-bp cDNA clone. The nucleotide sequence
of the cDNA clone encodes for a protein of 347 amino acid residues. The amino
acid sequence of the GBX2 homeodomain is identical (100%) to the that of
homologous gene, Gbx2, expressed in the developing mouse embryo and virtually
identical (97%) to a gene expressed in the developing chicken embryo, CHox7. The 
5' end of the GBX2 gene contains a CpG island in the untranslated region and a
trinucleotide (CCG)8 repeat in the coding region. The amino-terminal end of the
GBX2 protein is proline-rich, with 30 proline residues in one stretch of 120
amino acids. A single 2.2-kb transcript was detected by Northern analysis in the 
developing human CNS as well as in other tissues. The human genomic clone for
GBX2 was also isolated, characterized, and mapped to 2q36(d)-q37 by somatic cell 
hybrid analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization. These studies provide a
framework for designing future experiments that are needed to determine the
functional significance of this gene in CNS development.

PMID: 8838315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mech Dev. 1996 Feb;54(2):149-60.

The Xenopus laevis homeobox gene Xgbx-2 is an early marker of anteroposterior
patterning in the ectoderm.

von Bubnoff A(1), Schmidt JE, Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195-7350, USA.

In a search for homeobox genes expressed during early Xenopus development, we
have isolated a gene which appears to be the Xenopus cognate of the mouse Gbx-2
gene. Expression of Xgbx-2 is first detectable by in situ hybridization at the
midgastrula stage when it is predominantly expressed in the dorsolateral
ectoderm, with a gap in expression at the dorsal midline. By the end of
gastrulation and during neurulation, Xgbx-2 is expressed dorsolaterally in the
neural ectoderm and laterally and ventrally in the epidermis with sharp anterior 
expression borders in both tissues. The anteriormost expression in the neural
ectoderm persists throughout the early stages of development, and was mapped to
the region of rhombomere 1, with an anterior expression border in the region of
the midbrain-hindbrain boundary. Thus Xgbx-2 is expressed anterior to the Hox
genes. Xgbx-2 expression is induced by retinoic acid (RA) in animal caps, and RA 
treatment of whole embryos expands and enhances Xgbx-2 expression in the
ectoderm. We suggest a role for Xgbx-2 in establishing the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary, which appears to separate early neurectodermal regions expressing genes
that are positively and negatively regulated by RA.

PMID: 8652408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Dyn. 1995 Dec;204(4):372-82.

Sequence and expression pattern of the Stra7 (Gbx-2) homeobox-containing gene
induced by retinoic acid in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Bouillet P(1), Chazaud C, Oulad-Abdelghani M, Dollé P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, INSERM, 
ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch, France.

The cDNA sequence of Stra7, a retinoic acid (RA)-inducible gene in P19 embryonal 
carcinoma (EC) cells, was determined. The deduced Stra7 protein contains a
homeodomain highly similar to that of the previously described chicken CHox7 gene
product, and is highly conserved during evolution, from hemichordates to
vertebrates. The mouse Stra7 cDNA corresponds to the full-length form of the 77
bp homeodomain-encoding cDNA fragment which was previously cloned and termed
MMoxA or Gbx-2. Reverse-transcriptase-PCR analysis revealed the presence of
Stra7/Gbx-2 transcripts in the adult brain, spleen, and female genital tract,
whereas no expression could be observed in heart, liver, lung, kidney, or testes.
In situ hybridization analysis showed a restricted expression pattern of
Stra7/Gbx-2 in the three primitive germ layers during gastrulation. Restricted
expression was also detected in the pharyngeal arches. Subsequently, there were
specific expression domains in the developing central nervous system, at the
midbrain/hindbrain boundary and later in the cerebellum anlage, in certain
rhombomeres, in dorsal regions of the spinal cord, and in the developing dorsal
thalamus and corpus striatum.

PMID: 8601031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. FEBS Lett. 1995 May 15;364(3):289-92.

Sequence and evolutionary conservation of the murine Gbx-2 homeobox gene.

Chapman G(1), Rathjen PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, Australia.

The homeobox gene family is divided into classes based on similarity of sequence 
across the homeodomain. Representative members of discrete classes are often
conserved widely throughout evolution and this can extend to their genomic
organisation and biological function. In this paper we report the first complete 
cDNA sequence of a member of the GBX class of homeobox genes, the murine gene
Gbx-2. Sequence comparisons indicate that this homeodomain class is highly
conserved within vertebrates. The homeodomain differs at only three positions out
of 60 and these can be used to subdivide the GBX class homeodomains into 2
sub-classes.

PMID: 7758585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. FEBS Lett. 1993 Dec 20;336(1):107-10.

The HOX complex neighbored by the EVX gene, as well as two other
homeobox-containing genes, the GBX-class and the EN-class, are located on the
same chromosomes 2 and 7 in humans.

Matsui T(1), Hirai M, Hirano M, Kurosawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, Aichi, 
Japan.

Two newly identified human homeobox-containing genes, GBX1 and GBX2, are closely 
related genes, as are members of the other homeobox genes, EN-1 and EN-2. GBX1
and EN-2 have been mapped to chromosome 7q36. The present study shows that GBX2
was mapped to chromosome 2q37. EN-1 was mapped to chromosome 2q14. Moreover, two 
HOX complexes neighbored by the EVX gene, HOXA and HOXD, are located at
chromosome 7p15-p14 and 2q31-q37, respectively. Thus, it is possible that these
homeobox genes were linked to each other on an ancestral genome and that the
ancestral chromosome segment was duplicated during evolution.

PMID: 7903253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


