
1. Placenta. 2016 Mar;39:45-54. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2016.01.008. Epub 2016 Jan
11.

Twist1 is involved in trophoblast syncytialization by regulating GCM1.

Lu X(1), He Y(2), Zhu C(3), Wang H(3), Chen S(4), Lin HY(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, PR China; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100039, PR China. (2)Center for
Reproductive Medicine, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Nanfang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, PR China; State Key Laboratory of
Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, 100101, PR China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and
Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
100101, PR China. (4)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Gynecology
and Obstetrics, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515,
PR China. Electronic address: chensl_92@163.com. (5)State Key Laboratory of Stem 
Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, 100101, PR China. Electronic address: linhy@ioz.ac.cn.

INTRODUCTION: The multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast (STB) is maintained and
regenerated by the fusion of underlying cytotrophoblast cells (CTBs) and is
responsible for a number of functions in the human placenta. Deficiencies in this
structure may result in pregnancy-associated diseases. However, the detailed
mechanisms underlying trophoblast syncytialization await further investigation.
METHODS: The location of the transcription factor Twist1 in human placental
tissues was identified by immunohistochemistry. The expression of Twist1 and
glial cells missing-1 (GCM1) was evaluated by qPCR or western blotting in two
cell-fusion models including forskolin-induced fusion of BeWo cells and
spontaneous syncytialization of CTBs. The key role of Twist1 in trophoblast
differentiation was identified using BeWo cells transfected with Twist1-specific 
siRNA. We investigated the effect of hypoxia on the expression of Twist1 and GCM1
in primary CTBs cultured with 2% oxygen. The Twist1 binding region in the GCM1
gene was detected by chromatin-immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Twist1 was expressed in human placental tissues, and the expression of
Twist1 and GCM1 increased in a time-dependent manner during spontaneous
syncytialization of primary CTBs and forskolin-induced fusion of BeWo cells. A
reduction in Twist1 and GCM1 expression was observed under hypoxic conditions and
was accompanied by inhibition of trophoblast syncytialization. Moreover,
siRNA-mediated silencing of Twist1 resulted in inhibition of BeWo cells fusion
and down-regulation of GCM1 expression. Furthermore, Twist1 was found to bind to 
the E-box-enriched region in intron 2 of the GCM1 gene during forskolin-induced
fusion of BeWo cells.
DISCUSSION: The above results suggest that Twist1 is required during trophoblast 
syncytialization. Twist1 may promote trophoblast syncytialization by regulating
the expression of GCM1.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26992674  [PubMed - in process]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 22;6:21630. doi: 10.1038/srep21630.

GATA3 inhibits GCM1 activity and trophoblast cell invasion.

Chiu YH(1,)(2), Chen H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang,
Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Development of human placenta involves the invasion of trophoblast cells from
anchoring villi into the maternal decidua. Placental transcription factor GCM1
regulates trophoblast cell invasion via transcriptional activation of HtrA4 gene,
which encodes a serine protease enzyme. The GATA3 transcription factor regulates 
trophoblast cell differentiation and is highly expressed in invasive murine
trophoblast giant cells. The regulation of trophoblastic invasion by GCM1 may
involve novel cellular factors. Here we show that GATA3 interacts with GCM1 and
inhibits its activity to suppress trophoblastic invasion. Immunohistochemistry
demonstrates that GATA3 and GCM1 are coexpressed in villous cytotrophoblast
cells, syncytiotrophoblast layer, and extravillous trophoblast cells of human
placenta. Interestingly, GATA3 interacts with GCM1, but not the GCM2 homologue,
through the DNA-binding domain and first transcriptional activation domain in
GCM1 and the transcriptional activation domains and zinc finger 1 domain in
GATA3. While GATA3 did not affect DNA-binding activity of GCM1, it suppressed
transcriptional activity of GCM1 and therefore HtrA4 promoter activity.
Correspondingly, GATA3 knockdown elevated HtrA4 expression in BeWo and JEG-3
trophoblast cell lines and enhanced the invasion activities of both lines. This
study uncovered a new GATA3 function in placenta as a negative regulator of GCM1 
activity and trophoblastic invasion.

PMCID: PMC4761948
PMID: 26899996  [PubMed - in process]


3. Bioessays. 2016 Mar;38(3):254-65. doi: 10.1002/bies.201500087. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

The basal chorionic trophoblast cell layer: An emerging coordinator of placenta
development.

Walentin K(1), Hinze C(1,)(2), Schmidt-Ott KM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. (2)Department of 
Nephrology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

During gestation, fetomaternal exchange occurs in the villous tree (labyrinth) of
the placenta. Development of this structure depends on tightly coordinated
cellular processes of branching morphogenesis and differentiation of specialized 
trophoblast cells. The basal chorionic trophoblast (BCT) cell layer that
localizes next to the chorioallantoic interface is of critical importance for
labyrinth morphogenesis in rodents. Gcm1-positive cell clusters within this layer
initiate branching morphogenesis thereby guiding allantoic fetal blood vessels
towards maternal blood sinuses. Later these cells differentiate and contribute to
the syncytiotrophoblast of the fetomaternal barrier. Additional cells within the 
BCT layer sustain continued morphogenesis, possibly through a repopulating
progenitor population. Several mouse mutants highlight the importance of a
structurally intact BCT epithelium, and a growing number of studies addresses its
patterning and epithelial architecture. Here, we review and discuss emerging
concepts in labyrinth development focussing on the biology of the BCT cell layer.

© 2016 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26778584  [PubMed - in process]


4. Endocrinology. 2016 Feb;157(2):883-99. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1696. Epub 2015 Dec
14.

Aberrant TGFß Signaling Contributes to Altered Trophoblast Differentiation in
Preeclampsia.

Xu J(1), Sivasubramaniyam T(1), Yinon Y(1), Tagliaferro A(1), Ray J(1), Nevo
O(1), Post M(1), Caniggia I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute (J.X., T.S., A.T., J.R., I.C.), Mt
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 3H7; Departments of Obstetrics and
Gynecology (Y.Y., O.N., I.C.), Physiology (T.S., J.R., M.P., I.C.), and
Pediatrics (M.P.), University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and Institute
of Medical Science (M.P.), The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5G 1X8.

TGFß has been implicated in preeclampsia, but its intracellular signaling via
phosphorylated mothers against decapentaplegic (SMADs) and SMAD-independent
proteins in the placenta remains elusive. Here we show that TGFß
receptor-regulated SMAD2 was activated (Ser(465/467) phosphorylation) in
syncytiotrophoblast and proliferating extravillous trophoblast cells of
first-trimester placenta, whereas inhibitory SMAD7 located primarily to
cytotrophoblast cells. SMAD2 phosphorylation decreased with advancing gestation, 
whereas SMAD7 expression increased and shifted to syncytiotrophoblasts toward
term. Additionally, we found that the TGFß SMAD-independent signaling via
partitioning defective protein 6 (PARD6)/Smad ubiquitylation regulatory factor
was activated at approximately 10-12 weeks of gestation in cytotrophoblast and
extravillous trophoblast cells comprising the anchoring column. Placentae from
early-onset, but not late-onset, preeclampsia exhibited elevated SMAD2
phosphorylation and SMAD7 levels. Whereas PARD6 expression increased and SMURF1
levels decreased in preeclamptic placentae, their association increased. SMAD2
phosphorylation by TGFß in villous explants and BeWo cells resulted in a
reduction of Glial cell missing-1 (GCM1) and fusogenic protein syncytin-1 while
increasing cell cycle regulators cyclin E-1 (CCNE1) and cyclin-dependent kinase
4. SMAD7 abrogated the proliferative effects of TGFß. CCNE1 levels were increased
in preeclamptic placentae, whereas GCM1 was markedly reduced. In addition, TGFß
treatment increased the association of PARD6 and SMURF1 and down-regulated Ras
homolog gene family, member A (RHOA) GTPase in JEG3 cells. In a wound assay, TGFß
treatment increased the association of PARD6 and SMURF1 and triggered JEG3 cell
migration through increased cellular protrusions. Taken together, our data
indicate that TGFß signaling via both SMAD2/7 and PARD6/SMURF1 pathways plays a
role in trophoblast growth and differentiation. Altered SMAD regulation of GCM1
and CCNE1 and aberrant expression/activation of PARD6/SMURF1 may contribute to
the pathogenesis of preeclampsia by affecting cellular pathways associated with
this disorder.

PMID: 26653761  [PubMed - in process]


5. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 26;36(1):197-209. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00655-15.

A Positive Feedback Loop between Glial Cells Missing 1 and Human Chorionic
Gonadotropin (hCG) Regulates Placental hCGß Expression and Cell Differentiation.

Cheong ML(1), Wang LJ(2), Chuang PY(3), Chang CW(2), Lee YS(4), Lo HF(3), Tsai
MS(5), Chen H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cathay General Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Biotechnology, Ming Chuan University, Tao-Yuan, 
Taiwan. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cathay General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang,
Taipei, Taiwan hwchen@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is composed of a common a subunit and a
placenta-specific ß subunit. Importantly, hCG is highly expressed in the
differentiated and multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast, which is formed via
trophoblast cell fusion and stimulated by cyclic AMP (cAMP). Although the
ubiquitous activating protein 2 (AP2) transcription factors TFAP2A and TFAP2C may
regulate hCGß expression, it remains unclear how cAMP stimulates
placenta-specific hCGß gene expression and trophoblastic differentiation. Here we
demonstrated that the placental transcription factor glial cells missing 1 (GCM1)
binds to a highly conserved promoter region in all six hCGß paralogues by
chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip (ChIP-chip) analyses. We further showed
that cAMP stimulates GCM1 and the CBP coactivator to activate the hCGß promoter
through a GCM1-binding site (GBS1), which also constitutes a previously
identified AP2 site. Given that TFAP2C may compete with GCM1 for GBS1, cAMP
enhances the association between the hCGß promoter and GCM1 but not TFAP2C.
Indeed, the hCG-cAMP-protein kinase A (PKA) signaling pathway also stimulates
Ser269 and Ser275 phosphorylation of GCM1, which recruits CBP to mediate GCM1
acetylation and stabilization. Consequently, hCG stimulates the expression of
GCM1 target genes, including the fusogenic protein syncytin-1, to promote
placental cell fusion. Our study reveals a positive feedback loop between GCM1
and hCG regulating placental hCGß expression and cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702603 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26503785  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 12;10(8):e0135089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135089.
eCollection 2015.

Differential Effects of Sodium Butyrate and Lithium Chloride on Rhesus Monkey
Trophoblast Differentiation.

Kumar P(1), Thirkill TL(1), Ji J(1), Monte LH(1), Douglas GC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, University
of California Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.

Trophoblast differentiation during early placental development is critical for
successful pregnancy and aberrant differentiation causes preeclampsia and early
pregnancy loss. During the first trimester, cytotrophoblasts are exposed to low
oxygen tension (equivalent to~2%-3% O2) and differentiation proceeds along an
extravillous pathway (giving rise to invasive extravillous cytotrophoblasts) and 
a villous pathway (giving rise to multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast).
Interstitial extravillous cytotrophoblasts invade the decidua, while endovascular
extravillous cytotrophoblasts are involved in re-modelling uterine spiral
arteries. We tested the idea that sodium butyrate (an epigenetic modulator)
induces trophoblast differentiation in early gestation rhesus monkey trophoblasts
through activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. The results show that
syncytiotrophoblast formation was increased by butyrate, accompanied by nuclear
accumulation of ß-catenin, and increased expression of EnvV2 and galectin-1 (two 
factors thought to be involved in trophoblast fusion). Surprisingly, the
expression of GCM1 and syncytin-2 was not affected by sodium butyrate. When
trophoblasts were incubated with lithium chloride, a GSK3 inhibitor that mimics
Wnt activation, nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin also occurred but
differentiation into syncytiotrophoblast was not observed. Instead the cells
differentiated to mononucleated spindle-shaped cells and showed molecular and
behavioral characteristics of endovascular trophoblasts. Another highly specific 
inhibitor of GSK3, CHIR99021, failed to induce endovascular trophoblast
characteristics. These observations suggest that activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin 
pathway correlates with both trophoblast differentiation pathways, but that
additional factors determine specific cell fate decisions. Other experiments
suggested that the differential effects of sodium butyrate and lithium chloride
might be explained by their effects on TNFa production. The results provide
valuable tools to manipulate trophoblast differentiation in vitro and to better
understand the differentiation pathways that occur during early gestation.

PMCID: PMC4533975
PMID: 26266541  [PubMed - in process]


7. Placenta. 2015 Sep;36(9):974-80. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2015.07.122. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

MTA3 regulates differentiation of human cytotrophoblast stem cells.

Horii M(1), Moretto-Zita M(1), Nelson KK(1), Li Y(1), Parast MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Sanford Consortium
for Regenerative Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. Electronic address: mparast@ucsd.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Early placental development depends on the correct balance of
cytotrophoblast (CTB) proliferation and differentiation, into either
syncytiotrophoblast (STB) involved in nutrient/gas exchange, or invasive
extravillous trophoblast (EVT) involved in establishment of blood flow to the
placenta. Metastasis associated protein-3 (MTA3) is a transcriptional
co-repressor known to regulate cell migration. In addition, MTA3 is reportedly
decreased in preeclampsia. We set out to investigate the role of MTA3 in human
trophoblast differentiation.
METHODS: We co-stained first and third trimester placental sections with
antibodies to MTA3 and other trophoblast markers. We also evaluated MTA3
expression following in vitro differentiation of primary isolated CTB. In order
to evaluate the role of MTA3 in trophoblast differentiation, we used lentiviral
constructs to overexpress and knock down its expression. Trophoblast
differentiation was assessed by a combination of marker expression and functional
assays, including hCG ELISA and cell migration.
RESULTS: MTA3 was abundantly expressed in CTB and proximal cell column EVT in the
human placenta and decreased with further differentiation into STB and mature
EVT. MTA3 knockdown in JEG3 resulted in a 2-3 fold decrease in STB markers, CGB
and GCM1, as well as in hCG secretion. In terms of EVT differentiation, MTA3
knockdown led to a 1.5-2 fold increase in HLA-G and cell migration, but decreased
the mature EVT marker ITGA1.
DISCUSSION: Taken together, our data suggest a role for MTA3 in terminal
trophoblast differentiation into both hCG-secreting STB and mature EVT.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4554833 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26198267  [PubMed - in process]


8. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2015 Jul 9;13:71. doi: 10.1186/s12958-015-0070-8.

Isolation, purification and in vitro differentiation of cytotrophoblast cells
from human term placenta.

Li L(1,)(2), Schust DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, University of
Missouri School of Medicine, 500 N. Keene Street, Columbia, MO, USA.
doctorlipingli@foxmail.com. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Guangzhou
Medical University Affiliated Guangzhou First People's Hospital, 1 Panfu Road,
Guangzhou, China. doctorlipingli@foxmail.com. (3)Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology and Women's Health, University of Missouri School of Medicine, 500 N. 
Keene Street, Columbia, MO, USA. schustd@health.missouri.edu.

BACKGROUND: The syncytialization of cytotrophoblast cells to syncytiotrophoblast 
is central to human placental transport and hormone production. Many techniques
for in vitro study of this process have been proposed and new investigators to
the field may find the literature in the field daunting. Here, we present a
straightforward and reliable method to establish this important model using
modern but readily available tools and reagents.
METHODS: Villous cytotrophoblast cells are obtained from term placenta using mild
enzymatic degradation, Percoll gradient centrifugation, negative magnetic cell
sorting using an antibody against classical major histocompatibility complex
molecules and in vitro culture on a matrix-coated growth surface.
RESULTS: The purity of isolated cytotrophoblast cells exceeds 98 % as assessed by
cytokeratin-7 expression using flow cytometry. Contamination by mesenchymal
cells, extravillous trophoblast cells, leukocytes, Hofbauer and endothelial cells
is minimized (less than 2 % when analyzed for vimentin, HLA-G, CD45, CD163 and
CD31 using flow cytometry). Isolated cytotrophoblast cells began to aggregate
into monolayers of mononucleated cells within about 12 h of plating. By 72 h in
culture, most cytotrophoblast cells have differentiated into syncytiotrophoblast 
as demonstrated by a loss of intercellular E-cadherin expression upon fusion into
multinucleated syncytia. After 72 h in culture, nearly every cultured cell
expresses syncytiotrophoblast markers, including cytokeratin-7, human chorionic
gonadotropin-ß (ß-hCG) and the fusion-related proteins glial cell missing-1
(GCM-1) and syncytin.
CONCLUSIONS: We present an efficient and reliable method for isolating of
cytotrophoblast cells with high purity and complete differentiation into
syncytiotrophoblast in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4497497
PMID: 26156160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Pathol Oncol Res. 2015 Jul;21(3):659-68. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9872-9. Epub
2015 Jan 13.

Activation of villous trophoblastic p38 and ERK1/2 signaling pathways in preterm 
preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome.

Szabo S(1), Mody M, Romero R, Xu Y, Karaszi K, Mihalik N, Xu Z, Bhatti G, Fule T,
Hupuczi P, Krenacs T, Rigo J Jr, Tarca AL, Hassan SS, Chaiworapongsa T, Kovalszky
I, Papp Z, Than NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology and Physiology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Preterm preeclampsia is associated with the failure of trophoblast invasion,
placental hypoxic/ischemic injury and the release of toxic substances, which
promote the terminal pathway of preeclampsia. In term preeclampsia, factors yet
unknown trigger the placenta to induce the terminal pathway. The contribution of 
the villous trophoblast to these pathologic events has not been fully elucidated.
Here we aimed to study how stress and signaling pathways influence trophoblastic 
functions in various subforms of preeclampsia. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were
constructed from placentas obtained from pregnant women in the following groups: 
1-2) preterm preeclampsia with (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8) or without (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>7) HELLP syndrome; 3)
late-onset preeclampsia (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8); 4-5) preterm (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5) and term (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>9) controls. 
TMA slides were stained for phosphorylated Akt-1, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38 kinases,
and trophoblastic immunostainings were semi-quantitatively evaluated. BeWo cells 
were kept in various stress conditions, and the expression of FLT1, GCM1, LEP,
and PGF was profiled by qRT-PCR, while Akt-1, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38 kinase
activities were measured with phospho-kinase immunoassays. We found that: 1)
Placental LEP and FLT1 expression was up-regulated in preterm preeclampsia with
or without HELLP syndrome compared to controls; 2) Mean pp38 immunoscore was
higher in preterm preeclampsia, especially in cases with HELLP syndrome, than in 
controls. 3) Mean pERK1/2 immunoscore was higher in preterm preeclampsia with
HELLP syndrome than in controls. 4) In BeWo cells, ischemia up-regulated LEP
expression, and it increased JNK and decreased ERK1/2 activity. 5) Hypoxia
up-regulated FLT1 and down-regulated PGF expression, and it increased ERK1/2, JNK
and p38 activity. 6) IL-1ß treatment down-regulated PGF expression, and it
increased JNK and p38 activity. 7) The p38 signaling pathway had the most impact 
on LEP, FLT1 and PGF expression. In conclusion, hypoxic and ischemic stress,
along with unknown factors, activates trophoblastic p38 signaling, which has a
key role in villous trophoblastic functional changes in preterm preeclampsia. The
activation of ERK1/2 signaling may induce additional trophoblastic functional
changes in HELLP syndrome, while distinct mechanisms may promote late-onset
preeclampsia.

PMID: 25583406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Mar;21(3):271-80. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau104. Epub 2014 Nov 
11.

Human embryonic stem cells carrying an unbalanced translocation demonstrate
impaired differentiation into trophoblasts: an in vitro model of human
implantation failure.

Shpiz A(1), Kalma Y(2), Frumkin T(2), Telias M(2), Carmon A(2), Amit A(2),
Ben-Yosef D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wolfe PGD Stem Cell Lab, Racine IVF Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel-Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Wolfe PGD Stem Cell Lab, Racine IVF Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel-Aviv
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. (3)Wolfe PGD Stem Cell Lab, Racine IVF
Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel 
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel dalitb@tlvmc.gov.il.

Carriers of the balanced translocation t(11;22), the most common reciprocal
translocation in humans, are at high risk of creating gametes with unbalanced
translocation, leading to repeated miscarriages. Current research models for
studying translocated embryos and the biological basis for their implantation
failure are limited. The aim of this study was to elucidate whether human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) carrying the unbalanced chromosomal translocation
t(11;22) can provide an explanation for repeated miscarriages of unbalanced
translocated embryos. Fluorescent in situ hybridization and karyotype analysis
were performed to analyze the t(11;22) in embryos during PGD and in the derived
hESC line. The hESC line was characterized by RT-PCR and FACS analysis for
pluripotent markers. Directed differentiation to trophoblasts was carried out by 
bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4). Trophoblast development was analyzed by
measuring ß-hCG secretion, by ß-hCG immunostaining and by gene expression of
trophoblastic markers. We derived the first hESC line carrying unbalanced
t(11;22), which showed the typical morphological and molecular characteristics of
a hESC line. Control hESCs differentiated into trophoblasts secreted increasing
levels of ß-hCG and concomitantly expressed the trophoblast genes, CDX2, TP63,
KRT7, ERVW1, CGA, GCM1, KLF4 and PPARG. In contrast, differentiated translocated 
hESCs displayed reduced and delayed secretion of ß-hCG concomitant with impaired 
expression of the trophoblastic genes. The reduced activation of trophoblastic
genes may be responsible for the impaired trophoblastic differentiation in
t(11;22)-hESCs, associated with implantation failure in unbalanced t(11;22)
embryos. Our t(11;22) hESCs are presented as a valuable human model for studying 
the mechanisms underlying implantation failure.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25391299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Histochem Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;143(4):381-96. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1294-y. Epub
2014 Nov 2.

Phospholipid scramblase 1 (PLSCR1) in villous trophoblast of the human placenta.

Berghold VM(1), Gauster M, Hemmings DG, Moser G, Kremshofer J, Siwetz M, Sundl M,
Huppertz B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology, Medical University of
Graz, Harrachgasse 21/VII, 8010, Graz, Austria.

A crucial factor for effective villous trophoblast fusion in the human placenta
is the transient deregulation of plasma membrane phospholipid asymmetry leading
to externalization of phosphatidylserine to the outer membrane leaflet. Screening
of scramblase family members implicated in the collapse of phospholipid asymmetry
revealed that phospholipid scramblase 1 (PLSCR1) is strongly expressed in villous
trophoblast. Therefore, we assessed the putative role of PLSCR1 in villous
trophoblast fusion. Spatio-temporal analysis in first trimester and term placenta
showed abundant expression of PLSCR1 in syncytiotrophoblast, macrophages and
endothelial cells, while it was virtually absent in villous cytotrophoblasts. For
functional studies, BeWo cells, isolated primary term trophoblasts and first
trimester villous explants were used. During forskolin-mediated BeWo cell
differentiation, neither PLSCR1 mRNA nor protein levels showed significant
changes. In contrast, when primary trophoblasts were stimulated with Br-cAMP, a
decrease in PLSCR1 mRNA and protein expression was observed. To elucidate a role 
for PLSCR1 in syncytialization, we used RNA interference and a chemical
scramblase inhibitor, R5421 (ethanedioic acid). Silencing of PLSCR1 using siRNA
had no effects while inhibition of scramblase activity by R5421 increased GCM-1
mRNA expression, beta-hCG protein secretion and fusion rates of BeWo cells. In
primary trophoblasts and villous explants, no effects of siRNA or R5421 treatment
on fusion were detected. This study provides data on PLSCR1 localization and
general expression in the human placenta. The data make it tempting to speculate 
on a role of PLSCR1 in negatively regulating trophoblast fusion.

PMID: 25362260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Placenta. 2014 Nov;35(11):855-65. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2014.07.015. Epub 2014 
Aug 26.

Evolutionary origins of the placental expression of chromosome 19 cluster
galectins and their complex dysregulation in preeclampsia.

Than NG(1), Romero R(2), Xu Y(3), Erez O(4), Xu Z(3), Bhatti G(3), Leavitt R(5), 
Chung TH(5), El-Azzamy H(3), LaJeunesse C(3), Wang B(3), Balogh A(6), Szalai
G(3), Land S(7), Dong Z(3), Hassan SS(8), Chaiworapongsa T(8), Krispin M(5), Kim 
CJ(9), Tarca AL(10), Papp Z(11), Bohn H(12).

Author information: 
(1)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and Detroit, MI, USA;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA; Maternity Private Department, Kutvolgyi Clinical
Block, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary; Institute of Enzymology,
Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest,
Hungary. Electronic address: nthan@med.wayne.edu. (2)Perinatology Research
Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Bethesda, MD, and Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address:
romeror@mail.nih.gov. (3)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and Detroit, 
MI, USA. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ben-Gurion University,
Beer-Sheva, Israel. (5)Zymo Research Corporation, Irvine, CA, USA.
(6)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and Detroit, MI, USA;
Department of Immunology, Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest, Hungary. (7)Center 
for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(8)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and Detroit, MI, USA;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. (9)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD,
and Detroit, MI, USA; Department of Pathology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. (10)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD,
and Detroit, MI, USA; Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI, USA. (11)Maternity Private Department, Kutvolgyi
Clinical Block, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. (12)Behringwerke AG,
Marburg/Lahn, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: The dysregulation of maternal-fetal immune tolerance is one of the 
proposed mechanisms leading to preeclampsia. Galectins are key regulator proteins
of the immune response in vertebrates and maternal-fetal immune tolerance in
eutherian mammals. Previously we found that three genes in a Chr19 cluster
encoding for human placental galectin-13 (PP13), galectin-14 and galectin-16
emerged during primate evolution and may confer immune tolerance to the
semi-allogeneic fetus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study involved various methodologies for gene and
protein expression profiling, genomic DNA methylation analyses, functional assays
on differentiating trophoblasts including gene silencing, luciferase reporter and
methylation assays. These methods were applied on placental specimens, umbilical 
cord blood cells, primary trophoblasts and BeWo cells. Genomic DNA sequences were
analyzed for transposable elements, transcription factor binding sites and
evolutionary conservation.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The villous trophoblastic expression of Chr19 cluster
galectin genes is developmentally regulated by DNA methylation and induced by key
transcription factors of villous placental development during trophoblast fusion 
and differentiation. This latter mechanism arose via the co-option of binding
sites for these transcription factors through promoter evolution and the
insertion of an anthropoid-specific L1PREC2 transposable element into the 5'
untranslated region of an ancestral gene followed by gene duplication events.
Among placental Chr19 cluster galectin genes, the expression of LGALS13 and
LGALS14 is down-regulated in preterm severe preeclampsia associated with SGA. We 
reveal that this phenomenon is partly originated from the dysregulated expression
of key transcription factors controlling trophoblastic functions and galectin
gene expression. In addition, the differential DNA methylation of these genes was
also observed in preterm preeclampsia irrespective of SGA.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal the evolutionary origins of the placental
expression of Chr19 cluster galectins. The complex dysregulation of these genes
in preeclampsia may alter immune tolerance mechanisms at the maternal-fetal
interface.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4203431
PMID: 25266889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Nov;13(3 Pt A):478-91. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.07.007. Epub
2014 Jul 30.

Hypoxic stress induces, but cannot sustain trophoblast stem cell differentiation 
to labyrinthine placenta due to mitochondrial insufficiency.

Xie Y(1), Zhou S(2), Jiang Z(1), Dai J(1), Puscheck EE(2), Lee I(3), Parker G(4),
Hüttemann M(5), Rappolee DA(6).

Author information: 
(1)CS Mott Center for Human Growth and Development, Department of Ob/Gyn,
Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (2)CS Mott Center for Human Growth and
Development, Department of Ob/Gyn, Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Program for
Reproductive Sciences, Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (3)College of Medicine, Dankook University,
Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do 330-714, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Pediatrics and Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State University School of 
Medicine, USA. (5)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, USA. (6)CS Mott Center for Human Growth and
Development, Department of Ob/Gyn, Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Program for
Reproductive Sciences, Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, USA; Institutes for Environmental Health Science, 
Wayne State University School of Medicine, USA; Department of Biology, University
of Windsor, Windsor, ON N9B 3P4, Canada. Electronic address:
drappole@med.wayne.edu.

Dysfunctional stem cell differentiation into placental lineages is associated
with gestational diseases. Of the differentiated lineages available to
trophoblast stem cells (TSC), elevated O2 and mitochondrial function are
necessary to placental lineages at the maternal-placental surface and important
in the etiology of preeclampsia. TSC lineage imbalance leads to embryonic failure
during uterine implantation. Stress at implantation exacerbates stem cell
depletion by decreasing proliferation and increasing differentiation. In an
implantation site O2 is normally ~2%. In culture, exposure to 2% O2 and
fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4) enabled the highest mouse TSC multipotency and 
proliferation. In contrast, hypoxic stress (0.5% O2) initiated the most TSC
differentiation after 24h despite exposure to FGF4. However, hypoxic stress
supported differentiation poorly after 4-7 days, despite FGF4 removal. At all
tested O2 levels, FGF4 maintained Warburg metabolism; mitochondrial inactivity
and aerobic glycolysis. However, hypoxic stress suppressed mitochondrial membrane
potential and maintained low mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase (oxidative
phosphorylation/OxPhos), and high pyruvate kinase M2 (glycolysis) despite FGF4
removal. Inhibiting OxPhos inhibited optimum differentiation at 20% O2. Moreover,
adding differentiation-inducing hyperosmolar stress failed to induce
differentiation during hypoxia. Thus, differentiation depended on OxPhos at 20%
O2; hypoxic and hyperosmolar stresses did not induce differentiation at 0.5% O2. 
Hypoxia-limited differentiation and mitochondrial inhibition and activation
suggest that differentiation into two lineages of the labyrinthine placenta
requires O2>0.5-2% and mitochondrial function. Stress-activated protein kinase
increases an early lineage and suppresses later lineages in proportion to the
deviation from optimal O2 for multipotency, thus it is the first enzyme reported 
to prioritize differentiation.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4253717
PMID: 25239494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Environ Sci Health B. 2014;49(11):797-810. doi: 10.1080/03601234.2014.938546.

Levels and risk assessment of chemical contaminants in byproducts for animal feed
in Denmark.

Mortensen A(1), Granby K, Eriksen FD, Cederberg TL, Friis-Wandall S, Simonsen Y, 
Broesbøl-Jensen B, Bonnichsen R.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Toxicology and Risk Assessment, National Food Institute, DTU ,
Søborg , Denmark.

With aim to provide information on chemical contaminants in byproducts in animal 
feed, the data from an official control by the Danish Plant Directorate during
1998-2009, were reviewed and several samples of citrus pulp and dried distillers 
grains with solubles (DDGS) were additionally collected for analysis and risk
assessment. The levels of contaminants in the samples from the official control
were below maximum limits from EU regulations with only a few exceptions in the
following groups; dioxins and dioxin-like polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs) in
fish-containing byproducts and dioxins in vegetable and animal fat, hydrogen
cyanide in linseed, and cadmium in sunflowers. The levels of pesticides and
mycotoxins in the additionally collected samples were below maximum limits.
Enniatin B (ENN B) was present in all DDGS samples. The hypothetical cases of
carry-over of contamination from these byproducts were designed assuming total
absorption and accumulation of the ingested contaminant in meat and milk and high
exposure (a byproduct formed 15-20% of the feed ration depending on the species).
The risk assessment was refined based on literature data on metabolism in
relevant animal species. Risk assessment of contaminants in byproducts is
generally based on a worst-case approach, as data on carry-over of a contaminant 
are sparse. This may lead to erroneous estimation of health hazards. The presence
of ENN B in all samples of DDGS indicates that potential impact of this emerging 
mycotoxin on feed and food safety deserves attention. A challenge for the future 
is to fill up gaps in toxicological databases and improve models for carry-over
of contaminants.

PMID: 25190554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 3;9(9):e104728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104728. eCollection
2014.

Role of the vasohibin family in the regulation of fetoplacental vascularization
and syncytiotrophoblast formation.

Suenaga K(1), Kitahara S(2), Suzuki Y(3), Kobayashi M(3), Horie S(3), Sugawara
J(4), Yaegashi N(4), Sato Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Institute of Development, Aging, and Cancer,
Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan; Department of Obstetrics &
Gynecology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Women's Medical
University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Vascular Biology,
Institute of Development, Aging, and Cancer, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 
Miyagi, Japan. (4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Tohoku University School
of Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan; Tohoku Medical Megabank
Organization, Tohoku University, Aobaku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Vasohibin-1 (VASH1) and vasohibin-2 (VASH2), the 2 members of the vasohibin
family, have been identified as novel regulators of angiogenesis. VASH1 ceases
angiogenesis, whereas VASH2 stimulates sprouting. Here we characterized their
functional role in the placenta. Immunohistochemical analysis of human placental 
tissue clarified their distinctive localization; VASH1 in endothelial cells and
VASH2 in trophoblasts. We then used a mouse model to explore their function.
Wild-type, Vash1((-/-)), and Vash2((-/-)) mice on a C57BL6 background were used
in their first pregnancy. As expected, the fetal vascular area was increased in
the Vash1((-/-)) mice, whereas it was decreased in the Vash2((-/-)) mice relative
to wild-type. In addition, we noticed that the Vash2((-/-)) mice at 18.5dpc
displayed thinner villi of the labyrinth and larger maternal lacunae. Careful
observation by an electron microscopy revealed that the syncytiotrophoblast
formation was defective in the Vash2((-/-)) mice. To test the possible
involvement of VASH2 in the syncytiotrophoblast formation, we examined the fusion
of BeWo cells, a human trophoblastoid choriocarcinoma cell line. The forskolin
treatment induced the fusion of BeWo cells, and the knockdown of VASH2 expression
significantly inhibited this cell fusion. Conversely, the overexpression of VASH2
by the infection with adenovirus vector encoding human VASH2 gene significantly
increased the fusion of BeWo cells. Glial cell missing-1 and endogenous
retrovirus envelope glycoprotein Syncytin 1 and Syncytin 2 are known to be
involved in the fusion of trophoblasts. However, VASH2 did not alter their
expression in BeWo cells. These results indicate that VASH1 and VASH2 showed
distinctive localization and opposing function on the fetoplacental
vascularization. Moreover, our study shows for the first time that VASH2
expressed in trophoblasts is involved in the regulation of cell fusion for
syncytiotrophoblast formation.

PMCID: PMC4153575
PMID: 25184477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Development. 2014 Jul;141(14):2825-37. doi: 10.1242/dev.107409. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Essential role of the ERK/MAPK pathway in blood-placental barrier formation.

Nadeau V(1), Charron J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9 rue McMahon, Québec, QC,
Canada G1R 2J6. (2)Centre de recherche sur le cancer de l'Université Laval,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9 rue
McMahon, Québec, QC, Canada G1R 2J6 jean.charron@crhdq.ulaval.ca.

The mammalian genome contains two ERK/MAP kinase kinase genes, Map2k1 and Map2k2,
which encode dual-specificity kinases responsible for ERK activation. Loss of
Map2k1 function in mouse causes embryonic lethality due to placental defects,
whereas Map2k2 mutants have a normal lifespan. The majority of Map2k1(+/-)
Map2k2(+/-) embryos die during gestation from the underdevelopment of the
placenta labyrinth, demonstrating that both kinases are involved in placenta
formation. Map2k1(+/-) Map2k2(+/-) mutants show reduced vascularization of the
labyrinth and defective formation of syncytiotrophoblast layer II (SynT-II)
leading to the accumulation of multinucleated trophoblast giant cells (MTGs). To 
define the cell type-specific contribution of the ERK/MAPK pathway to placenta
development, we performed deletions of Map2k1 function in different Map2k1 Map2k2
allelic backgrounds. Loss of MAP kinase kinase activity in pericytes or in
allantois-derived tissues worsens the MTG phenotype. These results define the
contribution of the ERK/MAPK pathway in specific embryonic and extraembryonic
cell populations for normal placentation. Our data also indicate that MTGs could 
result from the aberrant fusion of SynT-I and -II. Using mouse genetics, we
demonstrate that the normal development of SynT-I into a thin layer of
multinucleated cells depends on the presence of SynT-II. Lastly, the combined
mutations of Map2k1 and Map2k2 alter the expression of several genes involved in 
cell fate specification, cell fusion and cell polarity. Thus, appropriate
ERK/MAPK signaling in defined cell types is required for the proper growth,
differentiation and morphogenesis of the placenta.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24948605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Hypertens. 2014 Aug;32(8):1553-61; discussion 1561. doi:
10.1097/HJH.0000000000000212.

The potential impact of the fetal genotype on maternal blood pressure during
pregnancy.

Petry CJ(1), Beardsall K, Dunger DB.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge bNeonatal Unit, Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust cMedical Research Laboratories,
Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2015 Mar;33(3):664-5.

The heritability of pregnancy-induced hypertension (encompassing both gestational
hypertension and preeclampsia) is around 0.47, suggesting that there is a genetic
component to its development. However, the maternal genetic risk variants
discovered so far only account for a small proportion of the heritability. Other 
genetic variants that may affect maternal blood pressure in pregnancy arise from 
the fetal genome, for example wild-type pregnant mice carrying offspring with
Cdkn1c or Stox1 disrupted develop hypertension and proteinuria. In humans, there 
is a higher risk for preeclampsia in women carrying fetuses with
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (including those fetuses with CDKN1C mutations) and a
lower risk for women carrying babies with trisomy 21. Other risk may be
associated with imprinted fetal growth genes and genes that are highly expressed 
in the placenta such as GCM1. This article reviews the current state of knowledge
linking the fetal genotype with maternal blood pressure in pregnancy.

PMID: 24842698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biol Reprod. 2014 Apr 25;90(4):83. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.113910. Print 2014
Apr.

Preconception zinc deficiency disrupts postimplantation fetal and placental
development in mice.

Tian X(1), Anthony K, Neuberger T, Diaz FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology and Health and Department of Animal Science,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania.

Zinc is an essential nutrient for optimal fertility, but the effects of
preconception zinc deficiency on postimplantation development are not known.
Female mice were fed a control or a zinc-deficient diet (ZDD) for 4-5 days before
ovulation (preconception). Embryonic and/or placental development were evaluated 
on Days 3.5, 6.5, 10.5, 12.5, and 16.5 of pregnancy. The findings show a decrease
in embryo length (31%, Day 10.5; 13%, Day 12.5; 10%, Day 16.5) and weight (23%,
Day 16.5) in embryos from mothers fed a ZDD preconception. Zinc deficiency also
caused a high incidence of pregnancy loss (46%, Day 10.5; 34%, Day 12.5; 51%, Day
16.5) compared to control (2%, Day 10.5; 7%, Day 12.5; 9%, Day 16.5). ZDD embryos
transferred to normal recipients were 38% smaller and implantation rate was only 
10% compared to 40% for controls. Trophoblast cell differentiation and
implantation on Day 6.5 of pregnancy were compromised by preconception zinc
deficiency. On Day 12.5 of pregnancy, placenta weight and area of fetal placenta 
were decreased 37% and 31%, respectively, by preconception zinc deficiency.
Consistent with a smaller fetal placenta, expression of key placental
transcripts, including Ar, Esx1, Syna, Tfeb, Dlx3, and Gcm1 mRNA, but not Ctsq
mRNA, were decreased 30%-70% in the ZDD group. Preconception zinc deficiency
caused 41%-57% of embryos to exhibit delayed or aberrant neural tube development,
as examined by light microscopy and magnetic resonance imaging. Collectively, the
findings provide evidence for the importance of preconception zinc in promoting
optimal fertility and oocyte developmental potential.

PMCID: PMC4076385
PMID: 24599289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 18;111(11):4043-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1318869111. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Molecular mechanism and structure of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae iron regulator 
Aft2.

Poor CB(1), Wegner SV, Li H, Dlouhy AC, Schuermann JP, Sanishvili R, Hinshaw JR, 
Riggs-Gelasco PJ, Outten CE, He C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, The University
of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.

The paralogous iron-responsive transcription factors Aft1 and Aft2 (activators of
ferrous transport) regulate iron homeostasis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by
activating expression of iron-uptake and -transport genes when intracellular iron
is low. We present the previously unidentified crystal structure of Aft2 bound to
DNA that reveals the mechanism of DNA recognition via specific interactions of
the iron-responsive element with a Zn(2+)-containing WRKY-GCM1 domain in Aft2. We
also show that two Aft2 monomers bind a [2Fe-2S] cluster (or Fe(2+)) through a
Cys-Asp-Cys motif, leading to dimerization of Aft2 and decreased DNA-binding
affinity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the [2Fe-2S]-bridged heterodimer
formed between glutaredoxin-3 and the BolA-like protein Fe repressor of
activation-2 transfers a [2Fe-2S] cluster to Aft2 that facilitates Aft2
dimerization. Previous in vivo findings strongly support the [2Fe-2S]
cluster-induced dimerization model; however, given the available evidence,
Fe(2+)-induced Aft2 dimerization cannot be completely ruled out as an alternative
Aft2 inhibition mechanism. Taken together, these data provide insight into the
molecular mechanism for iron-dependent transcriptional regulation of Aft2 and
highlight the key role of Fe-S clusters as cellular iron signals.

PMCID: PMC3964038
PMID: 24591629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):4328-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03628-13. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Transcriptional derepression of the ERVWE1 locus following influenza A virus
infection.

Li F(1), Nellåker C, Sabunciyan S, Yolken RH, Jones-Brando L, Johansson AS,
Owe-Larsson B, Karlsson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Syncytin-1, a fusogenic protein encoded by a human endogenous retrovirus of the W
family (HERV-W) element (ERVWE1), is expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast layer
of the placenta. This locus is transcriptionally repressed in adult tissues
through promoter CpG methylation and suppressive histone modifications. Whereas
syncytin-1 appears to be crucial for the development and functioning of the human
placenta, its ectopic expression has been associated with pathological
conditions, such as multiple sclerosis and schizophrenia. We previously reported 
on the transactivation of HERV-W elements, including ERVWE1, during influenza
A/WSN/33 virus infection in a range of human cell lines. Here we report the
results of quantitative PCR analyses of transcripts encoding syncytin-1 in both
cell lines and primary fibroblast cells. We observed that spliced ERVWE1
transcripts and those encoding the transcription factor glial cells missing 1
(GCM1), acting as an enhancer element upstream of ERVWE1, are prominently
upregulated in response to influenza A/WSN/33 virus infection in nonplacental
cells. Knockdown of GCM1 by small interfering RNA followed by infection
suppressed the transactivation of ERVWE1. While the infection had no influence on
CpG methylation in the ERVWE1 promoter, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
detected decreased H3K9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) and histone methyltransferase
SETDB1 levels along with influenza virus proteins associated with ERVWE1 and
other HERV-W loci in infected CCF-STTG1 cells. The present findings suggest that 
an exogenous influenza virus infection can transactivate ERVWE1 by increasing
transcription of GCM1 and reducing H3K9me3 in this region and in other regions
harboring HERV-W elements.IMPORTANCE: Syncytin-1, a protein encoded by the env
gene in the HERV-W locus ERVWE1, appears to be crucial for the development and
functioning of the human placenta and is transcriptionally repressed in
nonplacental tissues. Nevertheless, its ectopic expression has been associated
with pathological conditions, such as multiple sclerosis and schizophrenia. In
the present paper, we report findings suggesting that an exogenous influenza A
virus infection can transactivate ERVWE1 by increasing the transcription of GCM1 
and reducing the repressive histone mark H3K9me3 in this region and in other
regions harboring HERV-W elements. These observations have implications of
potential relevance for viral pathogenesis and for conditions associated with the
aberrant transcription of HERV-W loci.

PMCID: PMC3993755
PMID: 24478419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Feb 15;306(4):E443-56. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00478.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Characterization of the adverse effects of nicotine on placental development: in 
vivo and in vitro studies.

Holloway AC(1), Salomon A, Soares MJ, Garnier V, Raha S, Sergent F, Nicholson CJ,
Feige JJ, Benharouga M, Alfaidy N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Grenoble, France;

In utero exposure to nicotine is associated with increased risk of numerous
adverse fetal and neonatal outcomes, which suggests that it acts directly to
affect placental development and the establishment of the fetomaternal
circulation (FC). This study used both in vivo [Wistar rats treated with 1 mg/kg 
nicotine from 2 wk prior to mating until gestational day (GD) 15] and in vitro
(RCHO-1 cell line; treated with 10(-9) to 10(-3)M nicotine) models to examine the
effects of nicotine on these pathways. At GD 15, control and treated placentas
were examined for the impact of nicotine on 1) trophoblast invasion,
proliferation, and degree of hypoxia, 2) labyrinth vascularization, 3) expression
of key genes of placental development, and 4) expression of placental angiogenic 
factors. The RCHO-1 cell line was used to determine the direct effects of
nicotine on trophoblast differentiation. Our in vivo experiments show that
nicotine inhibits trophoblast interstitial invasion, increases placental hypoxia,
downregulates labyrinth vascularization as well as key transcription factors
Hand1 and GCM1, and decreases local and circulating EG-VEGF, a key placental
angiogenic factor. The in vitro experiments confirmed the inhibitory effects of
nicotine on the trophoblast migration, invasion, and differentiation processes
and demonstrated that those effects are most likely due to a dysregulation in the
expression of nicotine receptors and a decrease in MMP9 activity. Taken together,
these data suggest that adverse effects of maternal smoking on pregnancy outcome 
are due in part to direct and endocrine effects of nicotine on the main processes
of placental development and establishment of FC.

PMID: 24368670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Anat Sci Int. 2014 Jan;89(1):11-20. doi: 10.1007/s12565-013-0214-x. Epub 2013 Nov
16.

Physiological functions of endoplasmic reticulum stress transducer OASIS in
central nervous system.

Saito A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
University of Hiroshima, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, 734-8553, Japan,
asaito@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Eukaryotic cells can adapt to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) dysfunction by producing
diverse signals from the ER to the cytosol or nucleus. These signaling pathways
are collectively known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). The canonical
branches of the UPR are mediated by three ER membrane-bound proteins:
double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR)-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase (PERK), inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1) and activating transcription
factor 6 (ATF6). These ER stress transducers basically play important roles in
cell survival after ER stress. Recently, novel types of ER stress transducers
that share a region of high sequence similarity with ATF6 have been identified.
They have a transmembrane domain, which allows them to associate with the ER, and
possess a transcription-activation domain and a basic leucine zipper (bZIP)
domain. These membrane-bound bZIP transcription factors include OASIS, BBF2H7
CREBH, CREB4 and Luman, and are collectively referred to as OASIS family members.
Despite their structural similarities with ATF6, differences in activating
stimuli and tissue distribution indicate specialized functions of each member on 
regulating UPR signaling in specific organs and tissues. One of them, OASIS, is
expressed preferentially in astrocytes in the central nervous system (CNS). OASIS
temporally regulates the differentiation from neural precursor cells into
astrocytes to promote the expression of Glial Cell Missing 1 through dynamic
interactions among OASIS family members followed by accelerating demethylation of
the Gfap promoter. This review is a summary of our current understanding of the
physiological functions of OASIS in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC3889286
PMID: 24242870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell Signal. 2014 Mar;26(3):648-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.11.002. Epub 2013
Nov 9.

Epigenetic and non-epigenetic regulation of syncytin-1 expression in human
placenta and cancer tissues.

Huang Q(1), Chen H(2), Li J(3), Oliver M(4), Ma X(5), Byck D(4), Gao Y(6), Jiang 
SW(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, China; Department of Biological Science, Mercer 
University School of Medicine, Savannah, GA 31404, USA. (2)Department of
Department of Histology and Embryology, Shantou University Medical College,
Guandong, China. (3)Department of Biological Science, Mercer University School of
Medicine, Savannah, GA 31404, USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mayo 
Medical College, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation, 55902, USA. (4)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Memorial Health University Medical Center, Savannah,
GA 31404, USA. (5)Department of Biological Science, Mercer University School of
Medicine, Savannah, GA 31404, USA. (6)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, China. Electronic 
address: ygao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn. (7)Department of Biological Science, Mercer
University School of Medicine, Savannah, GA 31404, USA; Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Mayo Medical College, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation, 55902,
USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Memorial Health University Medical 
Center, Savannah, GA 31404, USA. Electronic address: jiang_@mercer.edu.

Syncytin-1 is a human endogenous retroviral envelope gene (HERVW1) product
specifically expressed in placental trophoblasts. By mediating the formation of
syncytiotrophoblasts through cell-cell fusion, syncytin-1 plays a critical role
for the placental barrier, endocrine and exchange functions. During pregnancy,
syncytin-1 expression is dynamically regulated by various pathophysiological
factors and pathways. This review summarizes and examines published data on
epigenetic and non-epigenetic regulation of syncytin-1 gene expression, with a
focus on the changes of syncytin-1 DNA methylation and expression in placental
trophoblasts under preeclamptic and hypoxic conditions. The functions of
syncytiotrophoblasts, the fusogenic and non-fusogenic activities of syncytin-1,
and aberrant activation of syncytin-1 expression in cancer cells are also
discussed. New findings on the epigenetic regulation of syncytin-1 in placentas
from monozygotic/dichorionic discordant twins are analyzed. The close correlation
among changes of DNMTs expression, syncytin-1 gene methylation, and syncytin-1
mRNA levels, in placentas associated with discordant fetal growth indicated a
dynamic nature of syncytin-1 regulation.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24216608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Hum Reprod. 2013 Nov;19(11):745-55. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gat050. Epub 2013 Jul
18.

Involvement of Epac1/Rap1/CaMKI/HDAC5 signaling cascade in the regulation of
placental cell fusion.

Chang CW(1), Cheong ML, Chang GD, Tsai MS, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115,
Taiwan.

The placental transcription factor glial cell missing 1 (GCM1) and its target
gene syncytin-1 are involved in cAMP-stimulated trophoblastic fusion for
syncytiotrophoblast formation. GCM1 DNA-binding activity is inhibited by
sumoylation, whereas GCM1 stability is decreased by deacetylation. cAMP enhances 
GCM1 desumoylation through the Epac1/Rap1/CaMKI signaling cascade and CaMKI is
known to down-regulate class IIa HDAC activity. In this paper, we study whether
the Epac1/Rap1/CaMKI signaling cascade regulates GCM1 activity and placental cell
fusion through class IIa HDACs. Interaction and co-localization of GCM1 and HDAC5
were characterized by co-immunoprecipitation analysis and immunofluorescence
microscopy (IFM). Regulation of GCM1 transcription activity and syncytin-1
expression by HDAC5 was studied by transient expression. Phospho-specific
antibodies against HDAC5, RNA interference and IFM were used to examine the
de-repression of GCM1 activity, syncytin-1 expression and cell-cell fusion by
Epac1/Rap1/CaMKI signaling cascade in placental BeWo cells expressing
constitutively active Epac1 and CaMKI. We demonstrate that both GCM1 and HDAC5
are expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast layer of full-term placenta and the
nuclei of BeWo cells. The interaction between HDAC5 and GCM1 facilitates GCM1
deacetylation and suppresses its transcriptional activity. In contrast, Epac1
stimulates HDAC5 phosphorylation on Ser259 and Ser498 in a Rap1- and
CaMKI-dependent manner leading to nuclear export of HDAC5 and thereby
de-repression of GCM1 transcriptional activity. Importantly, HDAC5 suppresses
syncytin-1 expression and cell-cell fusion in BeWo cells, which is counteracted
by Epac1 and CaMKI. Our results reveal a new layer of regulation of GCM1 activity
and placental cell fusion through the Epac1/Rap1/CaMKI signaling cascade by
restraining HDAC5 from interacting with and mediating GCM1 deacetylation.

PMID: 23867755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Differentiation. 2013 Apr-Jun;85(4-5):150-60. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2013.02.002.
Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Regulation of murine placentogenesis by the retroviral genes Syncytin-A,
Syncytin-B and Peg10.

Henke C(1), Ruebner M, Faschingbauer F, Stolt CC, Schaefer N, Lang N, Beckmann
MW, Strissel PL, Strick R.

Author information: 
(1)University-Clinic Erlangen, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Universitaetsstr. 21-23, D-91054 Erlangen,
Germany.

The murine placenta has a trichorial structure with two multinucleated
syncytiotrophoblast (SCT) layers representing a barrier between the maternal and 
fetal blood system. Genes of endogenous retroviruses and retrotransposon-derived 
paternally expressed genes (Peg), remnants of past infections and integrations in
the genome, have essential functions in placentogenesis. Previous studies showed 
that the envelope genes Syncytin-A and Syncytin-B were essential for cell-cell
fusion of the SCT. The goal of this study was to analyze the temporal
localization and expression of nine genes throughout placental development from
embryonic day (E)8.5 to E18.5 using in situ-hybridization and absolute
RNA-quantification. These included a comparison of previously characterized genes
from the labyrinth Syncytin-A, Syncytin-B, Gcm1, the junctional zone PL-1, PL-2, 
Plf, Tpbpa with two further characterized genes Peg10 and Tpbpb. Syncytin-A and
Syncytin-B RNA localized to SCT-I and SCT-II, respectively. Peg10 RNA localized
to all extraembryonic tissues, specifically to the parietal and sinusoidal TGC of
the labyrinth layer, which is in contact with SCT-I and the maternal blood. All
three retroviral/retrotransposon-derived genes showed the highest expression at
E16.5, but Peg10 with 188,917.1 molecules/ng cDNA was 208-fold and 106.8-fold
higher expressed than Syncytin-A and Syncytin-B, respectively. Tpbpb localized to
the junctional zone and showed the highest expression at E16.5 along with PL-2,
Plf, Tpbpa, but not PL-1, which decreased in expression at E10.5. To investigate 
a role of Syncytin-A, Syncytin-B and Peg10 in cell-cell fusion, we established a 
cell culture system with fractionated primary trophoblasts from murine placentae.
Culturing trophoblasts for up to 72h partly resembled trophoblast development in 
vivo according to the nine marker genes. Knockdown of Syncytin-A demonstrated a
functional regulation of cell-cell fusion, where knockdown of Peg10 showed no
involvement in cell fusion. Due to the expression of Peg10 in TGCs, we propose an
essential functional role in the fetal-maternal blood system.

Copyright © 2013 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23807393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Microcirculation. 2014 Jan;21(1):48-57. doi: 10.1111/micc.12073.

Effects of genes and environment on the fetoplacental arterial microcirculation
in mice revealed by micro-computed tomography imaging.

Rennie MY(1), Sled JG, Adamson SL.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Research Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon,
USA.

The fetoplacental arterial tree is critical for efficient distribution of
arterial blood to capillaries throughout the placental exchange region; yet,
little is known about the factors and mechanisms that control its development.
Advances in micro-CT imaging and analysis, and available mutant mouse strains,
are facilitating rapid progress. Indeed, micro-CT studies show that genetic
differences between the CD1 and C57Bl/6 mouse strains, and between Gcm1
heterozygotes and wild-type littermates alter the developmental trajectory of the
fetoplacental arterial tree as do environmental factors including maternal
exposure to toxins in cigarette smoke and malarial infection. Relative to other
vascular beds, the fetoplacental arterial tree is particularly tractable because 
veins can more easily be excluded when infusing the contrast agent and because of
the placenta's small size, which means that the whole organ can be imaged
(maintaining connectivity) and that the tree is simpler (fewer branching
generations). Despite these differences, measured parameters were found to be
similar to arterial trees in other adult rodent organs. Thus, micro-CT analysis
provides a means for advancing of our understanding of the mechanisms controlling
development of the fetoplacental arterial tree. Results will likely have
relevance to other arterial vasculatures as well.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23799968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Sep;80(9):774-84. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22209. Epub 2013 Jul 19.

Reversible effects of oxygen partial pressure on genes associated with placental 
angiogenesis and differentiation in primary-term cytotrophoblast cell culture.

Debiève F(1), Depoix C, Gruson D, Hubinont C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Institut de Recherche Expérimental et Clinique,
Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

Timely regulated changes in oxygen partial pressure are important for placental
formation. Disturbances could be responsible for pregnancy-related diseases like 
preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. We aimed to (i) determine the
effect of oxygen partial pressure on cytotrophoblast differentiation; (ii)
measure mRNA expression and protein secretion from genes associated with
placental angiogenesis; and (iii) determine the reversibility of these effects at
different oxygen partial pressures. Term cytotrophoblasts were incubated at 21%
and 2.5% O2 for 96 hr, or were switched between the two oxygen concentrations
after 48 hr. Real-time PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) were
used to evaluate cell fusion and differentiation, measuring transcript levels for
those genes involved in cell fusion and placental angiogenesis, including VEGF,
PlGF, VEGFR1, sVEGFR1, sENG, INHA, and GCM1. Cytotrophoblasts underwent fusion
and differentiation in 2.5% O2 . PlGF expression was inhibited while sVEGFR1
expression increased. VEGF and sENG mRNA expressions increased in 2.5% compared
to 21% O2 , but no protein was detected in the cell supernatants. Finally, GCM1
mRNA expression increased during trophoblast differentiation at 21% O2 , but was 
inhibited at 2.5% O2 . These mRNA expression effects were reversed by returning
the cells to 21% O2 . Thus, low-oxygen partial pressure does not inhibit
term-cytotrophoblast cell fusion and differentiation in vitro. Lowering the
oxygen partial pressure from 21% to 2.5% caused normal-term trophoblasts to
reversibly modify their expression of genes associated with placental
angiogenesis. This suggests that modifications observed in pregnancy diseases
such as preeclampsia or growth retardation are probably due to an extrinsic
effect on trophoblasts.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23794249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2815-24. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0596. Epub 2013 
Jul 12.

Hypoxia and trophoblast differentiation: a key role for PPAR<U+03B3>.

Tache V(1), Ciric A, Moretto-Zita M, Li Y, Peng J, Maltepe E, Milstone DS, Parast
MM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California , Davis,
Sacramento, California.

Tissue oxygen tension regulates differentiation of multiple types of stem cells. 
In the placenta, hypoxia has been associated with abnormal trophoblast
differentiation and placental insufficiency syndromes of preeclampsia (PE) and
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) is a ligand-activated transcription factor involved in many
cellular processes, including differentiation. We have previously shown that
PPAR<U+03B3>-null trophoblast stem (TS) cells show a defect in differentiation to
labyrinthine trophoblast, instead differentiating preferentially to trophoblast
giant cells (TGC). Since PPAR<U+03B3> is known to be regulated by hypoxia in adipose
tissue, we hypothesized that there may be a link between oxygen tension, PPAR<U+03B3>
expression, and trophoblast differentiation. We found that hypoxia reduced PPAR<U+03B3> 
expression by a mechanism independent of both hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) and 
histone deacetylases (HDACs). In addition, PPAR<U+03B3> partially rescued
hypoxia-induced inhibition of labyrinthine differentiation in wild-type TS cells 
but was not required for hypoxia-induced inhibition of TGC differentiation.
Finally, we show that induction of labyrinthine trophoblast differentiation by
HDAC inhibitor treatment is independent of both PPAR<U+03B3> and Gcm1. We propose a
model with two pathways for labyrinthine trophoblast differentiation of TS cells,
one of which is dependent on PPAR<U+03B3> and inhibited by hypoxia. Since hypoxia is
associated with PE and IUGR, we propose that PPAR<U+03B3> may at least partially mediate
hypoxia-induced placental insufficiency and as such may be a promising
therapeutic target for these disorders.

PMCID: PMC3804243
PMID: 23767827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biochem J. 2013 Jul 15;453(2):201-8. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130175.

RACK1 (receptor for activated C-kinase 1) interacts with FBW2 (F-box and
WD-repeat domain-containing 2) to up-regulate GCM1 (glial cell missing 1)
stability and placental cell migration and invasion.

Wang CC(1), Lo HF, Lin SY, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115,
Taiwan.

GCM1 (glial cell missing 1) is a short-lived transcription factor essential for
placental development. The F-box protein, FBW2 (F-box and WD-repeat
domain-containing 2), which contains five WD (tryptophan-aspartate) repeats,
recognizes GCM1 and mediates its ubiquitination via the SCFFBW2 E3 ligase
complex. Although the interaction between GCM1 and FBW2 is facilitated by GCM1
phosphorylation, it is possible that this interaction might be regulated by
additional cellular factors. In the present study, we perform tandem-affinity
purification coupled with MS analysis identifying RACK1 (receptor for activated
C-kinase 1) as an FBW2-interacting protein. RACK1 is a multifaceted scaffold
protein containing seven WD repeats. We demonstrate that the WD repeats in both
RACK1 and FBW2 are required for the interaction of RACK1 and FBW2. Furthermore,
RACK1 competes with GCM1 for FBW2 and thereby prevents GCM1 ubiquitination, which
is also supported by the observation that GCM1 is destabilized in RACK1-knockdown
BeWo placental cells. Importantly, RACK1 knockdown leads to decreased expression 
of the GCM1 target gene HTRA4 (high-temperature requirement protein A4), which
encodes a serine protease crucial for cell migration and invasion. As a result,
migration and invasion activities are down-regulated in RACK1-knockdown BeWo
cells. The present study reveals a novel function for RACK1 to regulate GCM1
activity and placental cell migration and invasion.

PMID: 23651062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(4):e1001536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001536. Epub 2013 Apr 
16.

A positive feedback loop involving Gcm1 and Fzd5 directs chorionic branching
morphogenesis in the placenta.

Lu J(1), Zhang S, Nakano H, Simmons DG, Wang S, Kong S, Wang Q, Shen L, Tu Z,
Wang W, Wang B, Wang H, Wang Y, van Es JH, Clevers H, Leone G, Cross JC, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Chorioallantoic branching morphogenesis is a key milestone during placental
development, creating the large surface area for nutrient and gas exchange, and
is therefore critical for the success of term pregnancy. Several Wnt pathway
molecules have been shown to regulate placental development. However, it remains 
largely unknown how Wnt-Frizzled (Fzd) signaling spatiotemporally interacts with 
other essential regulators, ensuring chorionic branching morphogenesis and
angiogenesis during placental development. Employing global and
trophoblast-specific Fzd5-null and Gcm1-deficient mouse models, combining
trophoblast stem cell lines and tetraploid aggregation assay, we demonstrate here
that an amplifying signaling loop between Gcm1 and Fzd5 is essential for normal
initiation of branching in the chorionic plate. While Gcm1 upregulates Fzd5
specifically at sites where branching initiates in the basal chorion, this
elevated Fzd5 expression via nuclear ß-catenin signaling in turn maintains
expression of Gcm1. Moreover, we show that Fzd5-mediated signaling induces the
disassociation of cell junctions for branching initiation via downregulating
ZO-1, claudin 4, and claudin 7 expressions in trophoblast cells at the base of
the chorion. In addition, Fzd5-mediated signaling is also important for
upregulation of Vegf expression in chorion trophoblast cells. Finally, we
demonstrate that Fzd5-Gcm1 signaling cascade is operative during human
trophoblast differentiation. These data indicate that Gcm1 and Fzd5 function in
an evolutionary conserved positive feedback loop that regulates trophoblast
differentiation and sites of chorionic branching morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3627642
PMID: 23610556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 10;434(3):460-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.004. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

The human leukocyte antigen G promotes trophoblast fusion and ß-hCG production
through the Erk1/2 pathway in human choriocarcinoma cell lines.

Wang JM(1), Zhao HX, Wang L, Gao ZY, Yao YQ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

The human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G) is expressed on the fetal-maternal
interface and plays a role in protecting fetal-derived trophoblasts from the
maternal immune response, allowing trophoblasts to invade the uterus. However,
HLA-G also possesses immune suppressing-independent functions. We found that
HLA-G expressing BeWo choriocarcinoma cells increased cell-cell fusion compared
to control BeWo cells under forskolin treatment. Regardless of forskolin
treatment, the expression of fusogenic gene mRNAs, including syncytin-1, the
transcription factor glial cell missing 1 (Gcm1), and beta human chorionic
gonadotropin (ß-hCG) were elevated. HLA-G up-regulates ß-hCG production in human 
choriocarcinoma cells because HLA-G knockdown in JEG-3 cells induces a dramatic
decrease in ß-hCG compared with control cells. The defect in ß-hCG production in 
HLA-G knocked-down cells could not be completely overcome by stimulating hCG
production through increasing intracellular cAMP levels. HLA-G expressing cells
have increased phosphorylation levels for extracellular signal-regulated
kinase1/2 (Erk1/2) in BeWo cells. The Erk1/2 pathway is inactivated after the
inhibition of HLA-G expression in JEG-3 cells. Finally, Erk1/2 inhibition was
able to suppress the increased hCG production induced by HLA-G expression.
Together, these data suggest novel roles for HLA-G in regulating ß-hCG production
via the modulation of the Erk1/2 pathway and by inducing trophoblast cell fusion.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23583402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. FASEB J. 2013 Jul;27(7):2818-28. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-224279. Epub 2013 Apr 11.

Caspase-14 suppresses GCM1 acetylation and inhibits placental cell
differentiation.

Wu YH(1), Lo HF, Chen SH, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Glial cell missing 1 (GCM1) transcription factor regulates placental cell fusion 
into the syncytiotrophoblast. Caspase-14 is proteolytically activated to mediate 
filaggrin processing during keratinocyte differentiation. Interestingly, altered 
expression of nonactivated caspase-14 proenzyme is associated with tumorigenesis 
and diabetic retinopathy, suggesting that caspase-14 may perform physiological
functions independently of its protease activity. Here, we performed tandem
affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry analysis to identify
caspase-14 proenzyme as a GCM1-interacting protein that suppresses GCM1 activity 
and syncytiotrophoblast differentiation. Immunohistochemistry revealed that
caspase-14 and GCM1 colocalize to placental cytotrophoblast cells at 8 wk of
gestation and syncytiotrophoblast layer at term. Further, we demonstrated that
caspase-14 mRNA level is decreased by 40% in placental BeWo cells treated with
forskolin (FSK). To the contrary, stimulation of GCM1-regulated placental cell
fusion and human chorionic gonadotropin ß (hCGß) expression by FSK is enhanced by
caspase-14 knockdown. Indeed, GCM1 protein level is increased by 40% in the
caspase-14-knockdown BeWo cells. Because GCM1 is stabilized by acetylation, we
subsequently showed that caspase-14 impedes the interaction between GCM1 and cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) to suppress
CBP-mediated acetylation and transcriptional coactivation of GCM1. Therefore,
caspase-14 can suppress placental cell differentiation through down-regulation of
GCM1 activity.

PMID: 23580611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;33(9):1782-96. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01228-12. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

The c-Myc-regulated microRNA-17~92 (miR-17~92) and miR-106a~363 clusters target
hCYP19A1 and hGCM1 to inhibit human trophoblast differentiation.

Kumar P(1), Luo Y, Tudela C, Alexander JM, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, North Texas March of Dimes Birth Defects Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Mononuclear cytotrophoblasts of the human placenta proliferate rapidly,
subsequently fuse, and differentiate to form multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast
with induction of aromatase (hCYP19A1) and chorionic gonadotropin (hCGß)
expression. Using microarray analysis, we identified members of the miR-17~92
cluster and its paralogs, miR-106a~363 and miR-106b~25, that are significantly
downregulated upon syncytiotrophoblast differentiation. Interestingly, miR-19b
and miR-106a directly targeted hCYP19A1 expression, while miR-19b also targeted
human GCM1 (hGCM1), a transcription factor critical for mouse labyrinthine
trophoblast development. Overexpression of these microRNAs (miRNAs) impaired
syncytiotrophoblast differentiation. hGCM1 knockdown decreased hCYP19A1 and hCGß 
expression, substantiating its important role in human trophoblast
differentiation. Expression of the c-Myc proto-oncogene was increased in
proliferating cytotrophoblasts compared to that in differentiated
syncytiotrophoblast. Moreover, c-Myc overexpression upregulated miR-17~92 and
inhibited hCYP19A1 and hCGß expression. Binding of endogenous c-Myc to genomic
regions upstream of the miR-17~92 and miR-106a~363 clusters in cytotrophoblasts
dramatically decreased upon syncytiotrophoblast differentiation. Intriguingly, we
observed higher levels of miR-106a and -19b and lower aromatase and hGCM1
expression in placentas from preeclamptic women than in placentas from
gestation-matched normotensive women. Our findings reveal that c-Myc-regulated
members of the miR-17~92 and miR-106a~363 clusters inhibit trophoblast
differentiation by repressing hGCM1 and hCYP19A1 and suggest that aberrant
regulation of these miRNAs may contribute to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

PMCID: PMC3624183
PMID: 23438603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e51837. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051837. Epub 2013 Jan 3.

DREAM mediated regulation of GCM1 in the human placental trophoblast.

Baczyk D(1), Kibschull M, Mellstrom B, Levytska K, Rivas M, Drewlo S, Lye SJ,
Naranjo JR, Kingdom JC.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Women's and Infants' Health at the Samuel Lunenfeld
Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. baczyk@lunenfeld.ca

The trophoblast transcription factor glial cell missing-1 (GCM1) regulates
differentiation of placental cytotrophoblasts into the syncytiotrophoblast layer 
in contact with maternal blood. Reduced placental expression of GCM1 and abnormal
syncytiotrophoblast structure are features of hypertensive disorder of
pregnancy--preeclampsia. In-silico techniques identified the calcium-regulated
transcriptional repressor--DREAM (Downstream Regulatory Element Antagonist
Modulator)--as a candidate for GCM1 gene expression. Our objective was to
determine if DREAM represses GCM1 regulated syncytiotrophoblast formation. EMSA
and ChIP assays revealed a direct interaction between DREAM and the GCM1
promoter. siRNA-mediated DREAM silencing in cell culture and placental explant
models significantly up-regulated GCM1 expression and reduced cytotrophoblast
proliferation. DREAM calcium dependency was verified using ionomycin.
Furthermore, the increased DREAM protein expression in preeclamptic placental
villi was predominantly nuclear, coinciding with an overall increase in
sumolylated DREAM and correlating inversely with GCM1 levels. In conclusion, our 
data reveal a calcium-regulated pathway whereby GCM1-directed villous trophoblast
differentiation is repressed by DREAM. This pathway may be relevant to disease
prevention via calcium-supplementation.

PMCID: PMC3536794
PMID: 23300953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2013 Jan 1;5:591-601.

Gestational protein restriction affects trophoblast differentiation.

Gao H(1), Yallampalli U, Yallampalli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-1062, USA.

Whether and how gestational protein restriction (PR) affects placental
development and function remain unknown. To test the hypothesis that PR can
affect trophoblast differentiation in mid-and late pregnancy, rats were fed a 20%
or an isocaloric 6% protein diet from Day 1 to 14 or 18 of pregnancy and effects 
of PR on trophoblast differentiation were determined by changes in expressions of
marker gene(s) for trophoblast lineages. At Day 18 of pregnancy, PR increased
expressions of Esrrb, Id1 andId2 (trophoblast stem cell markers), decreased
expressions of Ascl2 (spongiotrophblast cell marker) and Prl2c1 (trophoblast
giant cell marker), but did not alter expressions of Gjb3 and Pcdh12(glycogen
cell markers) in the junctional zone (JZ). In the labyrinth zone (LZ), PR did not
change expressions of Prl2b1 (trophoblast giant cell marker), Gcm1 and Syna
(syncytiotrophoblast cell markers), but decrease expression of Ctsq (sinusoidal
trophoblast giant cell marker). These results indicate that PR impairs the
differentiation of trophoblast stem cell into spongiotrophoblast and trophoblast 
giant cells in JZ, and formation of sinusoidal trophoblast giant cells in LZ.

PMCID: PMC4046710
PMID: 23277015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Placenta. 2013 Feb;34(2):119-26. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2012.11.009. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

Sexually dimorphic placental development throughout gestation in the spiny mouse 
(Acomys cahirinus).

O'Connell BA(1), Moritz KM, Walker DW, Dickinson H.

Author information: 
(1)The Ritchie Centre, Monash Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria
3800, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: It has been hypothesized that male fetuses down regulate placental
growth during periods of accelerated fetal growth. We aimed to investigate this, 
and determine whether sexual dimorphism was apparent in the spiny mouse placenta.
We hypothesized that expression of fetal growth promoters would be higher in
placentas of males, whereas genes involved in placental structural development
would be more highly expressed in placentas of females.
METHODS: Spiny mouse dams, a precocial rodent with an in utero endocrine milieu
dissimilar from other rodents, but akin to humans, were sacrificed at gestational
ages 15-37 (term = 39 days). Placentas were collected and processed for histology
or qPCR analysis of selected genes (GCM1, MAP2K1, SLC2A1, NR3C1, IGF1, IGF1R).
RESULTS: Fetal and placental weights were similar for both sexes. Placentas of
female fetuses had less spongy zone (P(SEX) < 0.0001), and more labyrinth (P(SEX)
< 0.0001) than males. Early placenta and labyrinth expression of SLC2A1 was
higher in males than females (P(SEX) < 0.05). Labyrinthine IGF1R remained
constant until term in the female, compared with male where expression increased 
until term. Peak MAP2K1 expression occurred earlier in the male placenta than the
female. Spongy zone SLC2A1 remained constant until term in the female, compared
with male where expression increased until term.
CONCLUSIONS: The spiny mouse is a species that exhibits sexually dimorphic
placental development. We suggest that these sex differences in placental gene
expression and structure may underlie or compound the male vulnerability to a
sub-optimal in utero environment.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23260227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 14;287(51):42685-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.388777. Epub
2012 Oct 15.

The maternally expressed gene Tssc3 regulates the expression of MASH2
transcription factor in mouse trophoblast stem cells through the AKT-Sp1
signaling pathway.

Takao T(1), Asanoma K, Tsunematsu R, Kato K, Wake N.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environment and Developmental Medical Sciences, Graduate
School of Medical Science, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan. ttakao@gynob.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Tssc3 is a maternally expressed/paternally silenced imprinted gene. Recent
evidence suggests that the loss of TSSC3 results in placental overgrowth in mice.
These findings showed that the TSSC3 gene functions as a negative regulator of
placental growth. In this study, we describe the function of TSSC3 and its
signaling pathway in mouse trophoblast stem (TS) cell differentiation. First of
all, we tested Tssc3 expression levels in TS cells. TS cells expressed Tssc3, and
its expression level was the highest from day 1 to 4 but was down-regulated at
day 5 after the induction of differentiation. Overexpression of TSSC3 in TS cells
up-regulated Gcm1 and Mash2, which are marker genes of mouse trophoblast
differentiation. Down-regulation of TSSC3 by siRNA enhanced Pl1 and Tpbpa
expression in TS cells cultured under stem cell conditions, suggesting the
contribution of TSSC3 to the differentiation from TS to trophoblast progenitors
and/or labyrinth trophoblasts. TSSC3 activated the PI3K/AKT pathway through
binding with phosphatidylinositol phosphate lipids and enhanced the activity of a
promoter containing an E-box structure, which is the binding sequence of the
Mash2 downstream target gene promoter. PI3K inhibitor suppressed the promoter
activity induced by TSSC3. TSSC3 induced Sp1 translocation from cytoplasm to
nucleus through the PI3K/AKT pathway. Nuclear Sp1 activated the Mash2
transcription by Sp1 binding with a consensus Sp1-binding motif. This is the
first report describing that TSSC3 plays an important role in the differentiation
from TS to trophoblast progenitors and/or labyrinth trophoblasts through the
TSSC3/PI3K/AKT/MASH2 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3522269
PMID: 23071113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biomed Res. 2012;33(4):217-24.

PMA-induced GCMa phosphorylation stimulates its transcriptional activity and
degradation.

Yasui Y(1), Miyazawa D, Ueda H, Sato K, Kitade Y, Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Kinjo Gakuin University, Nagoya, Japan.

Glial cells missing Drosophila homolog a (GCMa) is a member of the GCM
transcription factor family and plays critical roles in trophoblast
differentiation and placental functions. It is well established that the cyclic
AMP (cAMP)-dependent pathway induces the expression and transcriptional activity 
of GCMa by regulating post-translational modifications of GCMa, which results in 
enhancement of trophoblast differentiation. We previously observed that phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) stimulates phosphorylation of GCMa on serines 328, 
378 and 383 through the protein kinase C (PKC)- and mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase (MEK)/extracellular signalregulated kinase (ERK)-dependent pathway,
which decreases the protein stability of GCMa. Here we report that PMA increases 
the ubiquitination level of GCMa, dependent on the phosphorylation of GCMa on
serines 328, 378 and 383. We found that this phosphorylation also stimulates the 
transcriptional activity of GCMa. Our data indicate that the PMA-induced PKC- and
MEK/ERKdependent pathway enhances the degradation as well as the transcriptional 
activity of GCMa. We also examined the impact of this signaling pathway on
trophoblasts and the results suggest that the PKC- and MEK/ERK-dependent pathway 
is involved in the regulation of trophoblast differentiation.

PMID: 22975632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nat Commun. 2012 Jul 24;3:967. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1971.

Unfolded protein response, activated by OASIS family transcription factors,
promotes astrocyte differentiation.

Saito A(1), Kanemoto S, Kawasaki N, Asada R, Iwamoto H, Oki M, Miyagi H, Izumi S,
Sanosaka T, Nakashima K, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedical & Health Sciences,
University of Hiroshima, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

OASIS is a member of the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors and modulates
cell- or tissue-specific unfolded protein response signalling. Here we show that 
this modulation has a critical role in the differentiation of neural precursor
cells into astrocytes. Cerebral cortices of mice specifically deficient in OASIS 
(Oasis(-/-)) contain fewer astrocytes and more neural precursor cells than those 
of wild-type mice during embryonic development. Furthermore, astrocyte
differentiation is delayed in primary cultured Oasis(-/-) neural precursor cells.
The transcription factor Gcm1, which is necessary for astrocyte differentiation
in Drosophila, is revealed to be a target of OASIS. Introduction of Gcm1 into
Oasis(-/-) neural precursor cells improves the delayed differentiation of neural 
precursor cells into astrocytes by accelerating demethylation of the Gfap
promoter. Gcm1 expression is temporally controlled by the unfolded protein
response through interactions between OASIS family members during astrocyte
differentiation. Taken together, our findings demonstrate a novel mechanism by
which OASIS and its associated family members are modulated by the unfolded
protein response to finely control astrocyte differentiation.

PMID: 22828627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(18):3707-17. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00223-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
9.

High-temperature requirement protein A4 (HtrA4) suppresses the fusogenic activity
of syncytin-1 and promotes trophoblast invasion.

Wang LJ(1), Cheong ML, Lee YS, Lee MT, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Cell-cell fusion and cell invasion are essential for placental development. Human
cytotrophoblasts in the chorionic villi may undergo cell-cell fusion to form
syncytiotrophoblasts to facilitate nutrient-gas exchange or differentiate into
extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) to facilitate maternal-fetal circulation. The
placental transcription factor glial cells missing 1 (GCM1) regulates syncytin-1 
and -2 expression to mediate trophoblast fusion. Interestingly, GCM1 and
syncytin-1 are also expressed in EVTs with unknown physiological functions. In
this study, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip (ChIP-chip)
analysis and identified the gene for high-temperature requirement protein A4
(HtrA4) as a GCM1 target gene, which encodes a serine protease facilitating
cleavage of fibronectin and invasion of placental cells. Importantly, HtrA4 is
immunolocalized in EVTs at the maternal-fetal interface, and its expression is
decreased by hypoxia and in preeclampsia, a pregnancy complication associated
with placental hypoxia and shallow trophoblast invasion. We further demonstrate
that HtrA4 interacts with syncytin-1 and suppresses cell-cell fusion. Therefore, 
HtrA4 may be crucial for EVT differentiation by playing a dual role in prevention
of cell-cell fusion of EVTs and promotion of their invasion into the uterus. Our 
study reveals a novel function of GCM1 and HtrA4 in regulation of trophoblast
invasion and that abnormal HrtA4 expression may contribute to shallow trophoblast
invasion in preeclampsia.

PMCID: PMC3430202
PMID: 22778138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039306. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Transcriptome analysis during human trophectoderm specification suggests new
roles of metabolic and epigenetic genes.

Assou S(1), Boumela I, Haouzi D, Monzo C, Dechaud H, Kadoch IJ, Hamamah S.

Author information: 
(1)CHU Montpellier, Institute for Research in Biotherapy, Hôpital Saint-Eloi,
INSERM U1040, Montpellier, France.

In humans, successful pregnancy depends on a cascade of dynamic events during
early embryonic development. Unfortunately, molecular data on these critical
events is scarce. To improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
govern the specification/development of the trophoblast cell lineage, the
transcriptome of human trophectoderm (TE) cells from day 5 blastocysts was
compared to that of single day 3 embryos from our in vitro fertilization program 
by using Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. Some of the microarray data were
validated by quantitative RT-PCR. The TE molecular signature included 2,196
transcripts, among which were genes already known to be TE-specific (GATA2, GATA3
and GCM1) but also genes involved in trophoblast invasion (MUC15), chromatin
remodeling (specifically the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3L) and steroid metabolism
(HSD3B1, HSD17B1 and FDX1). In day 3 human embryos 1,714 transcripts were
specifically up-regulated. Besides stemness genes such as NANOG and DPPA2, this
signature included genes belonging to the NLR family (NALP4, 5, 9, 11 and 13),
Ret finger protein-like family (RFPL1, 2 and 3), Melanoma Antigen family (MAGEA1,
2, 3, 5, 6 and 12) and previously unreported transcripts, such as MBD3L2 and
ZSCAN4. This study provides a comprehensive outlook of the genes that are
expressed during the initial embryo-trophectoderm transition in humans. Further
understanding of the biological functions of the key genes involved in
steroidogenesis and epigenetic regulation of transcription that are up-regulated 
in TE cells may clarify their contribution to TE specification and might also
provide new biomarkers for the selection of viable and competent blastocysts.

PMCID: PMC3382239
PMID: 22761758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Oct 15;362(1-2):48-59. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.05.009. 
Epub 2012 May 28.

Ceramide biosynthesis and metabolism in trophoblast syncytialization.

Singh AT(1), Dharmarajan A, Aye IL, Keelan JA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Women's and Infant's Health, Dentistry and Health Sciences, The
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.

Sphingolipid mediators such as ceramide are pleiotropic regulators of cellular
growth, differentiation and apoptosis. We investigated the role of ceramide
biosynthesis, metabolism and actions in term human cytotrophoblasts syncytialized
over 7 days in culture. Intracellular C16 ceramide levels increased modestly
after 3 days in culture, then declined. Ceramidase was present at particularly
high levels in syncytialized trophoblasts; inhibition of ceramidase reduced the
degree of cell fusion. Exposure to short chain C8 ceramide or aSMase enhanced
secretion of the differentiation marker hCG without affecting fusion or cell
viability. In contrast, pharmacological inhibition of ceramidase reduced the
extent of fusion. Inhibition of the ceramide-responsive JNK and PP2A pathways did
not abolish the effects of ceramide, and JNK phosphorylation was unresponsive to 
ceramide; however, ceramide significantly inhibited phosphorylation of Akt. This 
study suggests that changes in ceramide biosynthesis and metabolism play a
differential role in the biochemical and morphological features of trophoblast
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22652149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Jun;33(3):331-8. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2012.01.003. Epub
2012 Jan 21.

Chlorpyrifos modifies the expression of genes involved in human placental
function.

Ridano ME(1), Racca AC, Flores-Martín J, Camolotto SA, de Potas GM,
Genti-Raimondi S, Panzetta-Dutari GM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología, Departamento de
Bioquímica Clínica, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.

The effects of organophosphate pesticides on human placenta remain poorly
investigated although an increased risk of pregnancy alterations has been
reported in women chronically exposed to these pesticides. Here, we have
addressed whether chlorpyrifos (CPF) modifies the expression of genes relevant
for placental function. Human placental JEG-3 cells were exposed to increasing
CPF concentrations up to 100 µM for 24 and 48 h and cell viability, mRNA, protein
and hormone levels were analyzed. Quantitative RT-PCR assays revealed that CPF
increased the expression of ABCG2, GCM1 and, even more significantly, ßhCG mRNAs 
in conditions where cell viability and morphology were not compromised. In
addition, ßhCG protein synthesis and secretion were time-dependently augmented.
Present results may reflect a CPF nocive effect on placenta cells or a
placental-defense mechanism to preserve its function. These novel CPF trophoblast
target genes should be considered in future studies of pregnancy outcomes
associated with in vivo exposures.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Hypertension. 2012 Mar;59(3):732-9. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.183939. Epub
2012 Jan 23.

Effects of reduced Gcm1 expression on trophoblast morphology, fetoplacental
vascularity, and pregnancy outcomes in mice.

Bainbridge SA(1), Minhas A, Whiteley KJ, Qu D, Sled JG, Kingdom JC, Adamson SL.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
shannon.bainbridge@uottawa.ca

Preeclampsia is a life-threatening disorder characterized by maternal gestational
hypertension and proteinuria that results from placental dysfunction. Placental
abnormalities include abnormal syncytiotrophoblast and a 50% reduction in
placental expression of the transcription factor Gcm1. In mice, homozygous
deletion of Gcm1 prevents syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and is embryonic
lethal. We used heterozygous Gcm1 mutants (Gcm1(+/-)) to test the hypothesis that
hypomorphic expression of placental Gcm1 causes defective syncytiotrophoblast
differentiation and maternal and placental phenotypes that resemble preeclampsia.
We mated wild-type female mice with Gcm1(+/-) fathers to obtain wild-type mothers
carrying 50% Gcm1(+/-) conceptuses. Gcm1(+/-) placentas had syncytiotrophoblast 
abnormalities including reduced gene expression of Gcm1-regulated SynB, elevated 
expression of sFlt1, a thickened interhemal membrane separating maternal and
fetal circulations, and electron microscopic evidence in syncytiotrophoblast of
necrosis and impaired maternal-fetal transfer. Fetoplacental vascularity was
quantified by histomorphometry and microcomputed tomography imaging. In
Gcm1(+/-), it was 30% greater than wild-type littermates, whereas placental
vascular endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa) expression and fetal and placental
weights did not differ. Wild-type mothers carrying Gcm1(+/-) conceptuses
developed late gestational hypertension (118±2 versus 109.6±0.7 mm Hg in
controls; P<0.05). We next correlated fetoplacental vascularity with placental
Gcm1 expression in human control and pathological pregnancies and found that, as 
in mice, fetoplacental vascularity increased when GCM1 protein expression
decreased (R(2)=-0.45; P<0.05). These results support a role for reduced
placental Gcm1 expression as a causative factor in defective syncytiotrophoblast 
differentiation and maternal and placental phenotypes in preeclampsia in humans.

PMID: 22275534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr 19;86(4):115. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.096925. Print
2012 Apr.

The molecular role of connexin 43 in human trophoblast cell fusion.

Dunk CE(1), Gellhaus A, Drewlo S, Baczyk D, Pötgens AJ, Winterhager E, Kingdom
JC, Lye SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Women's and Infants' Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
dunk@lunenfeld.ca

Connexin expression and gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC)
mediated by connexin 43 (Cx43)/gap junction A1 (GJA1) are required for
cytotrophoblast fusion into the syncytium, the outer functional layer of the
human placenta. Cx43 also impacts intracellular signaling through protein-protein
interactions. The transcription factor GCM1 and its downstream target
ERVW-1/SYNCYTIN-1 are key players in trophoblast fusion and exert their actions
through the ERVW-1 receptor SLC1A5/ASCT-2/RDR/ATB(0). To investigate the
molecular role of the Cx43 protein and its interaction with this fusogenic
pathway, we utilized stable Cx43-transfected cell lines established from the
choriocarcinoma cell line Jeg3: wild-type Jeg3, alphahCG/Cx43 (constitutive Cx43 
expression), JpUHD/Cx43 (doxycyclin-inducible Cx43 expression), or JpUHD/trCx43
(doxycyclin-inducible Cx43 carboxyterminal deleted). We hypothesized that
truncation of Cx43 at its C-terminus would inhibit trophoblast fusion and protein
interaction with either ERVW-1 or SLC1A5. In the alphahCG/Cx43 and JpUHD/Cx43
lines, stimulation with cAMP caused 1) increase in GJA1 mRNA levels, 2) increase 
in percentage of fused cells, and 3) downregulation of SLC1A5 expression. Cell
fusion was inhibited by GJIC blockade using carbenoxylone. Neither Jeg3, which
express low levels of Cx43, nor the JpUHD/trCx43 cell line demonstrated cell
fusion or downregulation of SLC1A5. However, GCM1 and ERVW-1 mRNAs were
upregulated by cAMP treatment in both Jeg3 and all Cx43 cell lines. Silencing of 
GCM1 prevented the induction of GJA1 mRNA by forskolin in BeWo choriocarcinoma
cells, demonstrating that GCM1 is upstream of Cx43. All cell lines and
first-trimester villous explants also demonstrated coimmunoprecipitation of
SLC1A5 and phosphorylated Cx43. Importantly, SLC1A5 and Cx43 gap junction plaques
colocalized in situ to areas of fusing cytotrophoblast, as demonstrated by the
loss of E-cadherin staining in the plasma membrane in first-trimester placenta.
We conclude that Cx43-mediated GJIC and SLC1A5 interaction play important
functional roles in trophoblast cell fusion.

PMCID: PMC4480072
PMID: 22238282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 27;417(4):1127-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.12.059. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

PMA induces GCMa phosphorylation and alters its stability via the PKC- and
ERK-dependent pathway.

Yasui Y(1), Yamada K, Takahashi S, Sugiura-Ogasawara M, Sato K, Miyazawa D,
Sugiyama T, Kitade Y, Ueda H.

Author information: 
(1)United Graduate School of Drug Discovery and Medical Information Sciences,
Gifu University, Gifu, Japan.

The glial cells missing a (GCMa) transcription factor plays a pivotal role in the
placental development by regulating the expression of several genes in the
placenta that are responsible for the proper formation of the
syncytiotrophoblast. It is well known that the function of GCMa is regulated at
both transcriptional and post-translational levels by the cyclic AMP
(cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent pathway, the activation of which
increases the GCMa protein level and leads to trophoblast differentiation into
the syncytiotrophoblast. However, little is known about the regulatory control of
GCMa by PKC-dependent signaling mechanism(s). To investigate whether GCMa is
regulated by PKC-dependent pathway, we treated the human choriocarcinoma JEG-3
cells with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and studied its effect on the
GCMa protein using a monoclonal anti-GCMa antibody we prepared. PMA caused a
transient decrease in the endogenous GCMa protein level in JEG-3 cells that was
accompanied by an increase in GCMa phosphorylation. The phosphorylation and
degradation of GCMa by PMA treatment was effectively reduced by pretreatment with
protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitors and a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
kinase (MEK) inhibitor, indicating a PKC- and MEK-dependent mechanism.
Furthermore, we identified the serine residues 328, 378 and 383 to be the
phosphorylation sites on GCMa that are involved in the PMA-induced degradation of
GCMa. Our data demonstrate for the first time that GCMa is phosphorylated by the 
PKC- and MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent mechanism, and
that this phosphorylation is involved in its degradation process.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22206674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5400-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.289801. Epub 2011 
Dec 15.

Nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2 (Nfe2) regulates JunD DNA-binding activity via
acetylation: a novel mechanism regulating trophoblast differentiation.

Kashif M(1), Hellwig A, Hashemolhosseini S, Kumar V, Bock F, Wang H, Shahzad K,
Ranjan S, Wolter J, Madhusudhan T, Bierhaus A, Nawroth P, Isermann B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I and Clinical Chemistry, University of
Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

We recently demonstrated that the bZip transcription factor nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2 (Nfe2) represses protein acetylation and expression of the
transcription factor glial cell missing 1 (Gcm1) in trophoblast cells, preventing
excess syncytiotrophoblast formation and permitting normal placental
vascularization and embryonic growth. However, the Gcm1 promoter lacks a
Nfe2-binding site and hence the mechanisms linking Nfe2 and Gcm1 expression
remained unknown. Here we show that Nfe2 represses JunD DNA-binding activity to
the Gcm1 promoter during syncytiotrophoblast differentiation. Interventional
studies using knockdown and knockin approaches show that enhanced JunD
DNA-binding activity is required for increased expression of Gcm1 and
syncytiotrophoblast formation as well as impaired placental vascularization and
reduced growth of Nfe2(-/-) embryos. Induction of Gcm1 expression requires
binding of JunD to the -1441 site within the Gcm1 promoter, which is distinct
from the -1314 site previously shown to induce Gcm1 expression by other bZip
transcription factors. Nfe2 modulates JunD binding to the Gcm1 promoter via
acetylation, as reducing JunD acetylation using the histone acetyltransferase
inhibitor curcumin reverses the increased JunD DNA-binding activity observed in
the absence of Nfe2. This identifies a novel mechanism through which bZip
transcription factors interact. Within the placenta this interaction regulates
Gcm1 expression, syncytiotrophoblast formation, placental vascularization, and
embryonic growth.

PMCID: PMC3285319
PMID: 22174410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nat Commun. 2011 Nov 22;2:548. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1551.

Identification of a link between Wnt/ß-catenin signalling and the cell fusion
pathway.

Matsuura K(1), Jigami T, Taniue K, Morishita Y, Adachi S, Senda T, Nonaka A,
Aburatani H, Nakamura T, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0032, Japan.

Cell fusion has a critical role in various developmental processes, immune
response, tissue homeostasis and regeneration, and possibly, in cancer. However, 
the signals that regulate cell fusion remain poorly understood. In a screen for
novel targets of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling, we identified glial cells missing 1
(GCM1), which encodes a transcription factor that is involved in epigenetic
regulation and is critical for the fusion of syncytiotrophoblast (ST) cells. Here
we show that ß-catenin/BCL9-Like (BCL9L)/T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) signalling
directly targets the GCM1/syncytin pathway and thereby regulates the fusion of
human choriocarcinoma cells. Furthermore, we show that the GCM1/syncytin-B
pathway is significantly downregulated in the placenta of BCL9L-deficient mice
and that the fusion and differentiation of ST-II cells are blocked. Our results
demonstrate a signal transduction pathway that regulates cell fusion, and may
provide intriguing perspectives into the various biological and pathological
processes that involve cell fusion.

PMID: 22109522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Dyn. 2011 Nov;240(11):2505-19. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22755. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Cell-cell adhesion defects in Mrj mutant trophoblast cells are associated with
failure to pattern the chorion during early placental development.

Watson ED(1), Hughes M, Simmons DG, Natale DR, Sutherland AE, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Early placental development in mice involves patterning of the chorion into
distinct layers, though little is understood regarding the interactions that
regulate its organization. Here we demonstrate that keratin aggregates found in
Mrj(-/-) chorionic trophoblast cells are associated with abnormal cell
morphology, collapse of the actin cytoskeleton, E-cadherin and ß-catenin
misexpression and extracellular matrix (ECM) disorganization. Accordingly,
Mrj(-/-) trophoblast cells in vitro are nonadherent and display erratic migratory
behavior. These cells also fail to differentiate into syncytiotrophoblast cells
since Rhox4b expression, a marker of syncytiotrophoblast progenitors, was
maintained and Gcm1, Synb, and Syna expression failed to increase. This
differentiation defect was not solely attributable to E-cadherin misexpression or
ECM disorganization. However, plating Mrj-deficient cells on exogenous
laminin-511 normalized their cell behavior. Lastly, we show that Mrj(-/-)
chorions at embryonic day 8.5 have expanded Rhox4b expression domains and do not 
form normal layers of gene expression suggesting that chorion patterning requires
Mrj.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21972064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2011 Aug 30;2(3):196-206. Epub 2011 May 5.

A fetal variant in the GCM1 gene is associated with pregnancy induced
hypertension in a predominantly hispanic population.

Wilson ML, Brueggmann D, Desmond DH, Mandeville JE, Goodwin TM, Ingles SA.

The aim of the study was to determine whether polymorphism in the GCM1 gene is
associated with pregnancy induced hypertension (PIH) in a case-control study of
mother-baby dyads. Predominantly Hispanic women, ages 15-45, with (n=136) and
without (n=169) PIH were recruited. We genotyped four polymorphisms in the GCM1
gene and examined the association with PIH using both logistic regression and
likelihood expectation maximization (LEM) to adjust for intra-familial
correlation between genotypes. Maternal genotype was not associated with PIH for 
any polymorphisms examined. Fetal genotype, however, was associated with maternal
risk of PIH. Mothers carrying a fetus with =1 copy of the minor (C) allele for
rs9349655 were less likely to develop PIH than women carrying a fetus with the GG
genotype (parity-adjusted OR=0.44, 95% Cl: 0.21, 0.94). The trend of decreasing
risk with increasing C alleles was also statistically significant (OR(trend)=0.41
95% Cl: 0.20, 0.85). The minor alleles for the other three SNPs also appear to be
associated with protection. Multilocus analyses of fetal genotypes showed that
the protective effect of carrying minor alleles at rs9349655 and rs13200319
(non-significant) remained unchanged when adjusting for genotypes at the other
loci. However, the apparent (non-significant) effect of rs2816345 and rs2518573
disappeared when adjusting for rs9349655. In conclusion, we found that a fetal
GCM1 polymorphism is significantly associated with PIH in a predominantly
Hispanic population. These results suggest that GCM1 may represent a fetal-effect
gene, where risk to the mother is conferred only through carriage by the fetus.

PMCID: PMC3166147
PMID: 21915358  [PubMed]


52. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):1040-7. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093369. Epub 2011
Jul 27.

The placental response to excess maternal glucocorticoid exposure differs between
the male and female conceptus in spiny mice.

O'Connell BA(1), Moritz KM, Roberts CT, Walker DW, Dickinson H.

Author information: 
(1)The Ritchie Centre, Monash Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.

The placenta is the intermediary between the mother and fetus, and its primary
role is to provide for the appropriate growth of the fetus. A suboptimal in utero
environment has been shown to differentially affect the health of offspring,
depending on their sex. Here we show that excess maternal glucocorticoids
administered in midgestation (Day 20, 0.5 gestation in the spiny mouse) for 60 h,
have persisting effects on the placenta that differ by fetal sex, placental
region, and time after glucocorticoid exposure. Dexamethasone (DEX) exposure
altered placental structure and mRNA expression from male and female fetuses both
immediately (Day 23) and 2 wk posttreatment (Day 37). The immediate consequences 
(Day 23) of DEX were similar between males and females, with reductions in the
expression of IGF1, IGF1R, and SLC2A1 in the placenta. However, by Day 37, the
transcriptional and structural response of the placenta was dependent on the sex 
of the fetus, with placentas of male fetuses having an increase in GCM1
expression, a decrease in SLC2A1 expression, and an increase in the amount of
maternal blood sinusoids in the DEX-exposed placenta. Female placentas, on the
other hand, showed increased SLC2A1 and MAP2K1 expression and a decrease in the
amount of maternal blood sinusoids in response to DEX exposure. We have shown
that the effect of a brief glucocorticoid exposure at midgestation has persisting
effects on the placenta, and this is likely to have ongoing and dynamic effects
on fetal development that differ for a male and female fetus.

PMID: 21795670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;31(18):3820-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05582-11. Epub 2011 Jul 
26.

A novel cyclic AMP/Epac1/CaMKI signaling cascade promotes GCM1 desumoylation and 
placental cell fusion.

Chang CW(1), Chang GD, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling and the placental transcription factor glial cell
missing 1 (GCM1) regulate expression of syncytin-1 and -2 fusogenic proteins,
which are critical for syncytiotrophoblast formation by trophoblast fusion. We
recently revealed a cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA)/CBP signaling pathway that
activates GCM1 by coordinating GCM1 phosphorylation and acetylation. In contrast,
GCM1 activity is downregulated by sumoylation of Lys156. How GCM1 sumoylation is 
regulated was unknown. Here, we identify a novel PKA-independent cAMP signaling
pathway as the critical regulator of GCM1 sumoylation. We show that Epac1 and
Rap1, in response to cAMP, activate CaMKI to phosphorylate Ser47 in GCM1. This
phosphorylation facilitates the interaction between GCM1 and the desumoylating
enzyme SENP1 and thereby leads to GCM1 desumoylation and activation. Using RNA
interference (RNAi), we further demonstrate that
8-(4-chlorophenylthio)-2'-O-Me-cAMP-AM (8-CPT-AM), an Epac activator, stimulates 
syncytin-1 and -2 gene expression and cell fusion of placental BeWo cells in a
GCM1-dependent manner. Importantly, the cell fusion defect in GCM1-knockdown BeWo
cells can be reversed and enhanced by the RNAi-resistant phosphomimetic
GCM1(S47D) mutant. Our study has identified a novel cAMP/Epac1/CaMKI/GCM1
signaling cascade that stimulates trophoblast fusion through promoting GCM1
phosphorylation and desumoylation.

PMCID: PMC3165715
PMID: 21791615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Jul 17;14(8):957-64. doi: 10.1038/nn.2875.

Mammalian Gcm genes induce Hes5 expression by active DNA demethylation and induce
neural stem cells.

Hitoshi S(1), Ishino Y, Kumar A, Jasmine S, Tanaka KF, Kondo T, Kato S, Hosoya T,
Hotta Y, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan. shitoshi-tky@umin.ac.jp

Signaling mediated by Notch receptors is crucial for the development of many
organs and the maintenance of various stem cell populations. The activation of
Notch signaling is first detectable by the expression of an effector gene, Hes5, 
in the neuroepithelium of mouse embryos at embryonic day (E) 8.0-8.5, and this
activation is indispensable for the generation of neural stem cells. However, the
molecular mechanism by which Hes5 expression is initiated in stem-producing cells
remains unknown. We found that mammalian Gcm1 and Gcm2 (glial cells missing 1 and
2) are involved in the epigenetic regulation of Hes5 transcription by DNA
demethylation independently of DNA replication. Loss of both Gcm genes and
subsequent lack of Hes5 upregulation in the neuroepithelium of E7.5-8.5
Gcm1(-/-); Gcm2(-/-) mice resulted in the impaired induction of neural stem
cells. Our data suggest that Hes5 expression is serially activated first by Gcms 
and later by the canonical Notch pathway.

PMID: 21765423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Stem Cell Rev. 2012 Mar;8(1):150-62. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9301-3.

Dissecting the first transcriptional divergence during human embryonic
development.

Bai Q(1), Assou S, Haouzi D, Ramirez JM, Monzo C, Becker F, Gerbal-Chaloin S,
Hamamah S, De Vos J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1040, Montpellier, 34000, France.

The trophoblast cell lineage is specified early at the blastocyst stage, leading 
to the emergence of the trophectoderm and the pluripotent cells of the inner cell
mass. Using a double mRNA amplification technique and a comparison with
transcriptome data on pluripotent stem cells, placenta, germinal and adult
tissues, we report here some essential molecular features of the human mural
trophectoderm. In addition to genes known for their role in placenta (CGA, PGF,
ALPPL2 and ABCG2), human trophectoderm also strongly expressed Laminins, such as 
LAMA1, and the GAGE Cancer/Testis genes. The very high level of ABCG2 expression 
in trophectoderm, 7.9-fold higher than in placenta, suggests a major role of this
gene in shielding the very early embryo from xenobiotics. Several genes,
including CCKBR and DNMT3L, were specifically up-regulated only in trophectoderm,
indicating that the trophoblast cell lineage shares with the germinal lineage a
transient burst of DNMT3L expression. A trophectoderm core transcriptional
regulatory circuitry formed by 13 tightly interconnected transcription factors
(CEBPA, GATA2, GATA3, GCM1, KLF5, MAFK, MSX2, MXD1, PPARD, PPARG, PPP1R13L,
TFAP2C and TP63), was found to be induced in trophectoderm and maintained in
placenta. The induction of this network could be recapitulated in an in vitro
trophoblast differentiation model.

PMCID: PMC3285757
PMID: 21750961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):779-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092809. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Generation of colonies of induced trophoblast cells during standard reprogramming
of porcine fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ezashi T(1), Matsuyama H, Telugu BP, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center and Division of Animal Sciences, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

During reprogramming of porcine mesenchymal cells with a four-factor
(POU5F1/SOX2/KLF4/MYC) mixture of vectors, a fraction of the colonies had an
atypical phenotype and arose earlier than the recognizable porcine induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell colonies. Within days after each passage, patches of 
cells with an epithelial phenotype formed raised domes, particularly under 20%
O(2) conditions. Relative to gene expression of the iPS cells, there was
up-regulation of genes for transcription factors associated with trophoblast (TR)
lineage emergence, e.g., GATA2, PPARG, MSX2, DLX3, HAND1, GCM1, CDX2, ID2, ELF5, 
TCFAP2C, and TEAD4 and for genes required for synthesis of products more typical 
of differentiated TR, such as steroids (HSD17B1, CYP11A1, and STAR),
pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG6), and select cytokines (IFND, IFNG, and 
IL1B). Although POU5F1 was down-regulated relative to that in iPS cells, it was
not silenced in the induced TR (iTR) cells over continued passage. Like iPS
cells, iTR cells did not senesce on extended passage and displayed high
telomerase activity. Upon xenografting into immunodeficient mice, iTR cells
formed nonhemorrhagic teratomas composed largely of layers of epithelium
expressing TR markers. When cultured under conditions that promoted embryoid body
formation, iTR cells formed floating spheres consisting of a single epithelial
sheet whose cells were tethered laterally by desmosome-like structures. In
conclusion, reprogramming of porcine fibroblasts to iPS cells generates, as a
by-product, colonies composed of self-renewing populations of TR cells, possibly 
containing TR stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3184293
PMID: 21734265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Development. 2011 Jun;138(11):2235-47. doi: 10.1242/dev.059105.

p45NF-E2 represses Gcm1 in trophoblast cells to regulate syncytium formation,
placental vascularization and embryonic growth.

Kashif M(1), Hellwig A, Kolleker A, Shahzad K, Wang H, Lang S, Wolter J, Thati M,
Vinnikov I, Bierhaus A, Nawroth PP, Isermann B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I and Clinical Chemistry, University of Heidelberg, INF
410, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Absence of the leucine zipper transcription factor p45NF-E2 results in
thrombocytopenia, impaired placental vascularization and intrauterine growth
restriction (IUGR) in mice. The mechanism underlying the p45NF-E2-dependent
placental defect and IUGR remains unknown. Here, we show that the placental
defect and IUGR of p45NF-E2 (Nfe2) null mouse embryos is unrelated to
thrombocytopenia, establishing that embryonic platelets and platelet-released
mediators are dispensable for placentation. Rather, p45NF-E2, which was hitherto 
thought to be specific to hematopoietic cells, is expressed in trophoblast cells,
where it is required for normal syncytiotrophoblast formation, placental
vascularization and embryonic growth. Expression of p45NF-E2 in labyrinthine
trophoblast cells colocalizes with that of Gcm1, a transcription factor crucial
for syncytiotrophoblast formation. In the absence of p45NF-E2, the width of
syncytiotrophoblast layer 2 and the expression of Gcm1 and Gcm1-dependent genes
(Synb and Cebpa) are increased. In vitro, p45NF-E2 deficiency results in
spontaneous syncytiotrophoblast formation, which can be reversed by Gcm1
knockdown. Increased Gcm1 expression in the absence of p45NF-E2 is dependent on
enhanced protein acetylation, including post-translational modification of Gcm1. 
Increasing and inhibiting acetylation in the placenta of wild-type control
embryos phenocopies and corrects, respectively, the changes observed in
p45NF-E2-deficient embryos. These studies identify a novel function of p45NF-E2
during placental development: in trophoblast cells, p45NF-E2 represses Gcm1 and
syncytiotrophoblast formation via acetylation.

PMID: 21558372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Hum Reprod. 2011 May;26(5):1025-34. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der053. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Glial cell missing-1 mediates over-expression of tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-4 in severe pre-eclamptic placental villi.

Drewlo S(1), Czikk M, Baczyk D, Lye S, Kingdom J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada. drewlo@lunenfeld.ca

BACKGROUND: Severe pre-eclampsia (sPE) causes significant maternal morbidity and 
intrauterine growth restriction as a result of severe placental dysfunction.
Defects in the formation of both extra-villous and villous trophoblast are
characteristic of this disease. The outer syncytiotrophoblast layer covering the 
placental villi develops syncytial knots and focal necrosis while reduced
invasion of the extra-villous trophoblast results in a reduced maternal blood
supply and ischemia of the placental villi. The transcription factor glial cell
missing-1 (GCM1) regulates formation of both types of trophoblast. GCM1
expression is reduced in placental villi of women with sPE but the functional
downstream consequences of reduced GCM1 expression are unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In floating first trimester villous explants we demonstrated
increased mRNA (2.5-fold, n = 12) and protein level (9.8-fold) of tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-4 (TIMP4) following repression of GCM1 (70 ± 7%)
by small interfering-RNA, using RT-PCR and western blot, respectively. Similar
increases in TIMP4 mRNA (4.2-fold, n = 7, P< 0.001 versus control) and protein
levels were found following gene silencing of GCM1 in BeWo cells (<90% knock down
of protein). TIMP4 protein was increased in placenta from women with sPE (3.5 ±
0.4 pg/µg, n = 8), compared with preterm (1.7 ± 0.17 pg/µg, n = 9) and term
controls (1.6 ± 0.16 pg/µg, n = 9; P< 0.01; quantified by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and visualized using immunohistochemistry) with reduced GCM1 
expression, mostly in the pathologic syncytial knots.
CONCLUSIONS: TIMP4 is a downstream target of GCM1 that may link the consequences 
of reduced GCM-1-directed trophoblast differentiation to histologic and
functional components of disordered placentation in sPE.

PMID: 21406447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Placenta. 2011 Feb;32(2):183-91. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.12.007. Epub 2011
Jan 3.

Oxysterols inhibit differentiation and fusion of term primary trophoblasts by
activating liver X receptors.

Aye IL(1), Waddell BJ, Mark PJ, Keelan JA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Women's and Infants' Health, The University of Western Australia,
King Edward Memorial Hospital, 374 Bagot Rd, Subiaco, Perth, WA 6008, Australia.

Oxygenated cholesterol metabolites known as oxysterols display potent biological 
activities ranging from regulation of lipid homeostasis to cytotoxicity.
Oxysterols have previously been shown to inhibit the invasion of first trimester 
trophoblasts, an effect which involves activation of the nuclear liver X
receptors (LXRs). In the present study, we investigated the effects of several
oxysterols on syncytialisation (differentiation and fusion) in term placental
trophoblasts. Treatment of cultured term primary trophoblast cells with
oxysterols [25-hydroxycholesterol, 7-ketocholesterol, 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol]
and the synthetic LXR agonist T0901317 at non-toxic doses decreased expression of
GCM-1 and HERV-W mRNA and reduced hCG secretion and placental alkaline
phosphatase activity, indicative of diminished trophoblast differentiation.
Furthermore, treatment with these compounds also decreased cell fusion measured
by E-cadherin immunostaining and quantification of syncytialised nuclei.
Treatment with an LXR antagonist (geranylgeranyl diphosphate) abrogated the
inhibitory effects of oxysterols and T0901317 on trophoblast syncytialisation
indicating that these effects are mediated by LXR. These findings suggest that
oxysterols impair differentiation and fusion of term trophoblast cells via an
LXR-dependent mechanism.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21208656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Feb;39(3):848-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq838. Epub 2010 Sep 
19.

Dual-specificity phosphatase 23 mediates GCM1 dephosphorylation and activation.

Lin FY(1), Chang CW, Cheong ML, Chen HC, Lee DY, Chang GD, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Glial cells missing homolog 1 (GCM1) is a transcription factor essential for
placental development. GCM1 promotes syncytiotrophoblast formation and placental 
vasculogenesis by activating fusogenic and proangiogenic gene expression in
placenta. GCM1 activity is regulated by multiple post-translational
modifications. The cAMP/PKA-signaling pathway promotes CBP-mediated GCM1
acetylation and stabilizes GCM1, whereas hypoxia-induced GSK-3ß-mediated
phosphorylation of Ser322 causes GCM1 ubiquitination and degradation. How and
whether complex modifications of GCM1 are coordinated is not known. Here we show 
that the interaction of GCM1 and dual-specificity phosphatase 23 (DUSP23) is
enhanced by PKA-dependent phosphorylation of GCM1 on Ser269 and Ser275. The
recruitment of DUSP23 reverses GSK-3ß-mediated Ser322 phosphorylation, which in
turn promotes GCM1 acetylation, stabilization and activation. Supporting a
central role in coordinating GCM1 modifications, knockdown of DUSP23 suppressed
GCM1 target gene expression and placental cell fusion. Our study identifies
DUSP23 as a novel factor that promotes placental cell fusion and reveals a
complex regulation of GCM1 activity by coordinated phosphorylation,
dephosphorylation and acetylation.

PMCID: PMC3035457
PMID: 20855292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biol Reprod. 2010 Sep;83(3):387-95. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.083915. Epub 2010
May 19.

GCM1 regulation of the expression of syncytin 2 and its cognate receptor MFSD2A
in human placenta.

Liang CY(1), Wang LJ, Chen CP, Chen LF, Chen YH, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Syncytin 2 is a newly identified placental membrane protein with fusogenic and
immunosuppressive activities. Major facilitator superfamily domain containing 2A 
(MFSD2A) is the cognate receptor for syncytin 2-mediated cell-cell fusion. Both
syncytin 2 and MFSD2A are highly expressed in placenta. In this study to
understand the regulation of syncytin 2 and MFSD2A expression in placenta, we
found that syncytin 2 gene is epigenetically silenced in nonplacental cells by
cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) dinucleotide methylation and that expression of 
syncytin 2 and MFSD2A genes are regulated by the placental transcription factor
GCM1 in placental cells. Functional GCM1-binding sites were identified in
syncytin 2 and MFSD2A promoters based on electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Because GCM1 activity is decreased in
hypoxic placental cells, we further confirmed that expression of MFSD2A is
downregulated in hypoxic BeWo choriocarcinoma cells. Interestingly, ectopic
expression of GCM1 activated syncytin 2 and MFSD2A expression in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells and facilitated MCF-7 cell fusion. The expression of syncytin 2 in
MCF-7 cells was partly attributed to CpG demethylation in the syncytin 2 promoter
in the presence of GCM1. Our results suggest that GCM1 is a critical factor in
controlling placental cell fusion through transcriptional regulation of syncytin 
2 and MFSD2A gene expression in placenta. In addition, GCM1 may also play an
important role in the epigenetic regulation of syncytin 2 gene expression.

PMID: 20484742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genetics. 2010 Aug;185(4):1507-17. doi: 10.1534/genetics.110.116673. Epub 2010
May 10.

Phantom, a new subclass of Mutator DNA transposons found in insect viruses and
widely distributed in animals.

Marquez CP(1), Pritham EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas, Arlington, Texas 76019, USA.

Transposons of the Mutator (Mu) superfamily have been shown to play a critical
role in the evolution of plant genomes. However, the identification of Mutator
transposons in other eukaryotes has been quite limited. Here we describe a
previously uncharacterized group of DNA transposons designated Phantom identified
in the genomes of a wide range of eukaryotic taxa, including many animals, and
provide evidence for its inclusion within the Mutator superfamily. Interestingly 
three Phantom proteins were also identified in two insect viruses and
phylogenetic analysis suggests horizontal movement from insect to virus,
providing a new line of evidence for the role of viruses in the horizontal
transfer of DNA transposons in animals. Many of the Phantom transposases are
predicted to harbor a FLYWCH domain in the amino terminus, which displays a
WRKY-GCM1 fold characteristic of the DNA binding domain (DBD) of Mutator
transposases and of several transcription factors. While some Phantom elements
have terminal inverted repeats similar in length and structure to Mutator
elements, some display subterminal inverted repeats (sub-TIRs) and others have
more complex termini reminiscent of so-called Foldback (FB) transposons. The
structural plasticity of Phantom and the distant relationship of its encoded
protein to known transposases may have impeded the discovery of this group of
transposons and it suggests that structure in itself is not a reliable character 
for transposon classification.

PMCID: PMC2927773
PMID: 20457878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 30;4(11):e8055. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008055.

PPARgamma regulates trophoblast proliferation and promotes labyrinthine
trilineage differentiation.

Parast MM(1), Yu H, Ciric A, Salata MW, Davis V, Milstone DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal trophoblast differentiation and function is the basis of
many placenta-based pregnancy disorders, including pre-eclampsia and fetal growth
restriction. PPARgamma, a ligand-activated nuclear receptor, plays essential
roles in placental development; null murine embryos die at midgestation due to
abnormalities in all placental layers, in particular, small labyrinth and
expanded giant cell layer. Previous studies have focused mostly on the role of
PPARgamma in trophoblast invasion. Based on the previously reported role of
PPARgamma in preadipocyte differentiation, we hypothesized that PPARgamma also
plays a pivotal role in trophoblast differentiation. To test this hypothesis, we 
report derivation of wild-type and PPARgamma-null trophoblast stem (TS) cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: PPARgamma-null TS cells showed defects in both
proliferation and differentiation, specifically into labyrinthine trophoblast.
Detailed marker analysis and functional studies revealed reduced differentiation 
of all three labyrinthine lineages, and enhanced giant cell differentiation,
particularly the invasive subtypes. In addition, rosiglitazone, a specific
PPARgamma agonist, reduced giant cell differentiation, while inducing Gcm1, a key
regulator in labyrinth. Finally, reintroducing PPARgamma into null TS cells,
using an adenovirus, normalized invasion and partially reversed defective
labyrinthine differentiation, as assessed both by morphology and marker analysis.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In addition to regulating trophoblast invasion,
PPARgamma plays a predominant role in differentiation of labyrinthine trophoblast
lineages, which, along with fetal endothelium, form the vascular exchange
interface with maternal blood. Elucidating cellular and molecular mechanisms
mediating PPARgamma action will help determine if modulating PPARgamma activity, 
for which clinical pharmacologic agonists already exist, might modify the course 
of pregnancy disorders associated with placental dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2778869
PMID: 19956639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Feb;298(2):R312-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00425.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Magnetic resonance imaging of hypoxic injury to the murine placenta.

Tomlinson TM(1), Garbow JR, Anderson JR, Engelbach JA, Nelson DM, Sadovsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA.

We assessed the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to define placental
hypoxic injury associated with fetal growth restriction. On embryonic day 18.5
(E18.5) we utilized dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI on a 4.7-tesla small
animal scanner to examine the uptake and distribution of gadolinium-based
contrast agent. Quantitative DCE parameter analysis was performed for the
placenta and fetal kidneys of three groups of pregnant C57BL/6 mice: 1) mice that
were exposed to Fi(O(2)) = 12% between E15.5 and E18.5, 2) mice in normoxia with 
food restriction similar to the intake of hypoxic mice between E15.5 and E18.5,
and 3) mice in normoxia that were fed ad libitum. After imaging, we assessed
fetoplacental weight, placental histology, and gene expression. We found that
dams exposed to hypoxia exhibited fetal growth restriction (weight reduction by
28% and 14%, respectively, P < 0.05) with an increased placental-to-fetal ratio. 
By using MRI-based assessment of placental contrast agent kinetics, referenced to
maternal paraspinous muscle, we found decreased placental clearance of contrast
media in hypoxic mice, compared with either control group (61%, P < 0.05). This
was accompanied by diminished contrast accumulation in the hypoxic fetal kidneys 
(23%, P < 0.05), reflecting reduced transplacental gadolinium transport. These
changes were associated with increased expression of placental Phlda2 and Gcm1
transcripts. Exposure to hypoxia near the end of mouse pregnancy reduces
placental perfusion and clearance of contrast. MRI-based DCE imaging provides a
novel tool for dynamic, in vivo assessment of placental function.

PMCID: PMC2828172
PMID: 19923363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2009 Oct;38(10):894-9.

Parallel genotyping of 10,204 single nucleotide polymorphisms to screen for
susceptible genes for IgA nephropathy.

Woo KT(1), Lau YK, Wong KS, Zhao Y, Chan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Medicine Department, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
woo.keng.thye@sgh.com.sg

INTRODUCTION: IgA nephritis (IgAN) is the most common glomerulonephritis
worldwide. We aim to genotype SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) genomewide
in patients with IgAN to search for genetic clues to its aetiology.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genotyping for 10,204 SNPs genomewide was done with the
Gene Chip Human Mapping 10K Microarray (Affymetrix). Twenty-eight patients with
IgAN and 30 normal subjects were screened and analysed for differences in
genotype frequency, allele frequency and heterozygosity reduction.
RESULTS: Among the most significantly associated SNPs, 48 SNPs were found mapping
directly to the intron of 42 genes that localised in 13 somatic chromosomes and
chromosome X. Genotype distribution of these SNPs did not deviate from the
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in normal subjects. The most significantly associated 
gene, glial cells missing homolog 1 (GCM, 2 =13.05, P = 0.000) is a transcription
factor mapped to 6p12.2. GCM1 reported decreased in placenta of patients with
pre-eclampsia. The second gene, Tenascin-R (TNR, 2 = 9.85, P = 0.002) is a
glycoprotein and extra-cellular matrix component mapped to 1q25.1. Tenascin-R was
associated with motor coordination impairment and enhanced anxiety profile in
deficient mice. Interestingly, Triadin (TRDN, 2 = 9.16, P = 0.01) is an integral 
membrane protein mapped to 6q22.31 within the IgAN1 locus. Triadin was shown to
participate in cardiac myocyte arrhythemia. However, there is no published study 
of these genes in IgAN.
CONCLUSION: Forty-two associated genes (particularly GCM1, TNR and TRDN) are
identified as possible susceptibility or marker genes for IgAN. Knowledge of
their mesangial expression and binding capacity for IgA-containing complexes may 
help elucidate the pathogenesis of IgAN.

PMID: 19890582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Hypertens Pregnancy. 2009 Aug;28(4):457-72. doi: 10.3109/10641950802629691.

Hypoxia upregulates GCM1 in human placenta explants.

McCaig D(1), Lyall F.

Author information: 
(1)Maternal and Fetal Medicine Section, Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill, 
Glasgow, UK.

Studies in mice have shown that a variety of genes, including GCM1, regulate the 
differentiation of trophoblast cells. GCM1 is also expressed in the human
placenta. Placental GCM1 protein has been reported to be reduced in preeclampsia.
In view of the close link between hypoxia, hypoxia-reoxygenation, preeclampsia,
placental development and the reported reduction in GCM1, we hypothesised that
GCM1 expression would be affected by hypoxia. The aim was to determine the
effects of hypoxia on GCM1 expression in the human placenta. Two model systems
were used; villous explants and cultured primary cytotrophoblast cells. GCM1
protein was detectable at low levels in explants maintained for 7 h in 8 or 20%
O2. A striking increase in GCM1 was observed when villous explants were incubated
for 1h in 1% O2 (p < 0.002). Incubation of explants for 1 h in 1% O(2) followed
by re-oxygenation for 6 h in 8 or 20% O2 resulted in a decline in GCM1 protein.
Expression of GCM1 was also analysed in primary cytotrophoblast and
syncytiotrophoblast cultured in 8 or 20% O2 or reduced oxygen (1-2% O2)
conditions. GCM1 protein was not detected in any of the experimental conditions
used. This study has shown that acute hypoxia increases GCM-1 protein in villous 
explants. The experiments with purified trophoblast do not support a role for
hypoxia increasing GCM-1 in these cells under the conditions used. The present
findings are in keeping with the complex effects of oxygen depending on the
conditions used. The hypoxic effects on GCM1 warrant further investigation as
they may provide further information on the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

PMID: 19843007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Reproduction. 2009 Dec;138(6):945-51. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0082. Epub 2009 Aug 19.

CD9 regulates transcription factor GCM1 and ERVWE1 expression through the
cAMP/protein kinase A signaling pathway.

Muroi Y(1), Sakurai T, Hanashi A, Kubota K, Nagaoka K, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, 113-8657 Tokyo, Japan.

ERVWE1 (SYNCYTIN-1), a membrane protein originating from the envelope gene of
human endogenous retrovirus-W (HERV-W), mediates the fusion of mononucleated
cytotrophoblasts into multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast. Though ERVWE1 has been 
characterized since its discovery, regulatory mechanisms associated with ERVWE1
expression have not been firmly established. We hypothesized that membrane
protein CD9, involved in cell-cell fusion of fertilization and myogenesis, could 
be involved in the regulation of ERVWE1 gene expression. In this study,
regulatory mechanisms of ERVWE1 expression were studied using human
choriocarcinoma BeWo cells. Forskolin is an activator of adenylate cyclase, which
increased CD9 and ERVWE1 expression. The increase in CD9 expression was inhibited
by a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor, Rp-cAMPS. These results indicate that CD9 
expression is regulated by the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway. Overexpression of CD9 
increased expression levels of ERVWE1 as well as GCM1 (hGCMa), which is a
transcription factor known to activate ERVWE1 gene transcription. However, high
ERVWE1 expression induced by CD9 overexpression did not result in the increase in
chorionic gonadotropin, beta polypeptide production. Moreover, CD9-induced
increase in ERVWE1 and GCM1 expressions were inhibited by Rp-cAMPS. These results
suggest that CD9 increases GCM1 expression via the cAMP/PKA signaling pathway,
resulting in the increase in ERVWE1 expression.

PMID: 19692500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 26;284(26):17411-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.016170. Epub 2009
May 5.

Mechanism of hypoxia-induced GCM1 degradation: implications for the pathogenesis 
of preeclampsia.

Chiang MH(1), Liang FY, Chen CP, Chang CW, Cheong ML, Wang LJ, Liang CY, Lin FY, 
Chou CC, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, and
Division of High Risk Pregnancy, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Preeclampsia is a major pregnancy-specific disorder affecting 5-7% of pregnancies
worldwide. Although hypoxia caused by incomplete trophoblast invasion and
impaired spiral arterial remodeling is thought to be a major cause of
preeclampsia, how hypoxia affects placental development remains uncertain. GCM1
(glial cells missing homolog 1) is a transcription factor critical for placental 
development. In preeclampsia, GCM1 and its target genes syncytin 1 and placental 
growth factor, important for syncytiotrophoblast formation and placental
vasculogenesis, are all decreased. Here we present evidence that GCM1 is a major 
target of hypoxia associated with preeclampsia. We show that hypoxia triggers
GCM1 degradation by suppressing the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt signaling
pathway, leading to GSK-3beta activation. Activated GSK-3beta phosphorylates GCM1
on Ser322, which in turn recruits the F-box protein FBW2, leading to GCM1
ubiquitination and degradation. Importantly, the GSK-3beta inhibitor LiCl
prevented hypoxia-induced GCM1 degradation. Our study identifies a molecular
basis for the disrupted GCM1 transcription network in preeclampsia and provides a
potential avenue for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC2719381
PMID: 19416964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2009;68(1):9-18. doi: 10.1159/000209396. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Syncytin-1 and glial cells missing a: hypoxia-induced deregulated gene expression
along with disordered cell fusion in primary term human trophoblasts.

Wich C(1), Kausler S, Dotsch J, Rascher W, Knerr I.

Author information: 
(1)Children's and Adolescents' Hospital, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Pre-eclampsia, a major cause of perinatal morbidity, is
characterized by alterations in placental oxygen availability and trophoblast
differentiation. We investigated how different levels of hypoxia alter the
expression of syncytin-1, glial cells missing a (GCMa) and syncytin-1 receptor
ASCT2 and affect syncytialization in primary term human trophoblasts.
METHODS: Cells were incubated at 1, 3, 6 and 21% O(2) for 24, 48 and 72 h with or
without cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Gene expression was analyzed by
real-time PCR. Syncytialization was assessed using beta-human chorionic
gonadotropin measurement and desmoplakin immunostaining.
RESULTS: Following incubation with cAMP at 21% O(2), peak gene expression of
syncytin-1 and GCMa was found after 24 h along with syncytium formation at 72 h. 
Conversely, incubation at 1% O(2) led to a time-dependent reduction of GCMa and
syncytin-1 at the transcriptional level. Cell fusion occurred at 21 and 6% O(2)
and was suppressed at 1% O(2). ASCT2 mRNA levels were preserved at normoxia and
downregulated at 1% O(2) after 48 h.
CONCLUSION: Our data support the premise that the expression of GCMa and
syncytin-1 precedes syncytialization of trophoblasts, e.g. at 6% O(2), which is
assumed to resemble physiological conditions. Severe hypoxia is associated with
reduced GCMa and syncytin-1 transcripts and altered fusion of primary
trophoblasts.

PMID: 19321927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2009 Apr;136(8):1363-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.031872.

Map2k1 and Map2k2 genes contribute to the normal development of
syncytiotrophoblasts during placentation.

Nadeau V(1), Guillemette S, Bélanger LF, Jacob O, Roy S, Charron J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, QC, G1R 2J6, Canada.

The mammalian genome contains two ERK/MAP kinase kinase genes, Map2k1 and Map2k2,
which encode dual-specificity kinases responsible for ERK/MAP kinase activation. 
In the mouse, loss of Map2k1 function causes embryonic lethality, whereas Map2k2 
mutants survive with a normal lifespan, suggesting that Map2k1 masks the
phenotype due to the Map2k2 mutation. To uncover the specific function of MAP2K2 
and the threshold requirement of MAP2K proteins during embryo formation, we have 
successively ablated the Map2k gene functions. We report here that Map2k2
haploinsufficiency affects the normal development of placenta in the absence of
one Map2k1 allele. Most Map2k1(+/-)Map2k2(+/-) embryos die during gestation
because of placenta defects restricted to extra-embryonic tissues. The impaired
viability of Map2k1(+/-)Map2k2(+/-) embryos can be rescued when the Map2k1
deletion is restricted to the embryonic tissues. The severity of the placenta
phenotype is dependent on the number of Map2k mutant alleles, the deletion of the
Map2k1 allele being more deleterious. Moreover, the deletion of one or both
Map2k2 alleles in the context of one null Map2k1 allele leads to the formation of
multinucleated trophoblast giant (MTG) cells. Genetic experiments indicate that
these structures are derived from Gcm1-expressing syncytiotrophoblasts (SynT),
which are affected in their ability to form the uniform SynT layer II lining the 
maternal sinuses. Thus, even though Map2k1 plays a predominant role, these
results enlighten the function of Map2k2 in placenta development.

PMID: 19304888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 May;29(10):2748-61. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01391-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
16.

Trophoblast stem cell maintenance by fibroblast growth factor 4 requires MEKK4
activation of Jun N-terminal kinase.

Abell AN(1), Granger DA, Johnson NL, Vincent-Jordan N, Dibble CF, Johnson GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-7365, USA. amy_abell@med.unc.edu

Trophoblast differentiation during placentation involves an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) with loss of E-cadherin and gain of
trophoblast invasiveness. Mice harboring a point mutation that renders inactive
the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase MEKK4 exhibit dysregulated
placental development with increased trophoblast invasion. Isolated MEKK4
kinase-inactive trophoblast stem (TS) cells cultured under undifferentiating,
self-renewing conditions in the presence of fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4)
display increased expression of Slug, Twist, and matrix metalloproteinase 2
(MMP2), loss of E-cadherin, and hyperinvasion of extracellular matrix, each a
hallmark of EMT. MEKK4 kinase-inactive TS cells show a preferential
differentiation to Tpbp alpha- and Gcm1-positive trophoblasts, which are
indicative of spongiotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast differentiation,
respectively. FGF4-stimulated Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 activity is
markedly reduced in MEKK4 kinase-inactive TS cells. Chemical inhibition of JNK in
wild-type TS cells induced a similar EMT response as loss of MEKK4 kinase
activity, including inhibition of E-cadherin expression and increased expression 
of Slug, MMP2, Tpbp alpha, and Gcm1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
revealed changes in AP-1 composition with increased Fra-2 and decreased Fra-1 and
JunB binding to the regulatory regions of Gcm1 and MMP2 genes in MEKK4
kinase-inactive TS cells. Our results define MEKK4 as a signaling hub for FGF4
activation of JNK that is required for maintenance of TS cells in an
undifferentiated state.

PMCID: PMC2682043
PMID: 19289495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell Death Differ. 2009 May;16(5):719-27. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.1. Epub 2009 Feb 
13.

Glial cell missing-1 transcription factor is required for the differentiation of 
the human trophoblast.

Baczyk D(1), Drewlo S, Proctor L, Dunk C, Lye S, Kingdom J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Women's and Infants' Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute of Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Mammalian placentation is a highly regulated process and is dependent on the
proper development of specific trophoblast cell lineages. The two major types of 
trophoblast, villous and extravillous, show mitotic arrest during
differentiation. In mice, the transcription factor, glial cell missing-1 (Gcm1), 
blocks mitosis and is required for syncytiotrophoblast formation and
morphogenesis of the labyrinth, the murine equivalent of the villous placenta.
The human homolog GCM1 has an analogous expression pattern, but its function is
presently unknown. We studied GCM1 function in the human-derived BeWo
choriocarcinoma cell line and in first trimester human placental villous and
extravillous explants. The GCM1 expression was either inhibited by siRNA and
antisense oligonucleotides methods or upregulated by forskolin treatment.
Inhibition of GCM1 resulted in an increased rate of proliferation, but prevented 
de novo syncytiotrophoblast formation in syncytially denuded floating villous
explants. GCM1 inhibition prevented extravillous differentiation along the
invasive pathway in extravillous explants on matrigel. By contrast,
forskolin-induced expression of GCM1 reduced the rate of proliferation and
increased the rate of syncytialization in the floating villous explant model. Our
studies show that GCM1 has a distinct role in the maintenance, development and
turnover of the human trophoblast. Alterations in GCM1 expression or regulation
may explain several aspects of two divergent severe placental insufficiency
syndromes, namely preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction, which cause
extreme preterm birth.

PMID: 19219068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e3905. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003905. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

STOX1 overexpression in choriocarcinoma cells mimics transcriptional alterations 
observed in preeclamptic placentas.

Rigourd V(1), Chauvet C, Chelbi ST, Rebourcet R, Mondon F, Letourneur F, Mignot
TM, Barbaux S, Vaiman D.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe 21, Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104),
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in STOX1 were proposed to be causal for predisposing to
preeclampsia, a hypertensive disorder originating from placental defects,
affecting up to 10% of human pregnancies. However, after the first study
published in 2005 three other groups have dismissed the polymorphism described in
the first paper as a causal mutation.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the present study, we have produced a
choriocarcinoma cell line overexpressing STOX1. This overexpression results in
transcriptional modification of 12.5% of the genes, some of them being direct
targets as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation. STOX1 overexpression
correlates strongly and specifically with transcriptomic alterations in
preeclamptic placentas (r = 0.30, p = 9.10(-7)). Numerous known key modulators of
preeclampsia (such as Endoglin, Syncytin, human chorionic gonadotrophin -hCG-,
and Glial Cell Missing Homolog -GCM1-) were modified in these transformed
choriocarcinoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results contribute to reconcile contradictory data concerning
the involvement of STOX1 in preeclampsia. In addition, they strongly suggest that
anomalies in STOX1 expression are associated with the onset of preeclampsia, thus
indicating that this gene should be the target of future studies. Our cellular
model could constitute an invaluable resource for studying specific aspects of
this human disease.

PMCID: PMC2592700
PMID: 19079545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Placenta. 2009 Jan;30(1):66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.10.009. Epub 2008
Nov 25.

Hyperosmolar stress induces global mRNA responses in placental trophoblast stem
cells that emulate early post-implantation differentiation.

Liu J(1), Xu W, Sun T, Wang F, Puscheck E, Brigstock D, Wang QT, Davis R,
Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)C.S. Mott Center for Human Growth and Development, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201,
USA.

Hyperosmolar stress acts in two ways on the implanting embryo and its major
constituent, placental trophoblast stem cells (TSC). Stress causes homeostasis
that slows development with lesser cell accumulation, increased cell cycle
arrest, and apoptosis. Stress may also cause placental differentiation at
implantation. To test for the homeostatic and differentiation-inducing
consequences of stress, TSC were exposed to hyperosmolar stress for 24 h and
tested using whole mouse genome arrays and Real-time quantitative (Q)PCR. At 0.5 
h, all 31 highly changing mRNA (>1.5-fold compared with unstressed TSC)
decreased, but by 24 h 158/288 genes were upregulated. Many genes upregulated at 
24 h were near baseline levels in unstressed TSC, suggesting new transcription.
Thus few genes change during the early stress response, but by 24 h TSC have
adapted to start new transcription with large gene sets. Types of genes
upregulated at 24 h included homeostatic genes regulating growth and DNA damage
induced (GADD45beta/gamma), activator protein (AP)-1 (junB/junC/ATF3/4), heat
shock proteins (HSP22/68), and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor [CDKI; p15,
p21]. But, stress also induced transcription factors that mediate TSC
differentiation to trophoblast giant cells (TGC) (Stra13, HES1, GATA-binding2),
placental hormones [proliferin, placental lactogen (PL)1, prolactin-like protein 
(PLP)M], and extracellular matrix genes (CCN1/2). Transcription factors for later
placental cell lineages, spongiotrophoblast (MASH2, TPBPalpha) and
syncytiotrophoblast (GCM1, TEF5) and placental hormones (PLPA, PLII) were not
induced by 24 h stress. Thus stress induced the temporal and spatial placental
differentiation normal after implantation. Although differentiation was induced, 
markers of TSC stemness such as inhibitor of differentiation (ID)2 remained at
100% of levels of unstressed TSC, suggesting that retained mRNA might mediate
dedifferentiation were stress to subside.

PMCID: PMC3343317
PMID: 19036436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Placenta. 2009 Jan;30(1):96-104. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.09.014. Epub 2008
Nov 12.

Early gene expression and morphogenesis of the murine chorioallantoic placenta in
vivo and in vitro.

Proctor LK(1), Dunk C, Baczyk D, Kingdom JC, Adamson SL.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Mount Sinai Hospital, and Department of Physiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: In mice the exchange of oxygen and nutrients between mother and fetus
occurs in the chorioallantoic placenta where fetal capillaries come in close
proximity with maternal blood perfusing trophoblast-lined sinusoids. Despite its 
critical importance, quantitative in vivo gene expression over the initial stages
of chorioallantoic placental development has not been described, nor are there in
vitro systems recapitulating the critical syncytiotrophoblast differentiation
step in its formation. Here we describe molecular events that occur during the
onset of chorioallantoic morphogenesis in mice in vivo, and in placental explant 
and whole conceptus cultures in vitro.
RESULTS: Chorioallantoic morphogenesis began immediately following allantoic
fusion with the chorion in vivo, and was associated with significant upregulation
of syncytiotrophoblast associated mRNA (Gcm1 and Syncytin A). However mouse
placentas with chorioallantoic point attachment cultured with the allantois or as
whole conceptuses did not upregulate Gcm1 and/or Syncytin A, suggesting that
syncytiotrophoblast differentiation did not occur in vitro. Failure of
morphogenesis appeared to be due to failure to sustain in vitro the chorionic
trophoblast cells from which the syncytiotrophoblast cells are derived. In vitro 
culture conditions did support the upregulation of ectoplacental cone marker
Tpbpalpha, maintenance of giant cell marker Pl1, and maintenance of Fgfr2
expression; all of which mimicked in vivo events observed over this developmental
interval.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that chorionic trophoblast maintenance and the early
events that occur in vivo between chorioallantoic point attachment and primary
villous formation are dependent on undefined intrauterine factors that were not
present in the in vitro culture system. Nevertheless, in vitro culture conditions
were appropriate to reproduce in vivo expression levels of Fgfr2, Pl1, and
Tpbpalpha in placental explants.

PMID: 19007985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):227-34. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070920. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Glial cells missing homologue 1 is induced in differentiating equine chorionic
girdle trophoblast cells.

de Mestre AM(1), Miller D, Roberson MS, Liford J, Chizmar LC, McLaughlin KE,
Antczak DF.

Author information: 
(1)Baker Institute for Animal Health and Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 
ademestre@rvc.ac.uk

The objective of this study was to identify transcription factors associated with
differentiation of the chorionic girdle, the invasive form of equine trophoblast.
The expression patterns of five transcription factors were determined on a panel 
of conceptus tissues from early horse pregnancy. Tissues from Days 15 through 46 
were tested. Eomesodermin (EOMES), glial cells missing homologue 1 (GCM1), heart 
and neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 1 (HAND1), caudal type homeobox
2 (CDX2), and distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3) were detected in horse trophoblast,
but the expression patterns for these genes varied. EOMES had the most restricted
distribution, while DLX3 CDX2, and HAND1 were widely expressed. GCM1 seemed to
increase in the developing chorionic girdle, and this was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR assays. GCM1 expression preceded a striking increase in
expression of equine chorionic gonadotropin beta (CGB) in the chorionic girdle,
and binding sites for GCM1 were discovered in the promoter region of the CGB
gene. GCM1, CGB, and CGA mRNA were expressed preferentially in binucleate cells
as opposed to uninucleate cells of the chorionic girdle. Based on these findings,
it is likely that GCM1 has a role in differentiation and function of the invasive
trophoblast of the equine chorionic girdle and endometrial cups. The equine
binucleate chorionic girdle (CG) secreting trophoblast shares molecular,
morphological, and functional characteristics with human syncytiotrophoblast and 
represents a model for studies of human placental function.

PMCID: PMC2804814
PMID: 18971425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biol Reprod. 2008 Nov;79(5):914-20. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.071407. Epub 2008
Aug 13.

Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBE2D2 is responsible for FBXW2 (F-box and WD repeat
domain containing 2)-mediated human GCM1 (glial cell missing homolog 1)
ubiquitination and degradation.

Chiang MH(1), Chen LF, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan.

Glial cell missing homolog 1 (GCM1) is an important transcription factor
regulating placental cell fusion. Recently, we have demonstrated that GCM1 is a
labile protein and that the F-box protein FBXW2 (F-box and WD repeat domain
containing 2) mediates GCM1 ubiquitination for proteasomal degradation. Multiple 
factors are involved in the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation system. Therefore,
in order to better understand the mechanism regulating GCM1 stability, we further
isolated and characterized the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme responsible for
FBXW2-mediated ubiquitination of GCM1 in this study. We prepared and screened a
variety of E2 proteins in an in vitro ubiquitination assay system for GCM1 and
found that UBE2D2 is required for the SCF(FBXW2) E3 ligase in regulation of GCM1 
ubiquitination. We also demonstrated that the enzyme activity of UBE2D2 is
required for GCMa ubiquitination and for association with the SCF(FBXW2) complex.
Moreover, knocking down UBE2D2 expression by RNA interference not only suppressed
FBXW2-mediated GCM1 ubiquitination, but also prolonged the half-life of GCM1 in
vivo. Our results suggest that UBE2D2 is a functional E2 protein which, together 
with FBXW2, regulates GCM1 stability in the placenta.

PMID: 18703417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2008;24:159-81. doi:
10.1146/annurev.cellbio.24.110707.175418.

The evolution, regulation, and function of placenta-specific genes.

Rawn SM(1), Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biology & Experimental Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, and the Graduate Program in Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada.
srawn@ucalgary.ca

A number of placenta-specific genes (e.g., Tpbp, Plac1, Syncytin, and
retrotransposon-associated genes such as Peg10, Rtl1, Endothelin B receptor,
Insl4, Leptin, Midline1, and Pleiotrophin), enhancer elements (e.g., glycoprotein
hormone alpha-subunit) and gene isoforms (e.g., 3betaHSD, Cyp19), as well as
placenta-specific members of gene families (e.g., Gcm1, Mash2, Rhox, Esx1,
Cathepsin, PAG, TKDP, Psg, Siglec) have been identified. This review summarizes
their evolution, regulation, and biochemical functions and discusses their
significance for placental development and function. Strikingly, the number of
unique, truly placenta-specific genes that have been discovered to date is very
small. The vast majority of placenta-specific gene products have resulted from
one of three mechanisms: evolution of placenta-specific promoters, evolution of
large gene families with several placenta-specific members, or adoption of
functions associated with endogenous retroviruses and retroelements.
Interestingly, nearly all the examples of placenta-specific genes that have been 
discovered to date are not present in all placental mammals.

PMID: 18616428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(11):3834-46. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn306. Epub 2008
May 21.

bZIP-Type transcription factors CREB and OASIS bind and stimulate the promoter of
the mammalian transcription factor GCMa/Gcm1 in trophoblast cells.

Schubert SW(1), Abendroth A, Kilian K, Vogler T, Mayr B, Knerr I,
Hashemolhosseini S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Kinder- und Jugendklinik and
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Zentrum, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Fahrstrasse 17, D-91054
Erlangen, Germany.

One of the master regulators of placental cell fusion in mammals leading to
multi-nucleated syncytiotrophoblasts is the transcription factor GCMa. Recently, 
we proved that the cAMP-driven protein kinase A signaling pathway is fundamental 
for up-regulation of GCMa transcript levels and protein stability. Here, we show 
that Transducer of Regulated CREB activity (TORC1), the human co-activator of
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), but not a dominant-negative CREB
mutant, significantly up-regulates the GCMa promoter. We identified potential
cAMP response element (CRE)-binding sites within the GCMa promoter upstream of
the transcriptional start site. Only the CRE site at -1337 interacted strongly
with CREB in promoter mapping experiments. The characterization of GCMa promoter 
mutants and additional bZIP-type family members demonstrated that also old
astrocyte specifically-induced substance (OASIS) is able to stimulate GCMa
transcription. Knockdown of endogenous CREB or OASIS in BeWo cells decreased
endogenous GCMa mRNA level and activity. Overexpression of TORC1 or OASIS in
choriocarcinoma cells led to placental cell fusion, accompanied by placental
expression of gap junction forming protein connexin-43. Further, we show that
CREB expression is replaced by OASIS expression around E12.5 suggesting that a
sequential order of bZIP-type family members ensures a high rate of GCMa
transcription throughout placentation.

PMCID: PMC2441803
PMID: 18495750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 2008 Jun;135(12):2083-91. doi: 10.1242/dev.020099. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

Early patterning of the chorion leads to the trilaminar trophoblast cell
structure in the placental labyrinth.

Simmons DG(1), Natale DR, Begay V, Hughes M, Leutz A, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, The University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, 
AB, T2N 4N1, Canada.

The labyrinth of the rodent placenta contains villi that are the site of nutrient
exchange between mother and fetus. They are covered by three trophoblast cell
types that separate the maternal blood sinusoids from fetal capillaries--a single
mononuclear cell that is a subtype of trophoblast giant cell (sinusoidal or
S-TGC) with endocrine function and two multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast layers,
each resulting from cell-cell fusion, that function in nutrient transport. The
developmental origins of these cell types have not previously been elucidated. We
report here the discovery of cell-layer-restricted genes in the mid-gestation
labyrinth (E12.5-14.5) including Ctsq in S-TGCs (also Hand1-positive), Syna in
syncytiotrophoblast layer I (SynT-I), and Gcm1, Cebpa and Synb in
syncytiotrophoblast layer II (SynT-II). These genes were also expressed in
distinct layers in the chorion as early as E8.5, prior to villous formation.
Specifically, Hand1 was expressed in apical cells lining maternal blood spaces
(Ctsq is not expressed until E12.5), Syna in a layer immediately below, and Gcm1,
Cebpa and Synb in basal cells in contact with the allantois. Cebpa and Synb were 
co-expressed with Gcm1 and were reduced in Gcm1 mutants. By contrast, Hand1 and
Syna expression was unaltered in Gcm1 mutants, suggesting that Gcm1-positive
cells are not required for the induction of the other chorion layers. These data 
indicate that the three differentiated trophoblast cell types in the labyrinth
arise from distinct and autonomous precursors in the chorion that are patterned
before morphogenesis begins.

PMCID: PMC3159581
PMID: 18448564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. BMC Genomics. 2008 Apr 28;9:194. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-194.

Phylogenetic and comparative gene expression analysis of barley (Hordeum vulgare)
WRKY transcription factor family reveals putatively retained functions between
monocots and dicots.

Mangelsen E(1), Kilian J, Berendzen KW, Kolukisaoglu UH, Harter K, Jansson C,
Wanke D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics, The Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences (SLU), PO Box 7080, SE-750 07Uppsala, Sweden.
elke.mangelsen@vbsg.slu.se

BACKGROUND: WRKY proteins belong to the WRKY-GCM1 superfamily of zinc finger
transcription factors that have been subject to a large plant-specific
diversification. For the cereal crop barley (Hordeum vulgare), three different
WRKY proteins have been characterized so far as regulators in sucrose signaling, 
pathogen defense, and in response to cold and drought. However, their
phylogenetic relationship remained unresolved.
RESULTS: In this study, we used available sequence information to identify a
minimum number of 45 barley WRKY transcription factor (HvWRKY) genes. According
to their structural features, the HvWRKY factors were classified into the
previously defined polyphyletic WRKY subgroups 1 to 3. Furthermore, we could
assign putative orthologs of the HvWRKY proteins in Arabidopsis and rice. While
in most cases clades of orthologous proteins were formed within each group or
subgroup, other clades were composed of paralogous proteins for the grasses and
Arabidopsis only, which is indicative of specific gene radiation events. To gain 
insight into their putative functions, we examined expression profiles of WRKY
genes from publicly available microarray data resources and found group specific 
expression patterns. While putative orthologs of the HvWRKY transcription factors
have been inferred from phylogenetic sequence analysis, we performed a
comparative expression analysis of WRKY genes in Arabidopsis and barley. Indeed, 
highly correlative expression profiles were found between some of the putative
orthologs.
CONCLUSION: HvWRKY genes have not only undergone radiation in monocot or dicot
species, but exhibit evolutionary traits specific to grasses. HvWRKY proteins
exhibited not only sequence similarities between orthologs with Arabidopsis, but 
also relatedness in their expression patterns. This correlative expression is
indicative for a putative conserved function of related WRKY proteins in monocot 
and dicot species.

PMCID: PMC2390551
PMID: 18442363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 29;283(9):5460-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710110200. Epub 2007
Dec 31.

Identification of integrin-alpha4, Rb1, and syncytin a as murine placental target
genes of the transcription factor GCMa/Gcm1.

Schubert SW(1), Lamoureux N, Kilian K, Klein-Hitpass L, Hashemolhosseini S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Fahrstr. 17, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Members of the GCM (glial cells missing) transcription factor family have been
shown to act as master regulators in different cells during mammalian and fly
development being responsible for processes including gliogenesis, hematopoiesis,
placental formation, and development of the parathyroidea. In the central nervous
system of flies, several target genes for GCM have been reported, namely repo,
pointed, and tramtrack. In mammals, two GCM genes are known (GCMa and GCMb), but 
the knowledge of their target genes is very limited. Here, we present for the
first time a global approach aimed to identify GCMa target genes. We found 66
genes up-regulated and 11 genes down-regulated in GCMa-deficient chorionic tissue
of mice at embryonic day 9.5. Moreover, we verified by quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR all 11 down-regulated genes. The two most strongly
down-regulated genes, integrin-alpha4 and retinoblastoma (Rb1), were further
analyzed by promoter studies. Additionally, we identified down-regulation of the 
murine syncytin A gene, which is fundamental for syncytiotrophoblast formation.
Finally, we proved strong down-regulation of integrin-alpha4 and Rb1 transcript
levels by in situ hybridization in murine GCMa-deficient placentae at embryonic
day 9.5. Our data demonstrate for the first time that genes encoding key
regulators of placental tissue formation and architecture are regulated by GCMa.

PMID: 18167345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Dyn. 2008 Feb;237(2):316-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21418.

Impaired placental trophoblast lineage differentiation in Alkbh1(-/-) mice.

Pan Z(1), Sikandar S, Witherspoon M, Dizon D, Nguyen T, Benirschke K, Wiley C,
Vrana P, Lipkin SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California
92697, USA.

E. coli AlkB has been intensively studied since 1983, but the in vivo roles of
its mammalian homologue Alkbh1 are unknown. We, therefore, created null mice for 
Alkbh1. Alkbh1 mRNA is expressed at highest levels in the trophoblast lineages of
the developing placenta. Alkbh1(-/-) placentas have decreased expression of
differentiated trophoblast markers including Tpbp, Gcm1, and Pl-1, and increased 
expression of the trophoblast stem cell marker Eomes. Alkbh1 localizes to nuclear
euchromatin, and interacts strongly with Mrj, an essential placental gene that
mediates gene repression by recruitment of class II histone deacetylases (HDACs).
Competition experiments show Alkbh1 and HDAC4 binding to Mrj are mutually
exclusive, which causes decreased HDAC activity and increased target gene
expression. Our study demonstrates Alkbh1 performs important functions in
placental trophoblast lineage differentiation and participates in mechanisms of
transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 18163532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biol Reprod. 2008 May;78(5):841-51. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Glial cell missing 1 regulates placental growth factor (PGF) gene transcription
in human trophoblast.

Chang M(1), Mukherjea D, Gobble RM, Groesch KA, Torry RJ, Torry DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois 62794, USA.

Placental growth factor (PGF, previously known as PlGF) is prominently expressed 
by trophoblasts in human placenta, whereas most nontrophoblast cells express low 
levels of PGF mRNA under normal physiological conditions. We have shown that
hypoxia decreases PGF expression in the trophoblast, but little is known about
transcriptional regulation of PGF gene expression. We sought to determine
promoter regions of the human PGF gene that contribute to its restricted high
constitutive expression in the trophoblast. Overlapping putative promoter regions
of human PGF gene encompassing 2-1.5 kb were cloned into reporter vectors and
co-transfected into trophoblast and nontrophoblast cell lines. Promoter activity 
generated by a 2-1.5-kb clone was significantly higher in trophoblasts than in
nontrophoblasts. Selective deletion mutants showed that a clone encompassing the 
PGF (2-828/++34) region generated promoter activity similar to the 2-1.5-kb
region in the trophoblast. However, deletion of another 131 bp from this subclone
(2-698/++34) resulted in significantly less promoter activity in the trophoblast.
The (2-828/2-698) region significantly enhanced activity of a minimal promoter
construct in trophoblast but not in nontrophoblast cells, suggesting that this
region contributes to regulating PGF transcription in the trophoblast.
Site-directed mutagenesis of a glial cell missing 1 (GCM1) motif in the 131-bp
region significantly decreased enhancer activity in the trophoblast. Furthermore,
overexpression of GCM1 significantly increased PGF 2-1.5-kb promoter activity and
PGF mRNA expression in trophoblast and nontrophoblast cells. Forced
overexpression of GCM1 restored PGF expression in the hypoxic trophoblast. These 
data support a functional role for GCM1 contributing to constitutively high
trophoblast PGF expression and is the first direct evidence of an
oxygen-responsive, trophoblast-specific transcription factor contributing to the 
regulation of PGF expression.

PMCID: PMC2442461
PMID: 18160678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):27239-49. Epub 2007 Jul 23.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier modification regulates the DNA binding activity of 
glial cell missing Drosophila homolog a.

Chou CC(1), Chang C, Liu JH, Chen LF, Hsiao CD, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan.

Glial cell missing Drosophila homolog a (GCMa) is an essential transcription
factor for placental development, which controls the differentiation of the
syncytiotrophoblast layer. Although the activity of GCMa can be
post-translationally regulated by protein phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and
acetylation, it is unknown whether GCMa activity can be regulated by sumoylation.
In this report, we investigated the role of sumoylation in the regulation of GCMa
activity. We demonstrated that Ubc9, the E2 component of the sumoylation
machinery, specifically interacts with the N-terminal domain of GCMa and promotes
GCMa sumoylation on lysine 156. Moreover, GCMa-mediated transcriptional
activation was repressed by sumoylation but was enhanced in the presence of the
SUMO-specific protease, SENP1. The repressive effect of sumoylation on GCMa
transcriptional activity was attributed to decreased DNA binding activity of
GCMa. Furthermore, structural analysis revealed a steric clash between the SUMO1 
moiety of sumoylated GCMa and the DNA-binding surfaces of GCMa, which may
destabilize the interaction between GCMa and its cognate DNA sequence. Our study 
demonstrates that GCMa is a new sumoylation substrate and its activity is
down-regulated by sumoylation.

PMID: 17646165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(14):5201-13. Epub 2007 May 14.

Transcriptional repressor erf determines extraembryonic ectoderm differentiation.

Papadaki C(1), Alexiou M, Cecena G, Verykokakis M, Bilitou A, Cross JC, Oshima
RG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Voutes, Heraklion, Crete 710 03, Greece.

Extraembryonic ectoderm differentiation and chorioallantoic attachment are
fibroblast growth factor (FGF)- and transforming growth factor beta-regulated
processes that are the first steps in the development of the placenta labyrinth
and the establishment of the fetal-maternal circulation in the developing embryo.
Only a small number of genes have been demonstrated to be important in
trophoblast stem cell differentiation. Erf is a ubiquitously expressed
Erk-regulated, ets domain transcriptional repressor expressed throughout
embryonic development and adulthood. However, in the developing placenta, after
7.5 days postcoitum (dpc) its expression is restricted to the extraembryonic
ectoderm, and its expression is restricted after 9.5 dpc in a subpopulation of
labyrinth cells. Homozygous deletion of Erf in mice leads to a block of chorionic
cell differentiation before chorioallantoic attachment, resulting in a persisting
chorion layer, a persisting ectoplacental cone cavity, failure of chorioallantoic
attachment, and absence of labyrinth. These defects result in embryo death by
10.5 dpc. Trophoblast stem cell lines derived from Erf(dl1/dl1) knockout
blastocysts exhibit delayed differentiation and decreased expression of
spongiotrophoblast markers, consistent with the persisting chorion layer, the
expanded giant cell layer, and the diminished spongiotrophoblast layer observed
in vivo. Our data suggest that attenuation of FGF/Erk signaling and consecutive
Erf nuclear localization and function is required for extraembryonic ectoderm
differentiation, ectoplacental cone cavity closure, and chorioallantoic
attachment.

PMCID: PMC1951951
PMID: 17502352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Neurovirol. 2007;13(1):29-37.

Influenza A virus transactivates the mouse envelope gene encoding syncytin B and 
its regulator, glial cells missing 1.

Asp L(1), Nellåker C, Karlsson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Linnea.Asp@ki.se

Recently, two candidate analogs for human syncytin, denoted syncytins A and B,
were identified in the murine genome. These were found to have expression
patterns and functions similar to human syncytin. In addition, the identification
of glial cells missing (GCM)-binding motifs in putative promoter regions of the
mouse syncytins imply analogous regulation. Transcriptional modulation of
syncytin by exogenous agents was recently suggested by studies reporting
transactivation of syncytin in human cell lines following virus infections. The
authors report that influenza A virus infection increased the levels of
transcripts encoding Gcm1 and syncytin B, but not syncytin A, in NIH-3T3 cells as
well as in mouse primary neurons or glia. Overexpression of human GCM1 in NIH-3T3
cells resulted in increased levels of transcripts encoding syncytin B but not
syncytin A. Systemic administration of neurotropic influenza A virus resulted in 
a neuronal infection and increased levels of Gcm1-encoding transcripts in brains 
of young mice. The mouse may therefore be useful for studies on the expression
and function of endogenous retroviral envelope genes and transcription factors
regulating their expression in the placenta and brain during physiological or
pathological conditions.

PMID: 17454446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2007 Feb;134(3):625-34.

Neurogenic role of Gcm transcription factors is conserved in chicken spinal cord.

Soustelle L(1), Trousse F, Jacques C, Ceron J, Cochard P, Soula C, Giangrande A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Although glial cells missing (gcm) genes are known as glial determinants in the
fly embryo, the role of vertebrate orthologs in the central nervous system is
still under debate. Here we show for the first time that the chicken ortholog of 
fly gcm (herein referred to as c-Gcm1), is expressed in early neuronal lineages
of the developing spinal cord and is required for neural progenitors to
differentiate as neurons. Moreover, c-Gcm1 overexpression is sufficient to
trigger cell cycle exit and neuronal differentiation in neural progenitors. Thus,
c-Gcm1 expression constitutes a crucial step in the developmental cascade that
prompts progenitors to generate neurons: c-Gcm1 acts downstream of proneural
(neurogenin) and progenitor (Sox1-3) factors and upstream of NeuroM neuronal
differentiation factor. Strikingly, this neurogenic role is not specific to the
vertebrate gene, as fly gcm and gcm2 are also sufficient to induce the expression
of neuronal markers. Interestingly, the neurogenic role is restricted to
post-embryonic stages and we identify two novel brain neuronal lineages
expressing and requiring gcm genes. Finally, we show that fly gcm and the chick
and mouse orthologs induce expression of neural markers in HeLa cells. These
data, which demonstrate a conserved neurogenic role for Gcm transcription
factors, call for a re-evaluation of the mode of action of these genes during
evolution.

PMID: 17215311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(22):6505-20. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

The natural history of the WRKY-GCM1 zinc fingers and the relationship between
transcription factors and transposons.

Babu MM(1), Iyer LM, Balaji S, Aravind L.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. madanm@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

WRKY and GCM1 are metal chelating DNA-binding domains (DBD) which share a four
stranded fold. Using sensitive sequence searches, we show that this WRKY-GCM1
fold is also shared by the FLYWCH Zn-finger domain and the DBDs of two classes of
Mutator-like element (MULE) transposases. We present evidence that they share a
stabilizing core, which suggests a possible origin from a BED finger-like
intermediate that was in turn ultimately derived from a C2H2 Zn-finger domain.
Through a systematic study of the phyletic pattern, we show that this WRKY-GCM1
superfamily is a widespread eukaryote-specific group of transcription factors
(TFs). We identified several new members across diverse eukaryotic lineages,
including potential TFs in animals, fungi and Entamoeba. By integrating sequence,
structure, gene expression and transcriptional network data, we present evidence 
that at least two major global regulators belonging to this superfamily in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Rcs1p and Aft2p) have evolved from transposons, and
attained the status of transcription regulatory hubs in recent course of
ascomycete yeast evolution. In plants, we show that the lineage-specific
expansion of WRKY-GCM1 domain proteins acquired functional diversity mainly
through expression divergence rather than by protein sequence divergence. We also
use the WRKY-GCM1 superfamily as an example to illustrate the importance of
transposons in the emergence of new TFs in different lineages.

PMCID: PMC1702500
PMID: 17130173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(22):8336-46. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Placental but not heart defects are associated with elevated hypoxia-inducible
factor alpha levels in mice lacking prolyl hydroxylase domain protein 2.

Takeda K(1), Ho VC, Takeda H, Duan LJ, Nagy A, Fong GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030-3501, USA.

PHD1, PHD2, and PHD3 are prolyl hydroxylase domain proteins that regulate the
stability of hypoxia-inducible factor alpha subunits (HIF-alpha). To determine
the roles of individual PHDs during mouse development, we disrupted all three Phd
genes and found that Phd2(-/-) embryos died between embryonic days 12.5 and 14.5 
whereas Phd1(-/-) or Phd3(-/-) mice were apparently normal. In Phd2(-/-) mice,
severe placental and heart defects preceded embryonic death. Placental defects
included significantly reduced labyrinthine branching morphogenesis, widespread
penetration of the labyrinth by spongiotrophoblasts, and abnormal distribution of
trophoblast giant cells. The expression of several trophoblast markers was also
altered, including an increase in the spongiotrophoblast marker Mash2 and
decreases in the labyrinthine markers Tfeb and Gcm1. In the heart, trabeculae
were poorly developed, the myocardium was remarkably thinner, and
interventricular septum was incompletely formed. Surprisingly, while there were
significant global increases in HIF-alpha protein levels in the placenta and the 
embryo proper, there was no specific HIF-alpha increase in the heart. Taken
together, these data indicate that among all three PHD proteins, PHD2 is uniquely
essential during mouse embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1636770
PMID: 16966370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 1;301(1):218-26. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

R-spondin3 is required for mouse placental development.

Aoki M(1), Mieda M, Ikeda T, Hamada Y, Nakamura H, Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Gene Regulation, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, 
2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, Japan.

Mouse R-spondin3 (Rspo3) is a member of the R-spondin protein family, which is
characterized by furin-like cysteine-rich domains and a thrombospondin type 1
repeat. Rspo3 has been proposed to function as a secretory molecule that promotes
the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. We generated mice bearing a mutant Rspo3 
allele in which a lacZ-coding region replaced the coding region of the first
exon. The homozygous mutant mice died at about embryonic day 10, due to impaired 
formation of the labyrinthine layer of the placenta. Rspo3 was expressed in the
allantoic component of the labyrinth. In the homozygous mutant placentas, fetal
blood vessels did not penetrate into the chorion, and expression of Gcm1,
encoding the transcription factor glial cells missing-1 (Gcm1), was dramatically 
reduced in the chorionic trophoblast cells. These findings suggest a critical
role for Rspo3 in the interaction between chorion and allantois in labyrinthine
development.

PMID: 16963017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Differentiation. 2006 Sep;74(7):393-401.

Branching morphogenesis during development of placental villi.

Cross JC(1), Nakano H, Natale DR, Simmons DG, Watson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, HSC
Room 2279, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary AB, Canada T2N 4N1. jcross@ucalgary.ca

The placenta forms a complex interface between the mother and fetus during
development that is designed for efficient nutrient exchange. A large surface
area is created by extensive branching morphogenesis of the trophoblast-derived
epithelium to create a villous network, called the labyrinth in rodents. These
villi are subsequently vascularized with an elaborate capillary network.
Morphogenesis begins with selection of a subset of trophoblast cells in the basal
layer of the chorion that express the Gcm1 transcription factor. These cells
leave the cell cycle and undergo cell shape changes that initiate a process of
involution to create primary villi into which fetal blood vessels grow. Much less
is known about the regulation of subsequent events in branching, certainly
compared with other organs. However, over 60 different mouse mutants have defects
during later labyrinth development. Some of these mutant genes encode components 
of signaling pathways such as the fibroblast growth factor and Wnt pathways that 
play evolutionarily conserved roles in other branched organs, These mutants
represent a still largely untapped resource as most of them have not been studied
in detail in relation to placental morphogenesis.

PMID: 16916377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Hiroshima J Med Sci. 2006 Mar;55(1):9-15.

Increased plasma mRNAs of placenta-specific 1 (PLAC1) and glial cells-missing 1
(GCM1) in mothers with pre-eclampsia.

Fujito N(1), Samura O, Miharu N, Tanigawa M, Hyodo M, Kudo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. nfujito@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

In this study we have investigated whether quantitative analysis of placental
mRNAs in maternal plasma provides a way to monitor placental status. We measured 
plasma concentrations of human chorionic gonadotropin beta-subunit (betahCG) and 
human placental lactogen (hPL) mRNAs as previously reported mRNAs and pregnancy
associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A), placenta-specific 1 (PLAC1) and glial
cells-missing 1 (GCM1) mRNAs, which have not been measured during the course of
normal pregnancy. Firstly, peripheral blood was obtained at various times from
healthy pregnant women to clarify the time course of placental mRNAs. Secondly,
blood was obtained from women with pre-eclampsia and gestational age-matched
controls to examine whether placental mRNAs change in pre-eclampsia. Plasma was
separated from these samples for extraction of RNA, followed by reverse
transcription polymerse chain reaction analysis. Median concentrations of PLAC1
and GCM1 mRNA in plasma of pre-eclamptic subjects respectively were 1625 and 2141
copies/ml, significantly higher than 195 and 881 copies/ml, the values for
controls (Mann-Whitney test, p<0.001). No significant difference was seen in hPL,
betahCG, or PAPP-A mRNA concentration between pre-eclamptic and control groups.
Plasma PLAC1 and GCM1 mRNAs appear promising as noninvasively measurable
molecular markers for pre-eclampsia.

PMID: 16594548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Mar 9;34(5):1459-69. Print 2006.

Histone deacetylase 3 binds to and regulates the GCMa transcription factor.

Chuang HC(1), Chang CW, Chang GD, Yao TP, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan.

Human GCMa transcription factor regulates expression of syncytin, a placental
fusogenic protein mediating trophoblastic fusion. Recently, we have demonstrated 
that CBP-mediated GCMa acetylation underlies the activated cAMP/PKA signaling
pathway that stimulates trophoblastic fusion. Because protein acetylation is a
reversible modification governed by histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone
deacetylase (HDACs), in this study we investigated the key HDACs responsible for 
deacetylation of GCMa and thus the reduction in GCMa activity to avoid unwanted
fusion events that may have adverse effects on placental morphogenesis. We herein
demonstrate that the HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), increases the level of
acetylated GCMa and that HDAC1, 3, 4 and 5 interact with and deacetylate GCMa.
Glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays further verified direct
interaction between GCMa and HDAC3 or CBP and HDAC3. HDAC3 counteracts the
transcriptional coactivator activity of CBP and the enhancement effect of CBP on 
GCMa-mediated transcriptional activation. Correlatively, we found in placental
cells that HDAC3 associates with the proximal GCMa-binding site (pGBS) in the
syncytin promoter and dissociates from pGBS in the presence of forskolin, which
stimulates the association of CBP and GCMa with pGBS. Our studies support that
trophoblastic fusion in placental morphogenesis depends on the regulation of GCMa
activity by HAT and HDAC.

PMCID: PMC1401512
PMID: 16528103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Ying Yong Sheng Tai Xue Bao. 2005 Dec;16(12):2476-8.

[Effects of pine wood nematode on propagation of its carrying bacteria].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin F(1), Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)College of Forestry Resources and Environment, Nanjing Forestry University,
Nanjing 210037, China. ptfern@126.com

In this paper, the aseptic eggs of Bursaphelenchus xylophilus were obtained after
treated with 30% H202, and cultured with Pinus thunbergii callus. Ten B.
xylophilus-carrying bacterial strains directly isolated from diseased P.
thugbergii and P. massoniana in six epidemic provinces i.e., GcM6-2A Pseudomonas 
putida, GcM6-1A P. putida, ZpB1-2A P. putida, HeM2A Pseudomonas sp., HeM1A
Pseudomonas sp., HeM142B Pseudomonas sp., GcM1-3A P. cepacia and HM3 Pantoeu sp.,
ZpB4-2B Staphylococcus sciuri and ZpB2-3A Enterobacter amnigenus, were collected,
and the effects of axenic B. xylophilus (ABx) on their propagation were studied. 
The results showed that pine wood nematode (PWN) promoted the propagation of 7
bacterial strains in Pseudomonas and 1 bacterial strain in Pantoeu sp., including
Pseudomonas putida, P. putida, P. putida , Pseudomonas sp., Pseudomonas sp.,
Pseudomonas sp., P. cepacia and Pantoeu sp., but inhibited Staphylococcus sciuri 
and Enterobacter amnigenus, which could explain the phenomenon that Pseudomonas
was the prevailing genus of the bacteria carried by PWN, and might provide
essential nutrition to the bacteria. The close relationship between PWN and
bacterial strains in Pseudomonas might account for the pine wood nematode
disease.

PMID: 16515211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Dec;14(6):697-711.

Transforming growth factor-beta induces differentiation of the labyrinthine
trophoblast stem cell line SM10.

Selesniemi K(1), Reedy M, Gultice A, Guilbert LJ, Brown TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Cell Biology, and Physiology, Wright State
University School of Medicine, Dayton, Ohio 45435, USA.

The mammalian placenta consists of different trophoblast cell types that assist
in the variety of functions required for the maintenance of pregnancy. In
rodents, labyrinthine trophoblasts of the placenta are especially important,
because they are capable of differentiating into fused labyrinthine cells, which 
form the feto-maternal exchange surface. Even though the molecular signals
triggering labyrinthine trophoblast differentiation are poorly understood,
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) has been shown to be present in the
placental environment and alter trophoblast development. In this study, we
investigated the effects of TGF-beta on the differentiation of the labyrinthine
trophoblast stem cell lines SM10 and HRP-1. RT-PCR analyses demonstrated that
while the molecular expression of labyrinthine-specific lineage markers (Esx1,
Tfeb, and Tec) was maintained in TGF-beta-treated SM10 and HRP-1 cells, TGF-beta 
induced the down-regulation of trophoblast stem cell markers Id2 and Cdx2. In
contrast, TGF-beta induced the expression of a marker of differentiated
labyrinthine trophoblasts, Gcm1, only in the SM10 cell line. Furthermore, we
demonstrated an increased glucose uptake in the TGF-beta-treated SM10 cells,
indicative of functional differentiation. Finally, cell fusion in
TGF-beta-treated SM10 and HRP-1 cells was investigated by western blotting
analysis of placental alkaline phosphatase and cadherin-11 and by microscopic
analyses of cell morphology using green fluorescent protein (GFP) and rhodamine
phalloidin staining. The western blotting and morphological analyses indicate
TGF-beta-induced cell fusion and morphological differentiation in the SM10 cell
line. The SM10 cell line will provide a new and unique model for detailed
analysis of TGF-beta-induced molecular events associated with labyrinthine
trophoblast differentiation and function.

PMID: 16433625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(19):8401-14.

Stimulation of GCMa transcriptional activity by cyclic AMP/protein kinase A
signaling is attributed to CBP-mediated acetylation of GCMa.

Chang CW(1), Chuang HC, Yu C, Yao TP, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115,
Taiwan.

Human GCMa is a zinc-containing transcription factor primarily expressed in
placenta. GCMa regulates expression of syncytin gene, which encodes for a
placenta-specific membrane protein that mediates trophoblastic fusion and the
formation of syncytiotrophoblast layer required for efficient fetal-maternal
exchange of nutrients and oxygen. The adenylate cyclase activator, forskolin,
stimulates syncytin gene expression and cell fusion in cultured placental cells. 
Here we present evidence that cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling pathway activates the
syncytin gene expression by regulating GCMa activity. We found that forskolin and
protein kinase A (PKA) enhances GCMa-mediated transcriptional activation.
Furthermore, PKA treatment stimulates the association of GCMa with CBP and
increases GCMa acetylation. CBP primarily acetylates GCMa at lysine367,
lysine406, and lysine409 in the transactivation domain (TAD). We found that
acetylation of these residues is required to protect GCMa from ubiquitination and
increases the TAD stability with a concomitant increase in transcriptional
activity, supporting the importance of acetylation in PKA-dependent GCMa
activation. Our results reveal a novel regulation of GCMa activity by
cAMP-dependent protein acetylation and provide a molecular mechanism by which
cAMP signaling regulates trophoblastic fusion.

PMCID: PMC1265739
PMID: 16166624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jul 18;579(18):3991-8.

Stimulation of GCMa and syncytin via cAMP mediated PKA signaling in human
trophoblastic cells under normoxic and hypoxic conditions.

Knerr I(1), Schubert SW, Wich C, Amann K, Aigner T, Vogler T, Jung R, Dötsch J,
Rascher W, Hashemolhosseini S.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.

Glial cells missing a (GCMa) belongs to a new transcription factor family.
Syncytin was shown to be a target gene of GCMa. Here, we demonstrate that the
protein kinase A (PKA) pathway acts upstream of GCMa. After transient
transfection of BeWo cells with PKA, GCMa transcriptional activity and both GCMa 
and syncytin transcripts were upregulated. This increase was accompanied by
further cellular differentiation. Using normoxic or hypoxic conditions to mimic
pathophysiological settings known to diminish trophoblast differentiation, we
found that gene repressive effects of oxygen deficiency were compensated by the
induction of the PKA pathway. We propose that GCMa-driven syncytin expression is 
the key mechanism for syncytiotrophoblast formation.

PMID: 16004993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3393-403. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-dependent histone deacetylase activity determines stem
cell fate in the placenta.

Maltepe E(1), Krampitz GW, Okazaki KM, Red-Horse K, Mak W, Simon MC, Fisher SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Molecular Medicine Program, University of
California, Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed
of HIFalpha and the arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT/HIF1beta). Previously, we have reported that ARNT function is required for 
murine placental development. Here, we used cultured trophoblast stem (TS) cells 
to investigate the molecular basis of this requirement. In vitro, wild-type TS
cell differentiation is largely restricted to spongiotrophoblasts and giant
cells. Interestingly, Arnt-null TS cells differentiated into chorionic
trophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, as demonstrated by their expression of
Tfeb, glial cells missing 1 (Gcm1) and the HIV receptor CXCR4. During this
process, a region of the differentiating Arnt-null TS cells underwent granzyme
B-mediated apoptosis, suggesting a role for this pathway in murine
syncytiotrophoblast turnover. Surprisingly, HIF1alpha and HIF2alpha were induced 
during TS cell differentiation in 20% O2; additionally, pVHL levels were
modulated during the same time period. These results suggest that
oxygen-independent HIF functions are crucial to this differentiation process. As 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity has been linked to HIF-dependent gene
expression, we investigated whether ARNT deficiency affects this epigenetic
regulator. Interestingly, Arnt-null TS cells had reduced HDAC activity, increased
global histone acetylation, and altered class II HDAC subcellular localization.
In wild-type TS cells, inhibition of HDAC activity recapitulated the Arnt-null
phenotype, suggesting that crosstalk between the HIFs and the HDACs is required
for normal trophoblast differentiation. Thus, the HIFs play important roles in
modulating the developmental plasticity of stem cells by integrating
physiological, transcriptional and epigenetic inputs.

PMID: 15987772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;83(2):188-95.

Biochemical characterization of the human placental transcription factor GCMa/1.

Lin C(1), Lin M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei.

Glial cells missing (GCM) proteins are a novel family of zinc-containing
transcription factors. Human GCMa/1 is primarily expressed in placental
trophoblast cells and regulates SYNCYTIN gene expression, which mediates fusion
of cytotrophoblasts to form the syncytiotrophoblast layer of the human placenta. 
To biochemically characterize the transcriptional activity of GCMa/1, we set up
an in vitro transcription system for human GCMa/1 (hGCMa/1). Using G-free
reporter constructs carrying multiple copies of wild-type or mutant GCMa-binding 
site (GBS) in front of a synthetic TATA box, we observed specific transcriptional
activities of recombinant hGCMa/1 proteins prepared from a baculovirus--insect
cell or Escherichia coli expression system. We further characterized
GCMa/1-mediated transcriptional activation on the native syncytin promoter. Using
G-free reporter constructs containing the native syncytin promoter, a TATA box
downstream of the proximal GBS in the syncytin promoter was shown to be essential
for the transcription activation directed by hGCMa/1. Therefore, our results
demonstrate positive transcriptional activities of GCMa/1 in vitro and provide a 
better understanding of GCMa/1-mediated SYNCYTIN gene expression.

PMID: 15864327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Stem Cells. 2004;22(5):659-68.

Specific knockdown of Oct4 and beta2-microglobulin expression by RNA interference
in human embryonic stem cells and embryonic carcinoma cells.

Matin MM(1), Walsh JR, Gokhale PJ, Draper JS, Bahrami AR, Morton I, Moore HD,
Andrews PW.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Stem Cell Biology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, S10
2TN, U.K.

We have used RNA interference (RNAi) to downregulate beta2-microglobulin and Oct4
in human embryonal carcinoma (hEC) cells and embryonic stem (hES) cells,
demonstrating that RNAi is an effective tool for regulating specific gene
activity in these human stem cells. The knockdown of Oct4 but not
beta2-microglobulin expression in both EC and ES cells resulted in their
differentiation, as indicated by a marked change in morphology, growth rate, and 
surface antigen phenotype, with respect to SSEA1, SSEA3, and TRA-1-60 expression.
Expression of hCG and Gcm1 was also induced following knockdown of Oct4
expression, in both 2102Ep hEC cells and in H7 and H14 hES cells, consistent with
the conclusion that, as in the mouse, Oct4 is required to maintain the
undifferentiated stem cell state, and that differentiation to trophectoderm
occurs in its absence. NTERA2 hEC cells also differentiated, but not to
trophectoderm, suggesting their equivalence to a later stage of embryogenesis
than other hEC and hES cells.

PMID: 15342930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2004;106(1):142.

Physical mapping and marker development for the porcine glial cells missing
homolog 1 (Drosophila) (GCM1) gene.

Spötter A(1), Drögemüller C, Kuiper H, Hamann H, Distl O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, School of Veterinary Medine
Hannover, Hannover, Germany. Andreas.Spoetter@tiho-hannover.de

PMID: 15222310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 1;271(1):26-37.

The Hand1, Stra13 and Gcm1 transcription factors override FGF signaling to
promote terminal differentiation of trophoblast stem cells.

Hughes M(1), Dobric N, Scott IC, Su L, Starovic M, St-Pierre B, Egan SE, Kingdom 
JC, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Calgary, AB, Canada.

The trophoblast cell lineage is an interesting model system because it is
composed of a limited number of cell types that are spatially patterned.
Trophoblast stem (TS) cells reside within a layer called the chorion and either
remain as stem cells or differentiate into spongiotrophoblast (SpT), trophoblast 
giant (TG) cells or syncytiotrophoblast cells (SynT) of the labyrinth.
Maintenance of the TS phenotype is dependent on stimulation by FGF4, whereas
differentiation and/or maintenance of the differentiated derivatives are
dependent on key transcription factors: Mash2 for SpT, Hand1 for TG cells and
Gcm1 for SynT cells. TS cells proliferate and retain their stem cell phenotype in
culture in response to FGF4 and an additional factor(s) that can be provided by
conditioned medium from embryonic fibroblast feeder cells (CM). To understand the
functions of Hand1, Mash2 and Gcm1 at a cellular level, we tested the effects of 
their ectopic and over-expression on the ability of TS cells to either continue
to proliferate or differentiate into their alternative fates. Expression of Mash2
alone had no effects on TS cell differentiation. However, Mash2-transfected cells
continued to divide longer after withdrawal of FGF/CM. Hand1 promoted TGC
differentiation, even in the continued presence of FGF4/CM. Stra13, another bHLH 
factor gene that is expressed in TG cells, also induced TG differentiation. Gcm1 
induced a rapid arrest of TS proliferation but, in contrast to Hand1 and Stra13, 
blocked TG cell differentiation. Although Gcm1 was not sufficient to promote SynT
formation, expression of an antisense Gcm1 transcript blocked SynT
differentiation. These data suggest that Mash2 functions to promote transient
FGF4-independent amplification of trophoblast cells that are progressing towards 
the SpT and TG cell phenotype. By contrast, Hand1 and Stra13 promote cell cycle
exit and restrict cells towards the TG fate, whereas Gcm1 promotes cell cycle
exit and restriction towards the SynT fate.

PMID: 15196947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Placenta. 2004 Jul;25(6):553-9.

Complex patterns of GCM1 mRNA and protein in villous and extravillous trophoblast
cells of the human placenta.

Baczyk D(1), Satkunaratnam A, Nait-Oumesmar B, Huppertz B, Cross JC, Kingdom JC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Canada.

The Gcm1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is essential for both
syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and formation of chorionic villi in mice. Its
early expression is very unusual in that it defines a subset of trophoblast cells
in the chorion, a layer that otherwise contains trophoblast stem cells. While
Gcm1 mRNA expression initiates independently within the chorion, the subsequent
maintenance of mRNA expression as well as the onset of protein accumulation is
dependent on contact with allantoic mesoderm. Previous studies have shown that
human GCM1 mRNA and protein are detectable in the placenta, but their patterns
have not been compared nor precisely localized. We, therefore, conducted the
present study to determine if the human mRNA and protein are subject to the same 
complexities of regulation as the mouse. In situ hybridization studies showed
that the GCM1 mRNA was expressed in villous cytotrophoblast cells, but only a
subset and never within cells immediately at the base of columns. Interestingly, 
the mRNA was detected throughout the cytotrophoblast columns. GCM1 protein
expression studies demonstrated that the transcription factor was present mainly 
within the nuclei of a subset of cytotrophoblast cells, consistent with its role 
as a transcription factor. Feint cytoplasmic staining of the transcription factor
was found in the syncytiotrophoblast but not in aggregated syncytial nuclei.
Nuclear immuno-reactivity for the GCM1 protein was detected in occasional nuclei 
in the distal part of the column. Therefore, GCM1 expression is regulated both at
the transcriptional and translational level. Overall, these studies show that the
general features of GCM1 mRNA and protein expression in the human placenta are
conserved with the mouse. They also highlight the fact that villous
cytotrophoblast cells are extremely heterogeneous with respect to GCM1
expression, a factor that should be considered when using isolated
cytotrophoblast cells for culture studies.

PMID: 15135239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Placenta. 2004 May;25(5):413-21.

Decreased placental GCM1 (glial cells missing) gene expression in pre-eclampsia.

Chen CP(1), Chen CY, Yang YC, Su TH, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of High Risk Pregnancy, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
cpchen@ms2.mmh.org.tw

Pre-eclampsia is a multisystem disorder of pregnancy associated with elevated
blood pressure, proteinuria, and complex biochemical disturbances. The mammalian 
homologue of the glial cells missing (GCM) gene, GCM1, is selectively expressed
in the placenta. GCM1 expression has been shown to affect placental branching and
vasculogenesis, abnormalities of which may result in the development of
pre-eclampsia. In this study immunohistochemistry, Western blot, and quantitative
real-time PCR were used to investigate GCM1 expression at different gestational
ages and in pre-eclampsia. Of 36 placentae without pre-eclampsia (ranged from
5-40 weeks of gestation), the level of GCM1 expression was relatively constant
before late third trimester. The immunoreactivity of GCM1 protein and the level
of GCM1 mRNA were not significantly different during normal pregnancy until 37
weeks of gestation, when the level of GCM1 expression was reduced significantly. 
Furthermore, significant reductions in GCM1 protein and mRNA were observed in
pre-eclamptic placentae compared with gestational age-matched controls. Our
results suggest that GCM1 is a distinct transcription factor involved in
placental disease and altered expression of the GCM1 gene may contribute to the
etiology of pre-eclampsia.

PMID: 15081636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Development. 2003 Dec;130(24):6027-35. Epub 2003 Oct 22.

The potential to induce glial differentiation is conserved between Drosophila and
mammalian glial cells missing genes.

Iwasaki Y(1), Hosoya T, Takebayashi H, Ogawa Y, Hotta Y, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Physiological
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8585, Japan.

Drosophila glial cells missing (gcm) is a key gene that determines the fate of
stem cells within the nervous system. Two mouse gcm homologs have been
identified, but their function in the nervous system remains to be elucidated. To
investigate their function, we constructed retroviral vectors harboring
Drosophila gcm and two mouse Gcm genes. Expression of these genes appeared to
influence fibroblast features. In particular, mouse Gcm1 induced the expression
of astrocyte-specific Ca(2+)-binding protein, S100beta, in those cells.
Introduction of the mouse Gcm1 gene in cultured cells from embryonic brains
resulted in the induction of an astrocyte lineage. This effect was also observed 
by in utero injection of retrovirus harboring mouse Gcm1 into the embryonic
brain. However, cultures from mouse Gcm1-deficient mouse brains did not exhibit
significant reductions in the number of astrocytes. Furthermore, in situ
hybridization analysis of mouse Gcm1 mRNA revealed distinct patterns of
expression in comparison with other well-known glial markers. The mammalian
homolog of Drosophila gcm, mouse Gcm1, exhibits the potential to induce
gliogenesis, but may function in the generation of a minor subpopulation of glial
cells.

PMID: 14573516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Placenta. 2003 Apr;24 Suppl A:S104-10.

Regulatory transcription factors controlling function and differentiation of
human trophoblast--a review.

Loregger T(1), Pollheimer J, Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Austria.

In transgenic mice, homozygous mutations of trophoblast-specific transcription
factors such as Hand1, Mash-2, I-mfa or GCM1 revealed their key regulatory roles 
in induction, maintenance or differentiation of distinct placental trophoblast
subpopulations in vivo. Descriptive studies have shown that several of these
factors are also expressed in the human placenta, suggesting that the molecular
mechanisms governing trophoblast differentiation could be similar in mice and
men. While an increasing number of putative developmental regulators are being
identified in the human placenta, little information is available regarding
whether the particular factors play an essential role in trophoblast
differentiation processes such as formation of anchoring villi, placental bed
invasion or syncytialization. However, expression of abundant
trophoblast-specific products such as hormones can be regarded as a hallmark of
differentiation, suggesting that the factors controlling their transcription
could also be involved in the developmental processes of the placenta. Indeed,
studies in different model systems revealed that the human homologues of murine
trophoblast-specific transcriptional regulators interact with the promoter
regions of typical placental genes such as aromatase P450 (CYP19), chorionic
gonadotrophin (CG) or placental lactogen (PL). Additionally, the unique
combination of more broadly distributed transcription factors of the Sp or Ap-2
protein family in a particular trophoblast cell type is required to govern mRNA
expression in a differentiation-dependent manner. Here, we will summarize our
present knowledge on these individual transcription factors that are involved in 
human trophoblast function and differentiation.

PMID: 12842421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 May;995:84-93.

Chorioallantoic morphogenesis and formation of the placental villous tree.

Cross JC(1), Simmons DG, Watson ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada. jcross@ucalgary.ca

The placenta is a highly specialized organ whose primary function is to promote
the exchange of nutrients and oxygen between maternal and fetal blood, essential 
for survival and growth of the baby. The surface area for nutrient transport is a
highly convoluted villous structure that forms by branching morphogenesis. In
mice, this process begins after embryonic day 8.5, following attachment of
allantoic mesoderm to the chorion, and continues through the end of gestation.
Gene targeting studies in mice have identified a large number of genes that are
essential for chorioallantoic development to give rise to the layer of the
placenta called the labyrinth. Collectively, these studies reveal that a number
of signaling pathways regulate four distinct phases of labyrinth development:
chorioallantoic attachment (involving VCAM1 and its receptor alpha4 integrin,
Bmp5/7, and Wnt7b, as well as the cochaperone Mrj), initiation of branching
(involving the Gcm1 transcription factor to select sites of branch initiation),
extension of villous branching (involving FGF, EGF, and HGF/Met signaling,
through the Grb2/Sos1/Mek1/p38alpha MAPK pathway), followed by vascularization of
the villous tree. The restricted expression and/or action of the signaling
components indicate that a series of intercellular interactions regulate
chorioallantoic development.

PMID: 12814941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Placenta. 2003 Feb-Mar;24(2-3):123-30.

Genes, development and evolution of the placenta.

Cross JC(1), Baczyk D, Dobric N, Hemberger M, Hughes M, Simmons DG, Yamamoto H,
Kingdom JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes & Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
jcross@ucalgary.ca

Through studies of transgenic and mutant mice, it is possible to describe
molecular pathways that control the development of all major trophoblast cell
subtypes and structures of the placenta. For example, the proliferation of
trophoblast stem cells is dependent on FGF signalling and downstream
transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes and Err2. Several bHLH transcription factors
regulate the progression from trophoblast stem cells to spongiotrophoblast and to
trophoblast giant cells (Id1/2, Mash2, Hand1, Stra13). Intercellular actions
critical for maintaining stable precursor cell populations are dependent on the
gap junction protein Cx31 and the growth factor Nodal. Differentiation towards
syncytiotrophoblast as well as the initiation of chorioallantoic (villous)
morphogenesis is regulated by the Gcm1 transcription factor, and subsequent
labyrinth development is dependent on Wnt, HGF and FGF signalling. These insights
suggest that most of the genes that evolved to regulate placental development are
either identical to ones used in other organ systems (e.g., FGF and epithelial
branching morphogenesis), were co-opted to take on new functions (e.g.,
AP-2gamma, Dlx3, Hand1), or arose via gene duplication to take on a specialized
placental function (e.g., Gcm1, Mash2). Many of the human orthologues of these
critical genes show restricted expression patterns that are consistent with a
conserved function. Such information is aiding the comparison of the human and
mouse placenta. In addition, the prospect of a conserved function clearly
suggests potential mechanisms for explaining complications of human placental
development.

PMID: 12596737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Dev Biol. 2002 Oct 15;250(2):358-73.

Interactions between trophoblast cells and the maternal and fetal circulation in 
the mouse placenta.

Adamson SL(1), Lu Y, Whiteley KJ, Holmyard D, Hemberger M, Pfarrer C, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Mammalian embryos have an intimate relationship with their mothers, particularly 
with the placental vasculature from which embryos obtain nutrients essential for 
growth. It is an interesting vascular bed because maternal vessel number and
diameter change dramatically during gestation and, in rodents and primates, the
terminal blood space becomes lined by placental trophoblast cells rather than
endothelial cells. Molecular genetic studies in mice aimed at identifying
potential regulators of these processes have been hampered by lack of
understanding of the anatomy of the vascular spaces in the placenta and the
general nature of maternal-fetal vascular interactions. To address this problem, 
we examined the anatomy of the mouse placenta by preparing plastic vascular casts
and serial histological sections of implantation sites from embryonic day (E)
10.5 to term. We found that each radial artery carrying maternal blood into the
uterus branched into 5-10 dilated spiral arteries located within the metrial
triangle, populated by uterine natural killer (uNK) cells, and the decidua
basalis. The endothelial-lined spiral arteries converged together at the
trophoblast giant cell layer and emptied into a few straight, trophoblast-lined
"canals" that carried maternal blood to the base of the placenta. Maternal blood 
then percolated back through the intervillous space of the labyrinth toward the
maternal side of the placenta in a direction that is countercurrent to the
direction of the fetal capillary blood flow. Trophoblast cells were found
invading the uterus in two patterns. Large cells that expressed the trophoblast
giant cell-specific gene Plf (encoding Proliferin) invaded during the early
postimplantation period in a pattern tightly associated with spiral arteries.
These peri/endovascular trophoblast were detected only approximately 150-300
microm upstream of the main giant cell layer. A second type of widespread
interstitial invasion in the decidua basalis by glycogen trophoblast cells was
detected after E12.5. These cells did not express Plf, but rather expressed the
spongiotrophoblast-specific gene Tpbp. Dilation of the spiral arteries was
obvious between E10.5 and E14.5 and was associated with a lack of elastic lamina 
and smooth muscle cells. These features were apparent even in the metrial
triangle, a site far away from the invading trophoblast cells. By contrast, the
transition from endothelium-lined artery to trophoblast-lined (hemochorial) blood
space was associated with trophoblast giant cells. Moreover, the shaping of the
maternal blood spaces within the labyrinth was dependent on chorioallantoic
morphogenesis and therefore disrupted in Gcm1 mutants. These studies provide
important insights into how the fetoplacental unit interacts with the maternal
intrauterine vascular system during pregnancy in mice.

PMID: 12376109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2002 Oct;57(4):501-5.

Underexpression of Gcm2, a master regulatory gene of parathyroid gland
development, in adenomas of primary hyperparathyroidism.

Correa P(1), Akerström G, Westin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Endocrine Unit, Uppsala University Hospital, 
Klinisk forskningsavdelning 2, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Glial cells missing (Gcm) was first identified as a binary switch
between neuronal and glial determination in Drosophila. Two homologues of
Drosophila Gcm have been identified in mice and humans, namely Gcm1 and Gcm2.
Mouse Gcm2 is restricted to parathyroid tissues and Gcm2 was recently identified 
as a master regulatory gene of parathyroid gland development as Gcm2 knockout
mice lack parathyroid glands.
DESIGN/PATIENTS: To identify Gcm2 transcripts in human non-neural tissues and to 
examine whether Gcm2 is involved in parathyroid gland tumorigenesis we analysed
Gcm2 transcript levels in several non-neural tissues by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and performed real-time quantitative RT-PCR
analysis on five normal glands, 15 parathyroid adenomas of primary
hyperparathyroidism (HPT) and nine hyperplastic glands of secondary HPT.
RESULTS: We found high Gcm2 mRNA expression in human parathyroid glands in
comparison with other non-neural tissues and underexpression in parathyroid
adenomas but not in lesions of HPT secondary to uraemia.
CONCLUSION: Because adenomas demonstrate lower Gcm2 expression than normal glands
we suggest that reduced expression of Gcm2 contributes to parathyroid gland
tumorigenesis. We speculate that a proper expression level of the Gcm2
transcription factor could be important for maintaining a fully differentiated
state of the parathyroid cell.

PMID: 12354132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mech Dev. 2002 Oct;118(1-2):175-8.

Restricted expression of mouse GCMa/Gcm1 in kidney and thymus.

Hashemolhosseini S(1), Hadjihannas M, Stolt CC, Haas CS, Amann K, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Erlangen, Fahrstrasse 17, D-91054
Erlangen, Germany. sh@biochem.uni-erlangen.de

Mouse Glial Cells Missing a (mGCMa) belongs to a small family of transcription
factors named after the prototypical GCM from Drosophila. mGCMa was expected to
regulate gliogenesis, but instead found to be primarily expressed during
development in trophoblasts of chorion and labyrinth. Its deletion causes
abnormal placental labyrinth formation and results in embryonic lethality. Here
we identify kidney and thymus as sites of mGCMa expression. In thymus, mGCMa is
restricted to few small clusters of cells, in kidney to the S3 segment of
proximal tubules. mGCMa expression is primarily postnatal, arguing for a role in 
organ function rather than organ development.

PMID: 12351183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Development. 2002 Aug;129(16):3957-64.

Ectopic expression of Gcm1 induces congenital spinal cord abnormalities.

Nait-Oumesmar B(1), Stecca B, Fatterpekar G, Naidich T, Corbin J, Lazzarini RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology and. Department of
Radiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York,
NY 10029, USA.

Brief ectopic expression of Gcm1 in mouse embryonic tail bud profoundly affects
the development of the nervous system. All mice from 5 independently derived
transgenic lines exhibited either one or both of two types of congenital spinal
cord pathologies: failure of the neural tube to close (spina bifida) and multiple
neural tubes (diastematomyelia). Because the transgene is expressed only in a
restricted caudal region and only for a brief interval (E8.5 to E13.5), there was
no evidence of embryonic lethality. The dysraphisms develop during the period and
within the zone of transgene expression. We present evidence that these
dysraphisms result from an inhibition of neuropore closure and a stimulation of
secondary neurulation. After transgene expression ceases, the spinal dysraphisms 
are progressively resolved and the neonatal animals, while showing signs of
scarring and tissue resorption, have a closed vertebral column. The multiple
spinal cords remain but are enclosed in a single spinal column as in the human
diastematomyelia. The animals live a normal life time, are fertile and do not
exhibit any obvious weakness or motor disabilities.

PMID: 12135932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jun 11;99(12):8090-5.

Hoxa 11 is upstream of Integrin alpha8 expression in the developing kidney.

Valerius MT(1), Patterson LT, Feng Y, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Mutation of the functionally redundant Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 genes gives absent or
rudimentary kidneys resulting from a dramatic reduction of the growth and
branching of the ureteric bud. To understand better the molecular mechanisms of
Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 function in kidney development, it is necessary to identify the
downstream target genes regulated by their encoded transcription factors. To this
end, we conducted a screen for Hoxa 11-responsive genes in two kidney cell lines.
HEK293 cells, which usually do not express Hoxa 11, were modified to allow
inducible Hoxa 11 expression. The mK10 cells, derived specifically for this study
from Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 double-mutant mice, were also modified to give cell
populations with and without Hoxa 11 expression. Differential display, Gene
Discovery Arrays, and Affymetrix genechip probe arrays were used to screen for
genes up- or down-regulated by Hoxa 11. Nine genes, PDGF A, Cathepsin L, annexin 
A1, Mm.112139, Est2 repressor factor, NrCAM, ZNF192, integrin-associated protein,
and GCM1, showed reproducible 3-fold or smaller changes in gene expression in
response to Hoxa 11. One gene, the Integrin alpha8, was up-regulated
approximately 20-fold after Hoxa 11 expression. The Integrin alpha8 gene is
expressed together with Hoxa 11 in metanephric mesenchyme cells, and mutation of 
Integrin alpha8 gives a bud-branching morphogenesis defect very similar to that
observed in Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 mutant mice. In situ hybridizations showed a dramatic
regional reduction in Integrin alpha8 expression in the developing kidneys of
Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 mutant mice. This work suggests that the Integrin alpha8 gene may
be a major effector of Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 function in the developing kidney.

PMCID: PMC123025
PMID: 12060755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mech Dev. 2002 Jul;115(1-2):27-34.

Gcm1 expression defines three stages of chorio-allantoic interaction during
placental development.

Stecca B(1), Nait-Oumesmar B, Kelley KA, Voss AK, Thomas T, Lazzarini RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Box 1126, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The formation of the labyrinth layer is a critical step of placental development.
The transcription factor glial cells missing 1 (Gcm1) plays a pivotal role in
labyrinth development, but the sequence of events controlling its expression has 
not been identified yet. Our studies presented herein show that Gcm1 expression
occurs in three distinct phases during placental development, each specific to a 
particular stage of chorio-allantois interaction. In the first, the pre-fusion
phase, Gcm1 mRNA is expressed in isolated clusters of chorionic cells, but not
efficiently translated. Upon allantois-chorion fusion, the second phase, Gcm1
expression is greatly induced in clusters of chorionic cells separated by
non-expressing cells and the Gcm1 mRNA is translated to protein. In the third
phase, the labyrinth formation, cells expressing Gcm1 proliferate, involute in
the chorionic plate and branched villi formation begins.

PMID: 12049764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Recent Prog Horm Res. 2002;57:221-34.

Transcription factors underlying the development and endocrine functions of the
placenta.

Cross JC(1), Anson-Cartwright L, Scott IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Calgary Faculty 
of Medicine, Alberta, Canada. jcrooss@ucalgary.ca

The placenta has been the subject of extensive basic research efforts in two
distinct fields. The developmental biology of placenta has been studied because
it is the first organ to develop during embryogenesis and because a number of
different gene mutations in mice result in embryonic lethality due to placental
defects. The trophoblast cell lineage is relatively simple such that only two
major, terminally differentiated cell types appear: an "invasive trophoblast"
cell subtype such as extravillous cytotrophoblast cells in humans and trophoblast
giant cells in mice, and a "transport trophoblast" cell subtype that is a
syncytium (syncytiotrophoblast) in humans and mice. These two cell types also
have been the focus of endocrinologists because they are the source of major
placental hormones. Understanding the transcriptional regulation of placental
hormone genes has given insights into the control of specificity of gene
expression. Because most placental hormones are produced by very specific
trophoblast cell subtypes, the transcriptional details promise to give insights
into cell-subtype specification. The fields of developmental biology and
molecular endocrinology appear to be meeting on this common ground with the
recent discovery of key transcription factors. Specifically, the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand1 is essential for
differentiation of trophoblast giant cells in mice and also regulates the
promoter for the giant cell-specific hormone, placental lactogen I gene (Pl1). In
contrast, formation of syncytiotrophoblast cells in mice is controlled by a
distinct genetic pathway that is governed by the Gcm1 transcription factor, a
homologue of the Drosophila glial cells missing gene. Human GCM I has been shown 
to regulate the activity of the placental-specific enhancer of the aromatase gene
(CYP19), which is specifically expressed in syncytiotrophoblast. Together, these 
findings imply that some key transcription factors have the dual functions of
controlling both critical cell fate decisions in the trophoblast cell lineage and
later the transcription of cell subtype-specific genes unrelated to development.

PMID: 12017545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Nov 11;278(1):134-9.

Genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and the complete 22 kb DNA
sequence of the human GCMa/GCM1, a placenta-specific transcription factor gene.

Yamada K(1), Ogawa H, Tamiya G, Ikeno M, Morita M, Asakawa S, Shimizu N, Okazaki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, School 
of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. kyamada@fujita-hu.ac.jp

The genomic sequence of the human GCMa/GCM1 gene, a mammalian homologue of
Drosophila melanogaster GCM, was determined. Drosophila GCM is a neural
transcription factor that regulates glial cell fate. The mammalian homolog
however, is a placenta-specific transcription factor that is necessary for
placental development. The 22 kb DNA sequence spanning the GCMa gene contains six
exons and five introns, encoding a 2.8 kb cDNA. Overall genomic organization is
similar for the human and mouse. Several potential binding sites for
transcription factors like GATA, Oct-1, and bHLH proteins were found in the
5'-flanking region of the human gene. A DNA motif for GCM protein binding exists 
in the 5'-flanking region that is highly homologous with that of the mouse gene. 
The location of this gene was mapped to chromosome 6 using fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11071865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nature. 2000 Jul 13;406(6792):199-203.

Genetic ablation of parathyroid glands reveals another source of parathyroid
hormone.

Günther T(1), Chen ZF, Kim J, Priemel M, Rueger JM, Amling M, Moseley JM, Martin 
TJ, Anderson DJ, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The parathyroid glands are the only known source of circulating parathyroid
hormone (PTH), which initiates an endocrine cascade that regulates serum calcium 
concentration. Glial cells missing2 (Gcm2), a mouse homologue of Drosophila Gcm, 
is the only transcription factor whose expression is restricted to the
parathyroid glands. Here we show that Gcm2-deficient mice lack parathyroid glands
and exhibit a biological hypoparathyroidism, identifying Gcm2 as a master
regulatory gene of parathyroid gland development. Unlike PTH receptor-deficient
mice, however, Gcm2-deficient mice are viable and fertile, and have only a mildly
abnormal bone phenotype. Despite their lack of parathyroid glands, Gcm2-deficient
mice have PTH serum levels identical to those of wild-type mice, as do
parathyroidectomized wild-type animals. Expression and ablation studies
identified the thymus, where Gcm1, another Gcm homologue, is expressed, as the
additional, downregulatable source of PTH. Thus, Gcm2 deletion uncovers an
auxiliary mechanism for the regulation of calcium homeostasis in the absence of
parathyroid glands. We propose that this backup mechanism may be a general
feature of endocrine regulation.

PMID: 10910362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):311-4.

The glial cells missing-1 protein is essential for branching morphogenesis in the
chorioallantoic placenta.

Anson-Cartwright L(1), Dawson K, Holmyard D, Fisher SJ, Lazzarini RA, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):248-50.

Trophoblast cells of the placenta are established at the blastocyst stage and
differentiate into specialized subtypes after implantation. In mice, the outer
layer of the placenta consists of trophoblast giant cells that invade the uterus 
and promote maternal blood flow to the implantation site by producing cytokines
with angiogenic and vasodilatory actions. The innermost layer, called the
labyrinth, consists of branched villi that provide a large surface area for
nutrient transport and are composed of trophoblast cells and underlying
mesodermal cells derived from the allantois. The chorioallantoic villi develop
after embryonic day (E) 8.5 through extensive folding and branching of an
initially flat sheet of trophoblast cells, the chorionic plate, in response to
contact with the allantois. We show here that Gcm1, encoding the transcription
factor glial cells missing-1 (Gcm1), is expressed in small clusters of chorionic 
trophoblast cells at the flat chorionic plate stage and at sites of
chorioallantoic folding and extension when morphogenesis begins. Mutation of Gcm1
in mice causes a complete block to branching of the chorioallantoic interface,
resulting in embryonic mortality by E10 due to the absence of the placental
labyrinth. In addition, chorionic trophoblast cells in Gcm1-deficient placentas
do not fuse to form syncytiotrophoblast. Abnormal development of placental villi 
is frequently associated with fetal death and intrauterine growth restriction in 
humans, and our studies provide the earliest molecular insight into this aspect
of placental development.

PMID: 10888880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):248-50.

The labyrinthine placenta.

Rinkenberger J, Werb Z.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):311-4.

PMID: 10888863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Histochem Cytochem. 2000 Jul;48(7):915-22.

Placental expression and chromosomal localization of the human Gcm 1 gene.

Nait-Oumesmar B(1), Copperman AB, Lazzarini RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York City, New York, USA.

Although gcm was first recognized for its role in specifying glial cell fate in
Drosophila melanogaster, its mammalian counterparts are expressed predominantly
in non-neural tissues. Here we demonstrate expression of the mouse and human GCM 
1 proteins in placenta. We have prepared a highly specific antibody that
recognizes the GCM 1 protein and have used it to assess the temporal and spatial 
expression profile of the protein. In both mouse and human placenta, the protein 
is associated with cells that are involved with exchange between maternal and
fetal blood supplies: the labyrinthine cells of the mouse placenta and the
syncytio- and cytotrophoblasts of the human placenta. Using the full-length hGcm 
1 cDNA as a probe, we have mapped the gene on human chromosome 6p12 by
fluorescent in situ hybridization.

PMID: 10858268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Genet. 1999;25(2):146-57.

A repertoire of differentially expressed transcription factors that offers
insight into mechanisms of human cytotrophoblast differentiation.

Janatpour MJ(1), Utset MF, Cross JC, Rossant J, Dong J, Israel MA, Fisher SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0512, USA.

During human placental development, specialized cells allocated to the
extraembryonic lineage (cytotrophoblasts) invade the uterus, anchoring the
conceptus to the decidua and tapping a supply of maternal blood. This unusual
behavior requires cytotrophoblasts to assume highly specialized characteristics; 
some are commonly associated with tumor cells, while others are typical of
endothelia. Here we investigated the transcriptional mechanisms that control
cytotrophoblast differentiation/invasion. Specifically, we examined the cells'
expression of a number of transcription factors, at the RNA level, as they
differentiated along the invasive pathway in vitro. Since basic helix-loop-helix 
(bHLH) proteins play important roles in murine trophoblast differentiation, we
first examined their expression by cytotrophoblasts. As in murine placental
development, expression of the human homologue of Mash-2 was confined to
progenitor cells. But expression of Hand-1, which promotes differentiation of
murine trophoblast giant cells, was not detected. We also found that
cytotrophoblasts upregulated the expression of bHLH/PAS factors that function in 
adaptive responses to hypoxia, including hEPAS-1, which is expressed primarily in
endothelial cells. Quite unexpectedly, we discovered that cytotrophoblasts
express high levels of mRNA encoding the human homologue of the Drosophila
neuronal fate gene, glial cells missing-1 (gcm-1). We also found evidence of
crosstalk between the bHLH and GCM-1 regulatory networks. Together, these results
offer insights into the transcriptional mechanisms that govern cytotrophoblast
differentiation/invasion. Interestingly, these mechanisms suggest analogies with 
those that govern differentiation of murine stem cells allocated to both the
intra- and extraembryonic lineages.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dev Dyn. 1999 Apr;214(4):303-11.

Murine Gcm1 gene is expressed in a subset of placental trophoblast cells.

Basyuk E(1), Cross JC, Corbin J, Nakayama H, Hunter P, Nait-Oumesmar B, Lazzarini
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The gcm gene of Drosophila melanogaster encodes a transcription factor that is an
important component in cell fate specification within the nervous system. In the 
absence of a functional gcm gene, progenitor cells differentiate into neurons,
whereas when the gene is ectopically expressed the cells produce excess glial
cells at the expense of neuronal differentiation. Recent searches of databases
have uncovered high sequence similarity between the Drosophila gem gene and an
anonymous human placental cDNA clone (Altschuller et al., 1996; this
communication). Here we report the molecular organization of the murine Gcm1, its
spatio-temporal pattern of expression in developing placenta, and its map
position at E1-E3 on murine chromosome 9. The murine gene is composed of at least
6 exons. The promoter region contains an "initiation sequence" and is GC rich,
characteristics of the promoters of several transcription factors. The mRNA has a
modest 5'UTR (ca. 200 bases) but an extensive 3' UTR (ca. 2 kb). Northern blot
and mRNA in situ hybridization studies showed that Gcm1 expression was readily
detectable only in the placenta. It began at embryonic day 7.5 within trophoblast
cells of the chorion and continued to about embryonic day 17.5 within a subset of
labyrinthine trophoblast cells. Comparison with other transcription factors
revealed that Gcm1 expression defines a unique subset of trophoblast cells.

PMID: 10213386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Development. 1999 Mar;126(6):1247-58.

Mrj encodes a DnaJ-related co-chaperone that is essential for murine placental
development.

Hunter PJ(1), Swanson BJ, Haendel MA, Lyons GE, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Departments of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, and Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

We have identified a novel gene in a gene trap screen that encodes a protein
related to the DnaJ co-chaperone in E. coli. The gene, named Mrj (mammalian
relative of DnaJ) was expressed throughout development in both the embryo and
placenta. Within the placenta, expression was particularly high in trophoblast
giant cells but moderate levels were also observed in trophoblast cells of the
chorion at embryonic day 8.5, and later in the labyrinth which arises from the
attachment of the chorion to the allantois (a process called chorioallantoic
fusion). Insertion of the ROSAbetageo gene trap vector into the Mrj gene created 
a null allele. Homozygous Mrj mutants died at mid-gestation due to a failure of
chorioallantoic fusion at embryonic day 8.5, which precluded formation of the
mature placenta. At embryonic day 8.5, the chorion in mutants was morphologically
normal and expressed the cell adhesion molecule beta4 integrin that is known to
be required for chorioallantoic fusion. However, expression of the chorionic
trophoblast-specific transcription factor genes Err2 and Gcm1 was significantly
reduced. The mutants showed no abnormal phenotypes in other trophoblast cell
types or in the embryo proper. This study indicates a previously unsuspected role
for chaperone proteins in placental development and represents the first genetic 
analysis of DnaJ-related protein function in higher eukaryotes. Based on a survey
of EST databases representing different mouse tissues and embryonic stages, there
are 40 or more DnaJ-related genes in mammals. In addition to Mrj, at least two of
these genes are also expressed in the developing mouse placenta. The specificity 
of the developmental defect in Mrj mutants suggests that each of these genes may 
have unique tissue and cellular activities.

PMID: 10021343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 13;95(21):12364-9.

Isolation and characterization of mammalian homologs of the Drosophila gene glial
cells missing.

Kim J(1), Jones BW, Zock C, Chen Z, Wang H, Goodman CS, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Biology, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

The glial cells missing (gcm) gene in Drosophila encodes a transcription factor
that determines the choice between glial and neuronal fates. We report here the
isolation of two mammalian gcm homologs, Gcm1 and Gcm2, and the characterization 
of their expression patterns during embryonic development. Although Gcm2 is
expressed in neural tissues at a low level, the major sites of expression for
both of the mammalian genes are nonneural, suggesting that the functions of the
mammalian homologs have diverged and diversified. However, when expressed
ectopically, Gcm1 can substitute functionally for Drosophila gcm by transforming 
presumptive neurons into glia. Thus, certain biochemical properties, although not
the specificity of the tissue in which the gene is expressed, have been conserved
through the evolution of the Gcm gene family.

PMCID: PMC22837
PMID: 9770492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. FEBS Lett. 1996 Sep 16;393(2-3):201-4.

Gcm1, a mammalian homolog of Drosophila glial cells missing.

Altshuller Y(1), Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Frohman MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, State University of New York, Stony
Brook 11794-8651, USA.

Differentiation of glia (astrocytes and oligodendrocytes) in Drosophila requires 
the gene glial cells missing (gcm), which controls lineage determination. In the 
absence of gcm, neuroglia progenitors exclusively differentiate into neurons,
instead of into both neurons and glia. In contrast, ectopic overexpression of gcm
causes uniform differentiation of the neuroglia progenitors into glia. Glial and 
neuronal cells in vertebrates similarly derive from neuroblast progenitors. To
investigate vertebrate glial formation, we have identified, cloned, and
chromosomally mapped a mammalian gcm homolog. Mouse Gcm1 demonstrates extensive
similarity to Drosophila gcm but is expressed at very low levels during neuro-
and gliogenesis.

PMID: 8814290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


