
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 22;6:21630. doi: 10.1038/srep21630.

GATA3 inhibits GCM1 activity and trophoblast cell invasion.

Chiu YH(1,)(2), Chen H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang,
Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Development of human placenta involves the invasion of trophoblast cells from
anchoring villi into the maternal decidua. Placental transcription factor GCM1
regulates trophoblast cell invasion via transcriptional activation of HtrA4 gene,
which encodes a serine protease enzyme. The GATA3 transcription factor regulates 
trophoblast cell differentiation and is highly expressed in invasive murine
trophoblast giant cells. The regulation of trophoblastic invasion by GCM1 may
involve novel cellular factors. Here we show that GATA3 interacts with GCM1 and
inhibits its activity to suppress trophoblastic invasion. Immunohistochemistry
demonstrates that GATA3 and GCM1 are coexpressed in villous cytotrophoblast
cells, syncytiotrophoblast layer, and extravillous trophoblast cells of human
placenta. Interestingly, GATA3 interacts with GCM1, but not the GCM2 homologue,
through the DNA-binding domain and first transcriptional activation domain in
GCM1 and the transcriptional activation domains and zinc finger 1 domain in
GATA3. While GATA3 did not affect DNA-binding activity of GCM1, it suppressed
transcriptional activity of GCM1 and therefore HtrA4 promoter activity.
Correspondingly, GATA3 knockdown elevated HtrA4 expression in BeWo and JEG-3
trophoblast cell lines and enhanced the invasion activities of both lines. This
study uncovered a new GATA3 function in placenta as a negative regulator of GCM1 
activity and trophoblastic invasion.

PMCID: PMC4761948
PMID: 26899996  [PubMed - in process]


2. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Feb 15;422:93-102. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.12.001. Epub
2015 Dec 8.

Cortisol regulates sodium homeostasis by stimulating the transcription of
sodium-chloride transporter (NCC) in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Lin CH(1), Hu HJ(2), Hwang PP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115,
Taiwan; National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (2)Institute of Cellular and Organismic
Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Cellular and
Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. Electronic address:
pphwang@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

In mammals, sodium/hydrogen exchanger (NHE) and sodium-chloride cotransporter
(NCC) are expressed in renal tubules, and exhibit functional redundancy and
mutual compensation in Na(+) uptake. In teleosts, the gills of the adult and skin
of the embryonic stage function as external kidneys, and ionocytes are
responsible for ionoregulation in these tissues. NHE- and NCC-expressing
ionocytes mutually cooperate to adjust Na(+) uptake, which is analogous to the
activity of the mammalian kidney. Cortisol is a hormone that controls Na(+)
uptake through regulating NCC expression and activity in mammals; however,
cortisol-mediated control of NCC expression is little understood in non-mammalian
vertebrates, such as teleosts. It is essential for our understanding of the
evolution of such regulation to determine whether cortisol has a conserved effect
on NCC in vertebrates. In the present study, we treated zebrafish embryos with
low Na(+) medium (LNa, 0.04 mM Na(+)) for 3 d to stimulate the mRNA expression of
nhe3b, ncc, and cyp11b1 (a cortisol-synthesis enzyme) and whole body cortisol
level. Exogenous cortisol treatment (20 mg/l, 3 d) resulted in an elevation of
whole-body Na(+) content, ncc expression, and the density of ncc-expressing cells
in zebrafish larvae. In loss-of-function experiments, microinjection of
glucocorticoid receptor (gr) morpholino (MO) suppressed sodium content, ncc
expression, and the density of ncc-expressing cells, but injection of mr MO had
no such effects. In addition, exogenous cortisol treatment and gr MO injection
also altered ncc expression and the density of ncc-expressing cells in gcm2
morphant larvae. Taken together, cortisol and GR appear to regulate Na(+)
absorption through stimulating ncc expression and the differentiation of
ncc-expressing ionocytes, providing new insights into the actions of cortisol on 
Na(+) uptake.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26678829  [PubMed - in process]


3. Dev Dyn. 2015 Jul;244(7):888-902. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24290. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Evidence for two distinct waves of epidermal ionocyte differentiation during
medaka embryonic development.

Trayer V(1), Séjourné N(1), Gay S(1), Thermes V(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR1037 LPGP Fish Physiology and Genomics, Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes,
France.

BACKGROUND: The fish epidermis contains specific cells, or ionocytes, that are
specialized in ion transport and contribute to the osmoregulatory function.
Besides the zebrafish model, the medaka (Oryzias latipes) has recently emerged as
an important model for osmoregulation studies because it possesses a particularly
high adaptability to salinity changes. However, hindering the progress of
research on embryonic ionocytes is the lack of a comprehensive view of their
developmental dynamic.
RESULTS: Using EdU integrations and the foxi3 and NKA markers, we characterized
the proliferating progenitors of ionocytes (here called ionoblastes) and we
quantified them, along with ionocytes, during embryogenesis. While progenitors of
the vitellin zone promptly differentiate in a synchronous manner, progenitors of 
the lateral zone differentiate progressively and asynchronously. Furthermore, we 
evidenced that nhe3 is expressed in differentiated ionocytes of both zones,
whereas ecac, ncc, and gcm2 are strictly specific of the lateral zone. We also
evidenced that the two zones are differentially regulated in distilled water and 
seawater.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data led us to propose a model timeline, which provides evidence
for the expansion of two successive and distinct populations of ionocytes. This
model opens the way for new studies related to epidermal development, plasticity 
and osmoregulation ontogeny.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25963515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Aug 15;411:113-20. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.04.018. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Gata3 cooperates with Gcm2 and MafB to activate parathyroid hormone gene
expression by interacting with SP1.

Han SI(1), Tsunekage Y(1), Kataoka K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medical Bioscience, Graduate School of Medical Life
Science, Yokohama City University, 1-7-29 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Medical Bioscience, Graduate School
of Medical Life Science, Yokohama City University, 1-7-29 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. Electronic address:
kkataoka@tsurumi.yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

Haploinsufficiency of the Gata3 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription
factor, is associated with the disorder hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal
dysplasia (HDR) syndrome in humans. However, the roles of Gata3 in
transcriptional regulation in the parathyroid glands are not well-understood. In 
this study, we show that Gata3 activates transcription of parathyroid hormone
(PTH), which is secreted from parathyroid glands and is critical for regulating
serum calcium and phosphate homeostasis. Gata3 interacted with Gcm2 and MafB, two
known transcriptional regulators of parathyroid development, and synergistically 
stimulated the PTH promoter. An SP1-binding element (GC box) located within the
PTH-promoter proximal region was critical for activating transcription by Gata3. 
In addition, the ubiquitous transcription factor SP1 also interacted with Gata3
as well as MafB and Gcm2, and HDR syndrome-associated Gata3 mutants were
defective in activating the PTH promoter. These results suggest that Gata3 is a
critical regulator of PTH gene expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25917456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Endocrinology. 2015 Jul;156(7):2384-94. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1968. Epub 2015 Apr 
14.

An Essential Role for Parathyroid Hormone in Gill Formation and Differentiation
of Ion-Transporting Cells in Developing Zebrafish.

Kwong RW(1), Perry SF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 6N5.

In vertebrates, parathyroid hormone (PTH) is important for skeletogenesis and
Ca(2+) homeostasis. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms by
which PTH regulates skeleton formation and Ca(2+) balance during early
development. Using larval zebrafish as an in vivo model system, we determined
that PTH1 regulates the differentiation of epithelial cells and the development
of craniofacial cartilage. We demonstrated that translational gene knockdown of
PTH1 decreased Ca(2+) uptake at 4 days after fertilization. We also observed that
PTH1-deficient fish exhibited reduced numbers of epithelial Ca(2+) channel
(ecac)-expressing cells, Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase-rich cells, and H(+)-ATPase-rich
cells. Additionally, the density of epidermal stem cells was decreased
substantially in the fish experiencing PTH1 knockdown. Knockdown of PTH1 caused a
shortening of the jaw and impeded the development of branchial arches. Results
from in situ hybridization suggested that the expression of collagen 2a1a (marker
for proliferating chondrocytes) was substantially reduced in the cartilage that
forms the jaw and branchial aches. Disorganization of chondrocytes in
craniofacial cartilage also was observed in PTH1-deficient fish. The results of
real-time PCR demonstrated that PTH1 morphants failed to express the
transcription factor glial cell missing 2 (gcm2). Coinjection of PTH1 morpholino 
with gcm2 capped RNA rescued the phenotypes observed in the PTH1 morphants,
suggesting that the defects in PTH1-deficient fish were caused, at least in part,
by the suppression of gcm2. Taken together, the results of the present study
reveal critical roles for PTH1 in promoting the differentiation of epidermal stem
cells into mature ionocytes and cartilage formation during development.

PMID: 25872007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Dec;99(12):E2794-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2857.

Increased prevalence of the GCM2 polymorphism, Y282D, in primary
hyperparathyroidism: analysis of three Italian cohorts.

D'Agruma L(1), Coco M, Guarnieri V, Battista C, Canaff L, Salcuni AS, Corbetta S,
Cetani F, Minisola S, Chiodini I, Eller-Vainicher C, Spada A, Marcocci C,
Guglielmi G, Zini M, Clemente R, Wong BY, de Martino D, Scillitani A, Hendy GN,
Cole DE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Endocrinology, Pathology and Radiology (L.D., M.C., V.G.,
C.B., A.S.S. G.G., R.C., D.d.M., A.Sc.), Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico (IRCCS) "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza," 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo 
(FG), Italy; Endocrine and Diabetology Unit (I.C., C.E.-V., A.Sp.) Department of 
Medical Sciences, University of Milan and IRCCS Policlinico San Donato (S.C.),
San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy; Departments of Endocrinology and Metabolism
(F.C., C.M.), University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; Department of Internal Medicine
and Medical Disciplines (S.M.), "Sapienza" Rome University, Rome, Italy;
Endocrine Unit (M.Z.), Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy;
Departments of Medicine, Physiology and Human Genetics (L.C., G.N.H.), McGill
University, and Calcium Research Laboratory, and Hormones and Cancer Research
Unit, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 1A1 Canada; and Departments 
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Medicine and Genetics (B.Y.L.W.,
D.E.C.C.), University of Toronto, Ontario, M4N 3M5 Canada.

CONTEXT: Glial cells missing-2 (GCM2) is key for parathyroid gland organogenesis.
Its persistent expression in the adult parathyroid raises the possibility that
overactive forms play a role in the evolution of parathyroid hyperactivity or
tumorigenesis. A GCM2 c.844T <U+2192> G; p.Y282D missense variant has been described
within a transactivation inhibitory domain (amino acids 263-352).
OBJECTIVE: The aims of the study were to 1) assess the frequency of Y282D in
Italian primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) and control (C) populations, 2) test
for association of 282D with PHPT and its phenotypic features, and 3) compare the
transactivation potency of GCM2 282D relative to wild-type Y282.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Subjects included a large southern Italian cohort (310 PHPT
and 433 C) and 2 replication cohorts from northern Italy. Association of 282D
with PHPT was tested in all cohorts and with phenotypic features in the larger
PHPT cohort. An in vitro GCM promoter-luciferase reporter assay was conducted in 
HEK293 cells.
RESULTS: 282D was significantly increased in the PHPT group, with a minor allele 
frequency of 0.066 compared with 0.029 in the C group (P = .0008), in the
discovery cohort and was more prevalent in the replication cohorts. Combined
analysis (510 PHPT and 665 C) yielded a likelihood ratio of 2.27 (95% confidence 
interval = 1.50-3.42; P < .0001). The 282D variant was not associated with serum 
calcium, phosphate, creatinine, or PTH levels or with bone mineral density,
fractures, or renal stones in the PHPT group. The 282D variant had significantly 
greater transcriptional activity than the wild-type Y282 (17× basal vs 12× basal;
P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The higher frequency of GCM2 282D in PHPT and enhanced
transcriptional activity of this variant supports the notion that it could
contribute causally to parathyroid tumorigenesis.

PMID: 25279501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Development. 2014 Oct;141(19):3697-708. doi: 10.1242/dev.110833. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Multiple roles for HOXA3 in regulating thymus and parathyroid differentiation and
morphogenesis in mouse.

Chojnowski JL(1), Masuda K(1), Trau HA(1), Thomas K(2), Capecchi M(3), Manley
NR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. (2)Division of Hematology and
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT 84132, USA. (3)Department of Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. 
(4)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA nmanley@uga.edu.

Hoxa3 was the first Hox gene to be mutated by gene targeting in mice and is
required for the development of multiple endoderm and neural crest cell
(NCC)-derived structures in the pharyngeal region. Previous studies have shown
that the Hoxa3 null mutant lacks third pharyngeal pouch derivatives, the thymus
and parathyroids by E18.5, and organ-specific markers are absent or downregulated
during initial organogenesis. Our current analysis of the Hoxa3 null mutant shows
that organ-specific domains did undergo initial patterning, but the location and 
timing of key regional markers within the pouch, including Tbx1, Bmp4 and Fgf8,
were altered. Expression of the parathyroid marker Gcm2 was initiated but was
quickly downregulated and differentiation failed; by contrast, thymus markers
were delayed but achieved normal levels, concurrent with complete loss through
apoptosis. To determine the cell type-specific roles of Hoxa3 in third pharyngeal
pouch development, we analyzed tissue-specific mutants using endoderm and/or
NCC-specific Cre drivers. Simultaneous deletion with both drivers resulted in
athymia at E18.5, similar to the null. By contrast, the individual
tissue-specific Hoxa3 deletions resulted in small, ectopic thymi, although each
had a unique phenotype. Hoxa3 was primarily required in NCCs for morphogenesis.
In endoderm, Hoxa3 temporally regulated initiation of the thymus program and was 
required in a cell-autonomous manner for parathyroid differentiation.
Furthermore, Hoxa3 was required for survival of third pharyngeal pouch-derived
organs, but expression in either tissue was sufficient for this function. These
data show that Hoxa3 has multiple complex and tissue-specific functions during
patterning, differentiation and morphogenesis of the thymus and parathyroids.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197593
PMID: 25249461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;99(11):E2421-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2174. Epub
2014 Aug 19.

Comprehensive next-generation sequencing analyses of hypoparathyroidism:
identification of novel GCM2 mutations.

Mitsui T(1), Narumi S, Inokuchi M, Nagasaki K, Nakazawa M, Sasaki G, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (T.M., S.N., M.I., T.H.), Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Division of Pediatrics (K.N.), Department of
Homeostatic Regulation and Development, Niigata University Graduate School of
Medicine and Dental Sciences, Niigata 951-8510, Japan; Department of Pediatrics
(M.N.), Tokyo Metropolitan Ohtsuka Hospital, Tokyo 170-8476, Japan; and
Department of Pediatrics (G.S.), Tokyo Dental College Ichikawa General Hospital, 
Chiba 272-8513, Japan.

CONTEXT: In most patients with hypoparathyroidism (HP), the etiology is not
defined clinically. Eight genes (AIRE, CASR, CLDN16, GATA3, GCM2, PTH, TBCE, and 
TRPM6) are known to be responsible genes associated with HP; however, no previous
study has screened the eight responsible genes comprehensively in HP patients.
OBJECTIVES: This study was conducted to determine the genetic defect in HP
patients. We also described clinical and molecular findings of two HP patients
with novel GCM2 mutations.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We enrolled 20 nonconsanguineous Japanese patients with
child-onset permanent HP without 22q11 deletion. Mutations and genomic
rearrangements involving the eight genes were screened by targeted
next-generation sequencing (NGS). We also screened genetic rearrangements by
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in the mutation-negative patients.
A putative deletion, which was suspected by NGS, was additionally analyzed by
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) and junction PCR. Identified novel nucleotide-level
GCM2 mutants were characterized in vitro.
RESULTS: We identified seven patients with a single gene disorder, including a
CASR mutation, GATA3 mutations, and novel GCM2 mutations (R367Tfs*15, T370M, and 
the deletion encompassing exon 1). This submicroscopic deletion, which had been
suspected by NGS, could not be detected by aCGH and was confirmed by ddPCR and
junction PCR. Functional studies of R367Tfs*- and T370M-GCM2 demonstrated a
reduction of target gene transactivation in both.
CONCLUSIONS: Using comprehensive NGS analyses, we identified the genetic defect
in 35% of HP patients in our cohort and discovered novel GCM2 mutations including
submicroscopic deletion that was undetectable by aCGH.

PMID: 25137426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Development. 2014 Aug;141(15):2950-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.111641.

Ectopic TBX1 suppresses thymic epithelial cell differentiation and proliferation 
during thymus organogenesis.

Reeh KA(1), Cardenas KT(1), Bain VE(1), Liu Z(2), Laurent M(1), Manley NR(2),
Richie ER(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Science Park Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. (3)Department of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park
Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA erichie@mdanderson.org.

The thymus and parathyroid glands arise from a shared endodermal primordium in
the third pharyngeal pouch (3rd pp). Thymus fate is specified in the ventral 3rd 
pp between E9.5 and E11, whereas parathyroid fate is specified in the dorsal
domain. The molecular mechanisms that specify fate and regulate thymus and
parathyroid development are not fully delineated. Previous reports suggested that
Tbx1 is required for thymus organogenesis because loss of Tbx1 in individuals
with DiGeorge syndrome and in experimental Tbx1 deletion mutants is associated
with thymus aplasia or hypoplasia. However, the thymus phenotype is likely to be 
secondary to defects in pharyngeal pouch formation. Furthermore, the absence of
Tbx1 expression in the thymus-fated domain of the wild-type 3rd pp suggested that
Tbx1 is instead a negative regulator of thymus organogenesis. To test this
hypothesis, we generated a novel mouse strain in which expression of a
conditional Tbx1 allele was ectopically activated in the thymus-fated domain of
the 3rd pp. Ectopic Tbx1 expression severely repressed expression of Foxn1, a
transcription factor that marks the thymus-fated domain and is required for
differentiation and proliferation of thymic epithelial cell (TEC) progenitors. By
contrast, ectopic Tbx1 did not alter the expression pattern of Gcm2, a
transcription factor restricted to the parathyroid-fated domain and required for 
parathyroid development. Ectopic Tbx1 expression impaired TEC proliferation and
arrested TEC differentiation at an early progenitor stage. The results support
the hypothesis that Tbx1 negatively regulates TEC growth and differentiation, and
that extinction of Tbx1 expression in 3rd pp endoderm is a prerequisite for
thymus organogenesis.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197657
PMID: 25053428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Jul;7(7):847-56. doi: 10.1242/dmm.016576.

The zebrafish merovingian mutant reveals a role for pH regulation in hair cell
toxicity and function.

Stawicki TM(1), Owens KN(2), Linbo T(3), Reinhart KE(3), Rubel EW(4), Raible
DW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA. Virginia Merrill Bloedel Hearing Research Center, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (2)Department of Biological Structure,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Virginia Merrill Bloedel
Hearing Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (3)Department of Biological Structure, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (4)Virginia Merrill Bloedel Hearing Research 
Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Department of
Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA. (5)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Virginia Merrill Bloedel Hearing Research Center,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. draible@u.washington.edu.

Control of the extracellular environment of inner ear hair cells by ionic
transporters is crucial for hair cell function. In addition to inner ear hair
cells, aquatic vertebrates have hair cells on the surface of their body in the
lateral line system. The ionic environment of these cells also appears to be
regulated, although the mechanisms of this regulation are less understood than
those of the mammalian inner ear. We identified the merovingian mutant through
genetic screening in zebrafish for genes involved in drug-induced hair cell
death. Mutants show complete resistance to neomycin-induced hair cell death and
partial resistance to cisplatin-induced hair cell death. This resistance is
probably due to impaired drug uptake as a result of reduced mechanotransduction
ability, suggesting that the mutants have defects in hair cell function
independent of drug treatment. Through genetic mapping we found that merovingian 
mutants contain a mutation in the transcription factor gcm2. This gene is
important for the production of ionocytes, which are cells crucial for whole body
pH regulation in fish. We found that merovingian mutants showed an acidified
extracellular environment in the vicinity of both inner ear and lateral line hair
cells. We believe that this acidified extracellular environment is responsible
for the defects seen in hair cells of merovingian mutants, and that these mutants
would serve as a valuable model for further study of the role of pH in hair cell 
function.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4073274
PMID: 24973752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Pflugers Arch. 2015 Apr;467(4):651-64. doi: 10.1007/s00424-014-1550-y. Epub 2014 
Jun 18.

Hydrogen sulfide inhibits Na+ uptake in larval zebrafish, Danio rerio.

Kumai Y(1), Porteus CS, Kwong RW, Perry SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, 30 Marie Curie, Ottawa, ON, K1N
6N5, Canada.

The present study investigated the role of hydrogen sulfide (H2S) in regulating
Na(+) uptake in larval zebrafish, Danio rerio. Waterborne treatment of larvae at 
4 days post-fertilization (dpf) with Na2S or GYY-4137 (chemicals known to
generate H2S) significantly reduced Na(+) uptake. Exposure of larvae to water
enriched with NaCl (1 mM NaCl) caused a pronounced reduction in Na(+) uptake
which was prevented by pharmacological inhibition of cystathionine ß-synthase
(CBS) or cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase (CSE), two key enzymes involved in the endogenous 
synthesis of H2S. Furthermore, translational gene knockdown of CSE and CBSb
significantly increased the basal rate of Na(+) uptake. Waterborne treatment with
Na2S significantly decreased whole-body acid excretion and reduced Na(+) uptake
in larval zebrafish preexposed to acidic (pH 4.0) water (a condition shown to
promote Na(+) uptake via Na(+)-H(+)-exchanger 3b, NHE3b). However, Na2S did not
affect Na(+) uptake in larvae depleted of NHE3b-containing ionocytes (HR cells)
after knockdown of transcription factor glial cell missing 2 (gcm2) in which
Na(+) uptake occurs predominantly via Na(+)-Cl(-) co-transporter (NCC)-containing
cells. These observations suggest that Na(+) uptake via NHE3b, but not NCC, is
regulated by H2S. Whole-mount immunohistochemistry demonstrated that ionocytes
expressing NHE3b also express CSE. These data suggests a physiologically relevant
role of H2S as a mechanism to lower Na(+) uptake in zebrafish larvae, probably
through its inhibitory action on NHE3b.

PMID: 24939700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Pflugers Arch. 2015 Apr;467(4):753-65. doi: 10.1007/s00424-014-1544-9. Epub 2014 
Jun 5.

A role for transcription factor glial cell missing 2 in Ca2+ homeostasis in
zebrafish, Danio rerio.

Kumai Y(1), Kwong RW, Perry SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, 30 Marie Curie, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6
N5, Canada.

The present study investigated the role of the transcription factor, glial cell
missing 2 (gcm2), in Ca(2+) regulation in zebrafish larvae. Translational gene
knockdown of gcm2 decreased Ca(2+) uptake and the density of ionocytes expressing
the epithelial Ca(2+) channel (ecac), and disrupted the overall Ca(2+) balance.
Ca(2+) uptake and the expression of gcm2 messenger RNA (mRNA) were significantly 
elevated in larvae acclimated to low Ca(2+) water (25 µM); the stimulation of
Ca(2+) uptake was not observed in fish experiencing gcm2 knockdown. Acclimation
to acidic water (pH 4) significantly reduced whole-body Ca(2+) content owing to
reduced Ca(2+) uptake and increased Ca(2+) efflux. However, ecac mRNA levels and 
the density of ecac-expressing ionocytes were increased in fish acclimated to
acidic water, and maximal Ca(2+) uptake capacity (J MAX) was significantly
increased when measured in control water (pH ~7.4). Acclimation of larvae to
acidic water significantly increased gcm2 mRNA expression, and in gcm2 morphants,
no such stimulation in Ca(2+) uptake was observed after their return to control
water. Overexpression of gcm2 mRNA resulted in a significant increase in the
numbers of ecac-expressing ionocytes and Ca(2+) uptake. These observations reveal
a critical role for gcm2 in Ca(2+) homeostasis in zebrafish larvae.

PMID: 24893788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Sep;99(9):E1774-83. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1029. Epub
2014 May 13.

Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism caused by germline mutation in GNA11:
phenotypic and molecular characterization.

Li D(1), Opas EE, Tuluc F, Metzger DL, Hou C, Hakonarson H, Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics (D.L., C.H., H.H.), Division of Endocrinology and 
Diabetes (E.E.O., M.A.L.), Division of Allergy and Immunology (F.T.), Division of
Pulmonary Medicine (H.H.), and Center for Bone Health (M.A.L.), The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia; and Department of Pediatrics (H.H., M.A.L.), University
of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104;
and Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit (D.L.M.), British Columbia Children's
Hospital, and Department of Pediatrics (D.L.M.), University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V5Z 4H4.

CONTEXT: Most cases of autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (ADH) are caused by 
gain-of-function mutations in CASR or dominant inhibitor mutations in GCM2 or
PTH.
OBJECTIVE: Our objectives were to identify the genetic basis for ADH in a
multigenerational family and define the underlying disease mechanism.
SUBJECTS: Here we evaluated a multigenerational family with ADH in which affected
subjects had normal sequences in these genes and were shorter than unaffected
family members.
METHODS: We collected clinical and biochemical data from 6 of 11 affected
subjects and performed whole-exome sequence analysis on DNA from two affected
sisters and their affected father. Functional studies were performed after
expression of wild-type and mutant Ga11 proteins in human embryonic
kidney-293-CaR cells that stably express calcium-sensing receptors.
RESULTS: Whole-exome-sequencing followed by Sanger sequencing revealed a
heterozygous mutation, c.179G>T; p.R60L, in GNA11, which encodes the a-subunit of
G11, the principal heterotrimeric G protein that couples calcium-sensing
receptors to signal activation in parathyroid cells. Functional studies of Ga11
R60L showed increased accumulation of intracellular concentration of free calcium
in response to extracellular concentration of free calcium with a significantly
decreased EC50 compared with wild-type Ga11. By contrast, R60L was significantly 
less effective than the oncogenic Q209L form of Ga11 as an activator of the MAPK 
pathway. Compared to subjects with CASR mutations, patients with GNA11 mutations 
lacked hypercalciuria and had normal serum magnesium levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the germline gain-of-function mutation of
GNA11 is a cause of ADH and implicate a novel role for GNA11 in skeletal growth.

PMCID: PMC4154081
PMID: 24823460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Transgenic Res. 2014 Aug;23(4):631-41. doi: 10.1007/s11248-014-9799-7. Epub 2014 
Apr 16.

Generation of mice encoding a conditional null allele of Gcm2.

Yuan Z(1), Opas EE, Vrikshajanani C, Libutti SK, Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Yeshiva
University, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.

Glial cells missing homolog 2 (GCM2) is a transcription factor that is expressed 
predominately in the pharyngeal pouches and, at later stages, in the developing
and mature parathyroid glands. In humans, loss of GCM2 function, either through
recessive apomorphic mutations or dominant inhibitor mutations in the human GCM2 
gene, leads to isolated hypoparathyroidism. In mice, homozygous disruption of
Gcm2 by conventional gene targeting results in parathyroid aplasia and
hypoparathyroidism. In this study, we report the generation and functional
characterization of mice encoding a conditional null allele of Gcm2. We
demonstrate the functional integrity of the conditional Gcm2 allele and report
successful in vivo deletion of exon 2 using Cre recombinase. The mice with
conditional deletion of Gcm2 displayed phenotypes similar to those previously
described for a conventional Gcm2 knockout, including perinatal lethality,
hypocalemia, low or undetectable serum levels of parathyroid hormone, and absent 
parathyroid glands. The production of a conditional mutant allele for Gcm2
represents a valuable resource for the study of the temporal- and
spatial-specific roles for Gcm2, and for understanding the postnatal activities
of GCM2 protein.

PMCID: PMC4086301
PMID: 24736975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4469-82. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1627. Epub 2013 Oct
18.

Calcium regulates FGF-23 expression in bone.

David V(1), Dai B, Martin A, Huang J, Han X, Quarles LD.

Author information: 
(1)MD, Coleman College of Medicine Building, Suite B226, University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center, 956 Court Avenue, Memphis Tennessee 38163.
dquarles@uthsc.edu.

Calcium has recently been shown to regulate fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23),
a bone-derived phosphate and vitamin D-regulating hormone. To better understand
the regulation of FGF-23 by calcium, phosphorus, 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3
[1,25(OH)2D], and PTH, we examined FGF-23 expression under basal conditions and
in response to PTH, doxercalciferol, or high-calcium diet treatment in Gcm2(-/-) 
and Cyp27b1(-/-) mutant mice. Gcm2(-/-) mice exhibited low serum PTH and
1,25(OH)2D concentrations, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia, whereas
Cyp27b1(-/-) mice had high PTH, undetectable 1,25(OH)2D, hypocalcemia, and
hypophosphatemia. Serum FGF-23 levels were decreased in both mutant models.
Doxercalciferol administration increased serum FGF-23 levels in both mutant
models. PTH administration to Gcm2(-/-) mice also increased serum FGF-23 levels, 
in association with an increase in both 1,25(OH)2D and calcium concentrations.
Multiple regression analysis of pooled data indicated that changes in FGF-23 were
positively correlated with serum calcium and 1,25(OH)2D but not related to
changes in serum phosphate concentrations. A high-calcium diet also increased
serum FGF-23 concentrations in Cyp27b1(-/-) mice in the absence of 1,25(OH)2D and
in Gcm2(-/-) mice with low PTH. The addition of calcium to the culture media also
stimulated FGF-23 message expression in MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts. In addition, FGF-23
promoter activity in cultured osteoblasts was inhibited by the L-calcium-channel 
inhibitor nifedipine and stimulated by calcium ionophores. The effects of chronic
low calcium to prevent 1,25(OH)2D and PTH stimulation of FGF-23 in these mutant
mouse models suggest that suppression of FGF-23 plays an important physiological 
adaptive response to hypocalcemia.

PMCID: PMC3836077
PMID: 24140714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Korean Med Sci. 2013 Oct;28(10):1489-95. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2013.28.10.1489.
Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Genetic and clinical characteristics of korean patients with isolated
hypoparathyroidism: from the Korean hypopara registry study.

Park SY(1), Eom YS, Choi B, Yi HS, Yu SH, Lee K, Jin HS, Chung YS, Jung TS, Lee
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cheil General Hospital, Kwandong University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Isolated hypoparathyroidism (IH) shows heterogeneous phenotypes and can be caused
by defects in a variety of genes. The goal of our study was to determine the
clinical features and to analyze gene mutations in a large cohort of Korean
patients with sporadic or familial IH. We recruited 23 patients. They showed a
broad range of onset age and various values of biochemical data. Whole exome
sequencing was performed on two affected cases and one unaffected individual in a
family. All coding exons and exon-intron borders of GCMB, CASR, and prepro-PTH
were sequenced using PCR-amplified DNA. In one family who underwent the whole
exome sequencing analysis, approximately 300 single nucleotide changes emerged as
candidates for genetic alteration. Among them, we identified a functional
mutation in exon 2 of GCMB (C106R) in two affected cases. Besides, heterozygous
gain-of-function mutations in the CASR gene were found in other subjects; D410E
and P221L. We also found one single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the
prepro-PTH gene, five SNPs in the CASR gene, and four SNPs in the GCMB gene. The 
current study represents a variety of biochemical phenotypes in IH patients with 
the molecular genetic diagnosis of IH.

PMCID: PMC3792604
PMID: 24133354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Clin Epigenetics. 2013 Sep 13;5(1):16. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-5-16.

Methylation profiling and evaluation of demethylating therapy in renal cell
carcinoma.

Ricketts CJ(1), Morris MR, Gentle D, Shuib S, Brown M, Clarke N, Wei W, Nathan P,
Latif F, Maher ER.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine, School of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. erm1000@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Despite therapeutic advances in targeted therapy, metastatic renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) remains incurable for the vast majority of patients. Key
molecular events in the pathogenesis of RCC include inactivation of the VHL
tumour suppressor gene (TSG), inactivation of chromosome 3p TSGs implicated in
chromatin modification and remodelling and de novo tumour-specific promoter
methylation of renal TSGs. In the light of these observations it can be proposed 
that, as in some haematological malignancies, demethylating agents such as
azacitidine might be beneficial for the treatment of advanced RCC.
RESULTS: Here we report that the treatment of RCC cell lines with azacitidine
suppressed cell proliferation in all 15 lines tested. A marked response to
azacitidine therapy (>50% reduction in colony formation assay) was detected in
the three cell lines with VHL promoter methylation but some RCC cell lines
without VHL TSG methylation also demonstrated a similar response suggesting that 
multiple methylated TSGs might determine the response to demethylating therapies.
To identify novel candidate methylated TSGs implicated in RCC we undertook a
combined analysis of copy number and CpG methylation array data. Candidate novel 
epigenetically inactivated TSGs were further prioritised by expression analysis
of RCC cell lines pre and post-azacitidine therapy and comparative expression
analysis of tumour/normal pairs. Thus, with subsequent investigation two
candidate genes were found to be methylated in more than 25% of our series and in
the TCGA methylation dataset for 199 RCC samples: RGS7 (25.6% and 35.2% of
tumours respectively) and NEFM in (25.6% and 30.2%). In addition three candidate 
genes were methylated in >10% of both datasets (TMEM74 (15.4% and 14.6%), GCM2
(41.0% and 14.6%) and AEBP1 (30.8% and 13.1%)). Methylation of GCM2 (P = 0.0324),
NEFM (P = 0.0024) and RGS7 (P = 0.0067) was associated with prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide preclinical evidence that treatment with
demethylating agents such as azacitidine might be useful for the treatment of
advanced RCC and further insights into the role of epigenetic changes in the
pathogenesis of RCC.

PMCID: PMC3848591
PMID: 24034811  [PubMed]


18. Kidney Int. 2013 Aug;84(2):277-84. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.137. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

The calcium sensing receptor modulates fluid reabsorption and acid secretion in
the proximal tubule.

Capasso G(1), Geibel PJ, Damiano S, Jaeger P, Richards WG, Geibel JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2013 Aug;84(2):228-30.

The proximal tubule uses a complex process of apical acid secretion and
basolateral bicarbonate absorption to regulate both luminal acidification and
fluid absorption. One of the primary regulators of apical acid secretion is the
luminal sodium-hydrogen exchanger expressed along the apical membrane of the
proximal tubule. Similarly, the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) is also located
along the luminal membrane of the proximal tubule. Here we investigated the role 
of CaSR in proton secretion and fluid reabsorption in proximal tubules by
modulating luminal calcium concentration, using both in vivo micropuncture in
rats and in vitro perfused mouse proximal tubules. Using CaSR knockout mice and a
calcimimetic agent, we found that increased proton secretion and fluid
reabsorption were CaSR dependent. Activating CaSR by either raising the luminal
calcium ion concentration or by the calcimimetic caused a concomitant increase in
sodium-dependent proton extrusion and fluid reabsorption, whereas in proximal
tubules isolated from CaSR knockout mice varying calcium ion concentration had no
effect. Application of a calcimimetic in lower concentrations of calcium ion
stimulated these processes in vitro and in vivo. Thus, in both rats and mice,
increased luminal calcium concentration leads to enhanced fluid reabsorption in
the proximal tubule, a process related to activation of CaSR.

PMID: 23615500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Dyn. 2013 Feb;242(2):164-78. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23905. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Early development of the thymus in Xenopus laevis.

Lee YH(1), Williams A, Hong CS, You Y, Senoo M, Saint-Jeannet JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry and Institute of Oral
Biosciences, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Although Xenopus laevis has been a model of choice for comparative
and developmental studies of the immune system, little is known about
organogenesis of the thymus, a primary lymphoid organ in vertebrates. Here we
examined the expression of three transcription factors that have been
functionally associated with pharyngeal gland development, gcm2, hoxa3, and
foxn1, and evaluated the neural crest contribution to thymus development.
RESULTS: In most species Hoxa3 is expressed in the third pharyngeal pouch
endoderm where it directs thymus formation. In Xenopus, the thymus primordium is 
derived from the second pharyngeal pouch endoderm, which is hoxa3-negative,
suggesting that a different mechanism regulates thymus formation in frogs. Unlike
other species foxn1 is not detected in the epithelium of the pharyngeal pouch in 
Xenopus, rather, its expression is initiated as thymic epithelial cell starts to 
differentiate and express MHC class II molecules. Using transplantation
experiments we show that while neural crest cells populate the thymus primordia, 
they are not required for the specification and initial development of this organ
or for T-cell differentiation in frogs.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide novel information on early thymus development 
in Xenopus, and highlight a number of features that distinguish Xenopus from
other organisms.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., a Wiley company.

PMCID: PMC3640628
PMID: 23172757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2012;25(7-8):741-6.

A novel mutation in the GCM2 gene causing severe congenital isolated
hypoparathyroidism.

Doyle D(1), Kirwin SM, Sol-Church K, Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
P.O. Box 269, Wilmington, DE 19803, USA. ddoyle@nemours.org

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the GCM2 gene in three siblings with congenital
hypoparathyroidism and perform functional analysis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We sequenced the GCM2 gene by PCR and analyzed the
functional consequence of the mutation by transient transfection studies.
Haplotype analysis was performed.
RESULTS: We identified a nucleotide change, c.408C>A, in exon 3 that is predicted
to truncate the Gcm2 protein (p.Tyr136Ter). All three affected siblings were
homozygous and both parents were heterozygous for the mutation. Transfection
studies revealed the mutant mRNA but not expression of the Gcm2 protein.
Haplotype analysis revealed that the two mutant GCM2 alleles shared genotypes on 
chromosome 6p24.2.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe the first GCM2 mutation in exon 3 in patients with
severe congenital hypoparathyroidism. Informative genetic markers could not
exclude identity by descent for the mutant alleles. Gcm2 protein was not detected
after transfection, suggesting that complete lack of Gcm2 action accounts for
severe hypoparathyroidism.

PMCID: PMC3694175
PMID: 23155703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Aug;97(8):E1499-505. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3366.
Epub 2012 May 14.

Differential gene expression by oxyphil and chief cells of human parathyroid
glands.

Ritter CS(1), Haughey BH, Miller B, Brown AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Washington University School of Medicine, Barnes Jewish
Hospital, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

CONTEXT: Parathyroid oxyphil cells, whose function is unknown, are thought to be 
derived from chief cells. Oxyphil cells increase in number in parathyroid glands 
of patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and are even more abundant in
patients receiving treatment for hyperparathyroidism with calcitriol and/or the
calcimimetic cinacalcet.
OBJECTIVE: We examined oxyphil and chief cells of parathyroid glands of CKD
patients for differential expression of genes important to parathyroid function.
DESIGN/SETTING/PARTICIPANTS: Parathyroid tissue from CKD patients with refractory
hyperparathyroidism was immunostained for gene expression studies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Immunostaining for PTH, PTHrP, calcium-sensing receptor,
glial cells missing 2, vitamin D receptor, 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1a-hydroxylase,
and cytochrome c was quantified and expression reported for oxyphil and chief
cells.
RESULTS: Expression of all proteins analyzed, except for the vitamin D receptor, 
was higher in oxyphil cells than in chief cells.
CONCLUSION: Human parathyroid oxyphil cells express parathyroid-relevant genes
found in the chief cells and have the potential to produce additional
autocrine/paracrine factors, such as PTHrP and calcitriol. Additional studies are
warranted to define the secretory properties of these cells and clarify their
role in parathyroid pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC3591682
PMID: 22585091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Endocrinol Invest. 2011 Jul;34(7 Suppl):27-34.

Genetics of hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypoparathyroidism.

Brandi ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Bone and Mineral Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Florence, Medical School, Viale Pieraccini, 6 - 50139 Florence,
Italy. m.brandi@dmi.unifi.it

Congenital hypoparathyroidism encompasses a series of disorders chracterized by
the common biochimical feature of symptomatic hypocalcemia with concomitant
hypophosphoremia. Clinical features differ among the various parathyroid-related 
hypocalcemic syndromes, as understandable on the basis of disorder-specific
genetics. The present article reviews the various disorders related to both
hypoparathyroid and pseudohypoparathyroid conditions, with a detailed report of
the recent discoveries in term of the genetics of these syndromes.

PMID: 21985977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Nov;1237:24-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06221.x.

Transcription factors in parathyroid development: lessons from hypoparathyroid
disorders.

Grigorieva IV(1), Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital,
University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Parathyroid developmental anomalies, which result in hypoparathyroidism, are
common and may occur in one in 4,000 live births. Parathyroids, in man, develop
from the endodermal cells of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches, whereas, in
the mouse they develop solely from the endoderm of the third pharyngeal pouches. 
In addition, neural crest cells that arise from the embryonic mid- and hindbrain 
also contribute to parathyroid gland development. The molecular signaling
pathways that are involved in determining the differentiation of the pharyngeal
pouch endoderm into parathyroid cells are being elucidated by studies of patients
with hypoparathyroidism and appropriate mouse models. These studies have revealed
important roles for a number of transcription factors, which include Tbx1, Gata3,
Gcm2, Sox3, Aire1 and members of the homeobox (Hox) and paired box (Pax)
families.

© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22082362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 May;76(5):625-33. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04256.x.

Identification and characterization of C106R, a novel mutation in the DNA-binding
domain of GCMB, in a family with autosomal-dominant hypoparathyroidism.

Yi HS(1), Eom YS, Park IeB, Lee S, Hong S, Jüppner H, Mannstadt M, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology,
Gachon University School of Medicine, Incheon, Korea.

OVERVIEW: Glial cells missing B (GCMB) is a transcription factor that is
expressed in the parathyroid hormone (PTH)-secreting cells of the parathyroid
glands. Several mutations in GCMB have been reported to cause hypoparathyroidism 
(HP). We identified a family with two individuals in two generations (mother and 
son), who are affected by autosomal-dominant hypoparathyroidism (AD-HP). A novel 
heterozygous mutation in exon 2 of GCMB was identified in both affected
individuals that changes cysteine at position 106 of the putative DNA-binding
domain of GCMB to arginine (C106R).
METHODS: We performed mutational analysis of the genes encoding GCMB, pre-pro
PTH, GATA3 and CaSR using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified genomic DNA. 
The identified GCMB mutant was characterized by functional studies including
nuclear localization, electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and luciferase
reporter assays, and homology modelling was performed to generate a
three-dimensional structural model for the DNA-binding domain of GCMB to predict 
the structural consequences of the identified mutation.
RESULTS: The C106R mutant of GCMB failed to interact with the DNA consensus
recognition motif, as determined by EMSA. Furthermore, in comparison with
wild-type GCMB, the C106R mutant demonstrated reduced transactivation in
luciferase reporter assays; however, the mutant GCMB failed to reduce the
activity of the wild-type protein. Consistent with the EMSA findings, homology
modelling analysis suggested that replacement of cysteine 106 with arginine would
interfere with DNA binding.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel GCMB mutation that may explain AD-HP in
our family. However, the exact mechanism by which this heterozygous mutation
leads to the disease in the described family remains to be elucidated.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3701386
PMID: 22066718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):208-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.022. Epub 2011 
Oct 28.

Modulation of Bmp4 signalling in the epithelial-mesenchymal interactions that
take place in early thymus and parathyroid development in avian embryos.

Neves H(1), Dupin E, Parreira L, Le Douarin NM.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR3294 Laboratoire Neurobiologie et Développement, Institut de
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Avenue de la Terrasse 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex,
France. hneves@fm.ul.pt

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions are crucial for the development of the
endoderm of the pharyngeal pouches into the epithelia of thymus and parathyroid
glands. Here we investigated the dynamics of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions 
that take place at the earliest stages of thymic and parathyroid organogenesis
using the quail-chick model together with a co-culture system capable of
reproducing these early events in vitro. The presumptive territories of thymus
and parathyroid epithelia were identified in three-dimensionally preserved
pharyngeal endoderm of embryonic day 4.5 chick embryos on the basis of the
expression of Foxn1 and Gcm2, respectively: the thymic rudiment is located in the
dorsal domain of the third and fourth pouches, while the parathyroid rudiment
occupies a more medial/anterior pouch domain. Using in vitro quail-chick tissue
associations combined with in ovo transplantations, we show that the
somatopleural but not the limb bud mesenchyme, can mimic the role of neural
crest-derived pharyngeal mesenchyme to sustain development of these glands up to 
terminal differentiation. Furthermore, mesenchymal-derived Bmp4 appears to be
essential to promote early stages of endoderm development during a short window
of time, irrespective of the mesenchymal source. In vivo studies using the
quail-chick system and implantation of growth factor soaked-beads further showed 
that expression of Bmp4 by the mesenchyme is necessary during a 24 h-period of
time. After this period however, Bmp4 is no longer required and another
signalling factor produced by the mesenchyme, Fgf10, influences later
differentiation of the pouch endoderm. These results show that morphological
development and cell differentiation of thymus and parathyroid epithelia require 
a succession of signals emanating from the associated mesenchyme, among which
Bmp4 plays a pivotal role for triggering thymic epithelium specification.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22057081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23746. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023746. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Acquisition of glial cells missing 2 enhancers contributes to a diversity of
ionocytes in zebrafish.

Shono T(1), Kurokawa D, Miyake T, Okabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Glial cells missing 2 (gcm2) encoding a GCM-motif transcription factor is
expressed in the parathyroid in amniotes. In contrast, gcm2 is expressed in
pharyngeal pouches (a homologous site of the parathyroid), gills, and
H(+)-ATPase-rich cells (HRCs), a subset of ionocytes on the skin surface of the
teleost fish zebrafish. Ionocytes are specialized cells that are involved in
osmotic homeostasis in aquatic vertebrates. Here, we showed that gcm2 is
essential for the development of HRCs and Na(+)-Cl(-) co-transporter-rich cells
(NCCCs), another subset of ionocytes in zebrafish. We also identified gcm2
enhancer regions that control gcm2 expression in ionocytes of zebrafish.
Comparisons of the gcm2 locus with its neighboring regions revealed no conserved 
elements between zebrafish and tetrapods. Furthermore, We observed gcm2
expression patterns in embryos of the teleost fishes Medaka (Oryzias latipes) and
fugu (Fugu niphobles), the extant primitive ray-finned fishes Polypterus
(Polypterus senegalus) and sturgeon (a hybrid of Huso huso × Acipenser ruhenus), 
and the amphibian Xenopus (Xenopus laevis). Although gcm2-expressing cells were
observed on the skin surface of Medaka and fugu, they were not found in
Polypterus, sturgeon, or Xenopus. Our results suggest that an acquisition of
enhancers for the expression of gcm2 contributes to a diversity of ionocytes in
zebrafish during evolution.

PMCID: PMC3157436
PMID: 21858216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Tissue Eng Part C Methods. 2011 Nov;17(11):1051-9. doi:
10.1089/ten.tec.2011.0170. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Directed trans-differentiation of thymus cells into parathyroid-like cells
without genetic manipulation.

Woods Ignatoski KM(1), Bingham EL, Frome LK, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrine Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Michigan
Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. kwi@umich.edu

Replacement of a diseased organ with an autologously derived tissue is an ideal
therapy for some medical problems. However, it is difficult to recreate many
adult human tissues in vitro due to the functionally necessary architecture of
most organs and the lack of understanding of methods to direct the development of
the organ of interest. The parathyroid gland is ideal for in vitro organ
development because this gland is relatively simple, is transplantable, and is
commonly affected by a surgical complication rather than an autoimmune disease.
We have investigated thymus as a source of autologous endoderm and
parathyroid-like precursor cells. Human thymus cells were treated with a
differentiation protocol we developed with human embryonic stem cells (The
Bingham Protocol) that utilizes timed exposures to Activin A and soluble Sonic
hedgehog (Shh). We incrementally changed the protocol to optimize the
differentiation of the thymus cells into parathyroid-like cells. The final
protocol used 50<U+2009>ng/mL Activin A and 100<U+2009>ng/mL Shh over 13 weeks. The
differentiated cells expressed the parathyroid markers parathyroid hormone (PTH),
calcium sensing receptor, chemokine receptor type-4 (CXCR4), and chorian-specific
transcription factor (GCM2) as measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and PTH enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Cultured thymus cells without
Activin A or Shh exposure did not secrete PTH nor express similar markers. The
differentiated cells released PTH, which was suppressed in response to increased 
calcium concentration. The chemically differentiated cells did not form tumors in
immune-compromised mice. Our protocol recreated cells with markers of parathyroid
tissue that responded as parathyroid cells to physiologic stimuli. This approach 
is a further step toward a strategy to restore parathyroid function using
autologous cells that were directed to differentiate by nongenetic in vitro
manipulation.

PMID: 21797755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Jul 17;14(8):957-64. doi: 10.1038/nn.2875.

Mammalian Gcm genes induce Hes5 expression by active DNA demethylation and induce
neural stem cells.

Hitoshi S(1), Ishino Y, Kumar A, Jasmine S, Tanaka KF, Kondo T, Kato S, Hosoya T,
Hotta Y, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan. shitoshi-tky@umin.ac.jp

Signaling mediated by Notch receptors is crucial for the development of many
organs and the maintenance of various stem cell populations. The activation of
Notch signaling is first detectable by the expression of an effector gene, Hes5, 
in the neuroepithelium of mouse embryos at embryonic day (E) 8.0-8.5, and this
activation is indispensable for the generation of neural stem cells. However, the
molecular mechanism by which Hes5 expression is initiated in stem-producing cells
remains unknown. We found that mammalian Gcm1 and Gcm2 (glial cells missing 1 and
2) are involved in the epigenetic regulation of Hes5 transcription by DNA
demethylation independently of DNA replication. Loss of both Gcm genes and
subsequent lack of Hes5 upregulation in the neuroepithelium of E7.5-8.5
Gcm1(-/-); Gcm2(-/-) mice resulted in the impaired induction of neural stem
cells. Our data suggest that Hes5 expression is serially activated first by Gcms 
and later by the canonical Notch pathway.

PMID: 21765423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Oct;26(10):2463-72. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.458.

MafB interacts with Gcm2 and regulates parathyroid hormone expression and
parathyroid development.

Kamitani-Kawamoto A(1), Hamada M, Moriguchi T, Miyai M, Saji F, Hatamura I,
Nishikawa K, Takayanagi H, Hitoshi S, Ikenaka K, Hosoya T, Hotta Y, Takahashi S, 
Kataoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of
Biological Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Japan.

Serum calcium and phosphate homeostasis is critically regulated by parathyroid
hormone (PTH) secreted by the parathyroid glands. Parathyroid glands develop from
the bilateral parathyroid-thymus common primordia. In mice, the expression of
transcription factor Glial cell missing 2 (Gcm2) begins in the dorsal/anterior
part of the primordium on embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5), specifying the parathyroid
domain. The parathyroid primordium then separates from the thymus primordium and 
migrates to its adult location beside the thyroid gland by E15.5. Genetic
ablation of gcm2 results in parathyroid agenesis in mice, indicating that Gcm2 is
essential for early parathyroid organogenesis. However, the regulation of
parathyroid development at later stages is not well understood. Here we show that
transcriptional activator v-maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene
homologue B (MafB) is developmentally expressed in parathyroid cells after E11.5.
MafB expression was lost in the parathyroid primordium of gcm2 null mice. The
parathyroid glands of mafB(+/-) mice were mislocalized between the thymus and
thyroid. In mafB(-/-) mice, the parathyroid did not separate from the thymus.
Furthermore, in mafB(-/-) mice, PTH expression and secretion were impaired;
expression levels of renal cyp27b1, one of the target genes of PTH, was
decreased; and bone mineralization was reduced. We also demonstrate that although
Gcm2 alone does not stimulate the PTH gene promoter, it associates with MafB to
synergistically activate PTH expression. Taken together, our results suggest that
MafB regulates later steps of parathyroid development, that is, separation from
the thymus and migration toward the thyroid. MafB also regulates the expression
of PTH in cooperation with Gcm2.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 21713993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;210(2):165-71. doi: 10.1530/JOE-10-0247. Epub 2011 Jun 3.

Mutational analysis of GCMB, a parathyroid-specific transcription factor, in
parathyroid adenoma of primary hyperparathyroidism.

Mannstadt M(1), Holick E, Zhao W, Jüppner H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Thier 1051, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
USA. mmannstadt@partners.org

Sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT), one of the most common endocrine
disorders, is characterized by hypercalcemia and elevated PTH levels. The
majority of cases are caused by a benign parathyroid adenoma, but somatic or de
novo germ-line mutations that lead to adenoma formation have only been identified
in few glands. GCMB is a parathyroid-specific transcription factor, which causes 
hypoparathyroidism when inactivated on both parental alleles or when a
dominant-negative, heterozygous mutation is present. It is overexpressed in some 
parathyroid adenomas, and we therefore tested the hypothesis that GCMB mutations 
can be a cause of parathyroid adenomas. Nucleotide sequence analysis was
performed on all coding exons and exon-intron borders of GCMB in 30 sporadic
parathyroid adenomas and we identified several known polymorphisms that were
either heterozygous or homozygous. In addition, one of the 30 investigated glands
revealed a novel heterozygous missense mutation, c.1144G>A, which introduced
methionine at position 382 for valine (V382M), a conserved amino acid residue.
Western blot analysis using mutant GCMB (GCMB-V382M) from lysates of transiently 
transfected DF-1 fibroblasts, luciferase assays using extracts from these cells, 
and electrophoretic mobility assays failed to reveal differences between
wild-type and mutant GCMB in expression level, transactivational capacity, and
DNA-binding ability. Furthermore, pulse-chase experiments demonstrated no
difference in half-life of wild-type and mutant protein. We conclude that
mutations in the transcription factor GCMB do not seem to play a major role in
the pathogenesis of PHPT.

PMCID: PMC3689587
PMID: 21642377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 May;25(5):867-76. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0277. Epub 2011 Mar
10.

Regulator of G protein signaling 5 is highly expressed in parathyroid tumors and 
inhibits signaling by the calcium-sensing receptor.

Koh J(1), Dar M, Untch BR, Dixit D, Shi Y, Yang Z, Adam MA, Dressman H, Wang X,
Gesty-Palmer D, Marks JR, Spurney R, Druey KM, Olson JA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 
27710, USA.

The molecular mechanisms responsible for aberrant calcium signaling in
parathyroid disease are poorly understood. The loss of appropriate
calcium-responsive modulation of PTH secretion observed in parathyroid disease is
commonly attributed to decreased expression of the calcium-sensing receptor
(CaSR), a G protein-coupled receptor. However, CaSR expression is highly variable
in parathyroid adenomas, and the lack of correlation between CaSR abundance and
calcium-responsive PTH kinetics indicates that mechanisms independent of CaSR
expression may contribute to aberrant calcium sensing in parathyroid disease. To 
gain a better understanding of parathyroid tumors and the molecular determinants 
that drive parathyroid adenoma development, we performed gene expression
profiling on a panel of 64 normal and neoplastic parathyroid tissues. The
microarray data revealed high-level expression of genes known to be involved in
parathyroid biology (PTH, VDR, CGA, CaSR, and GCM2). Moreover, our screen
identified regulator of G protein signaling 5 (RGS5) as a candidate inhibitor of 
CaSR signaling. We confirmed RGS5 to be highly expressed in parathyroid adenomas 
relative to matched-pair normal glands. Transient expression of RGS5 in cells
stably expressing CaSR resulted in dose-dependent abrogation of
calcium-stimulated inositol trisphosphate production and ERK1/2 phosphorylation. 
Furthermore, we found that RGS5-nullizygous mice display reduced plasma PTH
levels, an outcome consistent with attenuated opposition to CaSR activity.
Collectively, these data suggest that RGS5 can act as a physiological regulator
of calcium sensing by CaSR in the parathyroid gland. The abnormally elevated
expression of RGS5 observed in parathyroid adenomas could thus represent a novel 
mechanism of CaSR desensitization in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism.

PMCID: PMC3082322
PMID: 21393447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):194-205. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.012. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Shh signalling restricts the expression of Gcm2 and controls the position of the 
developing parathyroids.

Grevellec A(1), Graham A, Tucker AS.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Department of Craniofacial Development and
Orthodontics, Floor 27 Guy's Tower, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London SE1
9RT, UK.

The parathyroid glands originate from the endoderm of the caudal pharyngeal
pouches. How these parathyroids are restricted to developing in the caudal
pouches is unclear. In this paper we investigate the role of Shh signalling in
patterning the vertebrate pharyngeal pouches, and show that Hh signalling may be 
involved in restricting the expression of the parathyroid marker Gcm2 in the
pharyngeal epithelium. In the chick and mouse, Shh signalling is excluded or
highly reduced in the posterior/caudal pouches, where the parathyroid marker Gcm2
is expressed, while remaining at high levels in the more anterior pouches.
Moreover, though the block of Shh signalling at early developmental stages
results in the loss of chick Gcm2 expression, at later stages, it induces ectopic
Gcm2 expression domains in the second and first pharyngeal epithelium, suggesting
that HH signalling prevents Gcm2 in those tissues. These ectopic domains go on to
express other parathyroid markers but do not migrate and develop into ectopic
parathyroids. Differences in the expression of Gcm2 in the chick, mouse and
zebrafish, correlate with changing patterns of Shh signalling, indicating a
conserved regulatory mechanism that acts to define pouch derivatives.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21349263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 23;6(12):e1001251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001251.

Thymus-associated parathyroid hormone has two cellular origins with distinct
endocrine and immunological functions.

Liu Z(1), Farley A, Chen L, Kirby BJ, Kovacs CS, Blackburn CC, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States 
of America.

In mammals, parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a key regulator of extracellular calcium
and inorganic phosphorus homeostasis. Although the parathyroid glands were
thought to be the only source of PTH, extra-parathyroid PTH production in the
thymus, which shares a common origin with parathyroids during organogenesis, has 
been proposed to provide an auxiliary source of PTH, resulting in a higher than
expected survival rate for aparathyroid Gcm2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mutants. However, the
developmental ontogeny and cellular identity of these "thymic" PTH-expressing
cells is unknown. We found that the lethality of aparathyroid Gcm2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mutants was
affected by genetic background without relation to serum PTH levels, suggesting a
need to reconsider the physiological function of thymic PTH. We identified two
sources of extra-parathyroid PTH in wild-type mice. Incomplete separation of the 
parathyroid and thymus organs during organogenesis resulted in misplaced,
isolated parathyroid cells that were often attached to the thymus; this was the
major source of thymic PTH in normal mice. Analysis of thymus and parathyroid
organogenesis in human embryos showed a broadly similar result, indicating that
these results may provide insight into human parathyroid development. In
addition, medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) express PTH in a
Gcm2-independent manner that requires TEC differentiation and is consistent with 
expression as a self-antigen for negative selection. Genetic or surgical removal 
of the thymus indicated that thymus-derived PTH in Gcm2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mutants did not
provide auxiliary endocrine function. Our data show conclusively that the thymus 
does not serve as an auxiliary source of either serum PTH or parathyroid
function. We further show that the normal process of parathyroid organogenesis in
both mice and humans leads to the generation of multiple small parathyroid
clusters in addition to the main parathyroid glands, that are the likely source
of physiologically relevant "thymic PTH."

PMCID: PMC3009658
PMID: 21203493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jan;35(1):145-51. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31820371e4.

Study of parathyroid transcription factor Gcm2 expression in parathyroid lesions.

Nonaka D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
Daisuke.Nonaka@christie.nhs.uk

Glial cells missing 2 (Gcm2) is a master regulatory gene of parathyroid gland
development, and it is exclusively expressed in the parathyroid gland. Diagnostic
application of anti-Gcm2 antibody has not been reported yet. In this study, a
total of 58 cases of parathyroid lesions including 40 adenomas, 2 atypical
adenomas, 2 carcinomas, 9 hyperplastic lesions, 4 parathyroid cysts, and 1 case
of recurrent hyperplasia of an autograft gland were stained with anti-Gcm2
antibody. Anti-Gcm2 was also applied to a variety of endocrine tumors, including 
thyroid tumors and nonendocrine tumors, and normal tissues from a variety of
organs, including the parathyroid and thyroid glands. Gcm2 nuclear expression was
seen in all the normal parathyroid glands, and cystic, hyperplastic, and
neoplastic parathyroid lesions in a diffuse manner, whereas no Gcm2 expression
was seen in any other normal tissues and tumors, including those of the thymus
and thyroid gland. Anti-Gcm2 antibody is a highly sensitive and specific marker
for parathyroid lesions. Although the immunohistochemistry stain for parathyroid 
hormone is a useful marker, its reaction tends to be variable in extent and
intensity in parathyroid neoplasia, and it is often negative in parathyroid
cysts, and Gcm2 would serve as a useful adjunct marker.

PMID: 21164298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Surgery. 2010 Dec;148(6):1186-9; discussion 1189-90. doi:
10.1016/j.surg.2010.09.021.

Differentiation of precursors into parathyroid-like cells for treatment of
hypoparathyroidism.

Woods Ignatoski KM(1), Bingham EL, Frome LK, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Endocrine Surgery, University of Michigan
Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5654, USA. kwi@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Hypoparathyroidism is the most frequent permanent complication of
thyroid surgery. Our hypothesis is that human precursor cells in culture can be
differentiated into parathyroid cells and used to reconstitute function. Human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are a stable model to study differentiation into
parathyroid-like cells. In prior work, the BG01-hESC line was stimulated to form 
parathyroid-like cells. This cell line is no longer available, however, and
additional studies were needed to confirm and extend prior observations.
METHODS: Increasing concentrations of fetal bovine serum and timed exposure to
Activin A were used to differentiate H1-hESC into parathyroid-like cells. The
potential benefit of Sonic hedgehog exposure on parathyroid-like cell development
also was evaluated by serial alterations of culture conditions. Calcium-sensing
receptor (CaSR), GCM2, and PTH expression (RT-PCR) and PTH protein secretion
(ELISA) were used as markers of differentiated cells.
RESULTS: We successfully modified our prior protocol to generate cells that
express CaSR, GCM2, and PTH RNA from undifferentiated H1-hESC. The cells also
secreted PTH.
CONCLUSION: We replicated parathyroid differentiation using H1-hESC cells. Our
data advance the project toward in vitro differentiation of precursor cells
isolated from individual patients for autotransplantation.

Copyright © 2010 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21134550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Bone. 2010 Sep;47(3):534-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2010.05.031. Epub 2010 Jun 15.

Involvement of GCMB in the transcriptional regulation of the human parathyroid
hormone gene in a parathyroid-derived cell line PT-r: effects of calcium and
1,25(OH)2D3.

Kawahara M(1), Iwasaki Y, Sakaguchi K, Taguchi T, Nishiyama M, Nigawara T,
Kambayashi M, Sawada T, Jing X, Miyajima M, Terada Y, Hashimoto K, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nephrology, Kochi Medical School,
Kochi University, Nankoku 783-8505, Japan.

Expression of the PTH gene is known to be under strict tissue-specific control
and is also regulated by extracellular calcium and 1,25(OH)(2)D. However, the
precise mode of transcriptional regulation remains to be elucidated, because of
the unavailability of appropriate cell lines derived from the parathyroid gland. 
We tried to identify the transcription factor(s) regulating the human PTH gene
transcription using the PT-r cell line. We found that PT-r cells endogenously
express PTH and several parathyroid-related genes. Using the cells, we
investigated the transcriptional regulation of human PTH gene. We found that GCMB
binds to the PTH gene 5'-promoter (-390/-383 bp) and positively regulates its
transcription. On the other hand, 1,25(OH)(2)D(3), and, in the presence of the
calcium sensing receptor, high extracellular calcium, exerted inhibitory effects 
on PTH gene expression. These results indicate that GCMB and vitamin D receptor
are involved in the positive and negative regulation of PTH gene expression,
respectively. Our data also suggest that PT-r cells retain some of the
characteristics of parathyroid cells.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20558332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Clin Invest. 2010 Jun;120(6):2144-55. doi: 10.1172/JCI42021. Epub 2010 May 17.

Gata3-deficient mice develop parathyroid abnormalities due to dysregulation of
the parathyroid-specific transcription factor Gcm2.

Grigorieva IV(1), Mirczuk S, Gaynor KU, Nesbit MA, Grigorieva EF, Wei Q, Ali A,
Fairclough RJ, Stacey JM, Stechman MJ, Mihai R, Kurek D, Fraser WD, Hough T,
Condie BG, Manley N, Grosveld F, Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University 
of Oxford, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism (OCDEM),
Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Heterozygous mutations of GATA3, which encodes a dual zinc-finger transcription
factor, cause hypoparathyroidism with sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia.
Here, we have investigated the role of GATA3 in parathyroid function by
challenging Gata3+/- mice with a diet low in calcium and vitamin D so as to
expose any defects in parathyroid function. This led to a higher mortality among 
Gata3+/- mice compared with Gata3+/+ mice. Compared with their wild-type
littermates, Gata3+/- mice had lower plasma concentrations of calcium and
parathyroid hormone (PTH) and smaller parathyroid glands with a reduced Ki-67
proliferation rate. At E11.5, Gata3+/- embryos had smaller parathyroid-thymus
primordia with fewer cells expressing the parathyroid-specific gene glial cells
missing 2 (Gcm2), the homolog of human GCMB. In contrast, E11.5 Gata3-/- embryos 
had no Gcm2 expression and by E12.5 had gross defects in the third and fourth
pharyngeal pouches, including absent parathyroid-thymus primordia.
Electrophoretic mobility shift, luciferase reporter, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that GATA3 binds specifically to a functional
double-GATA motif within the GCMB promoter. Thus, GATA3 is critical for the
differentiation and survival of parathyroid progenitor cells and, with GCM2/B,
forms part of a transcriptional cascade in parathyroid development and function.

PMCID: PMC2877956
PMID: 20484821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jul;95(7):3512-6. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2532. Epub
2010 May 12.

A missense glial cells missing homolog B (GCMB) mutation, Asn502His, causes
autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism.

Mirczuk SM(1), Bowl MR, Nesbit MA, Cranston T, Fratter C, Allgrove J, Brain C,
Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University 
of Oxford, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism (OCDEM),
Churchill Hospital, Headington Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

CONTEXT: Glial cells missing B (GCMB), the mammalian homolog of the Drosophila
GCM gene, encodes a 506-amino-acid parathyroid-specific transcription factor. To 
date, only two different heterozygous GCMB mutations have been reported in three 
kindreds with autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate a family with autosomal dominant
hypoparathyroidism for PTH, CaSR, and GCMB mutations.
METHODS: Leukocyte DNA was used with exon-specific primers for PCR amplification 
and the DNA sequences of the PCR products determined. Functional analyses using
fluorescence microscopy, EMSAs, and luciferase reporter assays were undertaken.
Informed consent was obtained using protocols approved by a national ethical
committee.
RESULTS: DNA sequence analysis revealed an A to C transversion at codon 502 of
GCMB, which altered the wild-type asparagine (Asn) to histidine (His). Functional
studies, using transient transfections of COS7 cells with GCMB wild-type and
mutant (Asn502His) tagged constructs, demonstrated that the wild-type and mutant 
proteins localized to the nucleus and retained the ability to bind the
GCM-consensus DNA recognition motif. However, a luciferase reporter assay
demonstrated that the Asn502His mutation resulted in a reduction in gene
transactivation. Moreover, cotransfection of the wild-type with mutant did not
lead to an increase in luciferase activity, thereby demonstrating a
dominant-negative effect of the Asn502His mutant that would be consistent with an
autosomal dominant inheritance.
CONCLUSION: Our results, which have identified the first dominant missense GCMB
mutation, help to increase our understanding of the mechanism underlying gene
transactivation that is a prerequisite for the function of this parathyroid
gland-specific transcription factor.

PMID: 20463099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 May 15;19(10):2028-38. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq084. Epub 2010 Feb
27.

Identification and characterization of novel parathyroid-specific transcription
factor Glial Cells Missing Homolog B (GCMB) mutations in eight families with
autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism.

Bowl MR(1), Mirczuk SM, Grigorieva IV, Piret SE, Cranston T, Southam L, Allgrove 
J, Bahl S, Brain C, Loughlin J, Mughal Z, Ryan F, Shaw N, Thakker YV, Tiosano D, 
Nesbit MA, Thakker RV.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Endocrine Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

GCMB is a member of the small transcription factor family GCM (glial cells
missing), which are important regulators of development, present in vertebrates
and some invertebrates. In man, GCMB encodes a 506 amino acid parathyroid
gland-specific protein, mutations of which have been reported to cause both
autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism. We ascertained 18 
affected individuals from 12 families with autosomal recessive hypoparathyroidism
and have investigated them for GCMB abnormalities. Four different homozygous
germline mutations were identified in eight families that originate from the
Indian Subcontinent. These consisted of a novel nonsense mutation R39X; a
missense mutation, R47L in two families; a novel missense mutation, R110W; and a 
novel frameshifting deletion, I298fsX307 in four families. Haplotype analysis,
using polymorphic microsatellites from chromosome 6p23-24, revealed that R47L and
I298fsX307 mutations arose either as ancient founders, or recurrent de novo
mutations. Functional studies including: subcellular localization studies, EMSAs 
and luciferase-reporter assays, were undertaken and these demonstrated that: the 
R39X mutant failed to localize to the nucleus; the R47L and R110W mutants both
lost DNA-binding ability; and the I298fsX307 mutant had reduced transactivational
ability. In order to gain further insights, we undertook 3D-modeling of the GCMB 
DNA-binding domain, which revealed that the R110 residue is likely important for 
the structural integrity of helix 2, which forms part of the GCMB/DNA binding
interface. Thus, our results, which expand the spectrum of
hypoparathyroidism-associated GCMB mutations, help elucidate the molecular
mechanisms underlying DNA-binding and transactivation that are required for this 
parathyroid-specific transcription factor.

PMID: 20190276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Mar;25(3):594-605. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.090825.

Parathyroid hormone regulates fetal-placental mineral homeostasis.

Simmonds CS(1), Karsenty G, Karaplis AC, Kovacs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
Newfoundland, Canada.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) plays an essential role in regulating calcium and bone 
homeostasis in the adult, but whether PTH is required at all for regulating
fetal-placental mineral homeostasis and skeletal development is uncertain. We
hypothesized that despite its low circulating levels during fetal life, PTH plays
a critical role in regulating these processes. To address this, we examined two
different genetic models of PTH deficiency. Pth null mice have enlarged
parathyroids that are incapable of making PTH, whereas Gcm2 null mice lack
parathyroids but have PTH that arises from the thymus. Pth nulls served as a
model of complete absence of PTH, whereas Gcm2 nulls were a model of severe
hypoparathyroidism. We determined that PTH contributes importantly to fetal
mineral homeostasis because in its absence a fetal hypoparathyroid phenotype
results with hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, hyperphosphatemia, low amniotic fluid 
mineral content, and reduced skeletal mineral content. We also determined that
PTH is expressed in the placenta, regulates the placental expression of genes
involved in calcium and other solute transfer, and may directly stimulate
placental calcium transfer. Although parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) 
acts in concert with PTH to regulate fetal mineral homeostasis and placental
calcium transfer, unlike PTH, it does not upregulate in response to fetal
hypocalcemia.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 19968565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Endocr J. 2010;57(2):161-70. Epub 2009 Dec 1.

Ectopic production of parathyroid hormone in a patient with sporadic medullary
thyroid cancer.

Demura M(1), Yoneda T, Wang F, Zen Y, Karashima S, Zhu A, Cheng Y, Yamagishi M,
Takeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine,
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi,
Kanazawa, Japan. m-demura@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Elevation of serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) in patients with medullary thyroid
cancer (MTC) is usually found in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A).
However, ectopic production of PTH is rare and its molecular etiology remains
largely uninvestigated. We report a case of ectopic production of PTH by a
sporadic MTC. The etiology of ectopic PTH gene expression was examined, focusing 
on GCM2 which has a crucial role in developing parathyroid glands. We observed
ectopic expression of the PTH and GCM2 genes in tissues from the tumor and
metastatic lymph nodes. However, GCM2 gene expression was also detected in
adjacent thyroid tissue and lymphoblasts, in which PTH gene expression was
absent. Hypomethylation of the PTH promoter, which is reportedly associated with 
ectopic production of PTH, was not seen in either the tumor tissue or metastatic 
lymph nodes. Meanwhile, DNA hypomethylation was seen in a CpG island identified
in the GCM2 promoter region, regardless of whether or not the GCM2 gene was
expressed. We showed that transcriptional activity of the CpG island sequences
cloned into a reporter plasmid was dependent upon DNA methylation. Finally, we
present the first report of a PTH-producing MTC. There was no apparent
association between ectopic PTH and GCM2 gene expression, despite co-expression
of the two genes. Neither genomic rearrangement nor DNA hypomethylation in the
PTH gene appeared responsible for ectopic production of PTH. Although DNA
hypomethylation may be necessary for the GCM2 gene expression, ectopic expression
of GCM2 won't be possible by DNA hypomethylation alone.

PMID: 19952463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Feb;162(2):407-21. doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0303. Epub 2009 Nov
25.

Presence and significance of a R110W mutation in the DNA-binding domain of GCM2
gene in patients with isolated hypoparathyroidism and their family members.

Tomar N(1), Bora H, Singh R, Gupta N, Kaur P, Chauhan SS, Sharma YD, Goswami R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi 110029, India.

OBJECTIVE: Glial cells missing 2 (GCM2) gene encodes a parathyroid-specific
transcription factor. We assessed GCM2 gene sequence in patients with isolated
hypoparathyroidism (IH).
DESIGN: Case-control study.
METHODS: Complete DNA sequencing of the GCM2 gene including its exons, promoter, 
and 5' and 3' UTRs was performed in 24/101 patients with IH. PCR-restriction
fragment length polymorphism was used to detect a novel R110W mutation in all 101
IH patients and 655 healthy controls. Significance of the mutation was assessed
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and nuclear localization on
transfection.
RESULTS: A heterozygous R110W mutation was present in DNA-binding domain in
11/101 patients (10.9%) and absent in 655 controls (P<10(-7)). Four of 13
nonaffected first-degree relatives for five of these index cases had R110W
mutation. Four heterozygous single nucleotide polymorphisms were found in the 5' 
region. One of the 11 patients with R110W also had T370M change in compound
heterozygous form. Mutant R110W and T370M GCM2 proteins showed decreased binding 
with GCM recognition elements on EMSA indicating loss of function. Both wild-type
and R110W mutant GCM2 proteins showed nuclear localization.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study indicates a significant association of R110W
variant with IH. Absence of effect of heterozygous R110W mutation on DNA binding 
and presence of the same mutation in asymptomatic family members indicate that
additional genetic (akin to T370M change) or nongenetic factors might contribute 
to the expression of diseases in IH. Alternatively, it is possible that
association of R110W with IH could be due to linkage disequilibrium with the
unidentified relevant genes in IH.

PMID: 19940031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Biol. 2009 May 1;329(1):116-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.026. Epub 2009
Mar 4.

Mechanism of development of ionocytes rich in vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase in the
skin of zebrafish larvae.

Esaki M(1), Hoshijima K, Nakamura N, Munakata K, Tanaka M, Ookata K, Asakawa K,
Kawakami K, Wang W, Weinberg ES, Hirose S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Midori-ku,
Yokohama, Japan.

Mitochondrion-rich cells (MRCs), or ionocytes, play a central role in aquatic
species, maintaining body fluid ionic homeostasis by actively taking up or
excreting ions. Since their first description in 1932 in eel gills, extensive
morphological and physiological analyses have yielded important insights into
ionocyte structure and function, but understanding the developmental pathway
specifying these cells remains an ongoing challenge. We previously succeeded in
identifying a key transcription factor, Foxi3a, in zebrafish larvae by database
mining. In the present study, we analyzed a zebrafish mutant, quadro (quo),
deficient in foxi1 gene expression and found that foxi1 is essential for
development of an MRC subpopulation rich in vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase (vH-MRC).
foxi1 acts upstream of Delta-Notch signaling that determines sporadic
distribution of vH-MRC and regulates foxi3a expression. Through gain- and
loss-of-function assays and cell transplantation experiments, we further
clarified that (1) the expression level of foxi3a is maintained by a positive
feedback loop between foxi3a and its downstream gene gcm2 and (2) Foxi3a
functions cell-autonomously in the specification of vH-MRC. These observations
provide a better understanding of the differentiation and distribution of the
vH-MRC subtype.

PMCID: PMC2751791
PMID: 19268451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Bone Miner Res. 2009 Jul;24(7):1173-9. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.090211.

Calcium-sensing receptor expression is regulated by glial cells missing-2 in
human parathyroid cells.

Mizobuchi M(1), Ritter CS, Krits I, Slatopolsky E, Sicard G, Brown AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 
63110, USA.

Glial cells missing-2 (Gcm2) is the key regulating transcription factor for
parathyroid gland development. The continued expression of high levels of Gcm2 in
mature parathyroid glands suggests that it is required for maintenance of
parathyroid cell differentiation. The role of Gcm2 in parathyroid cell
physiology, however, has not been fully studied. In this study, we examined the
effects of Gcm2 silencing on cultured human parathyroid cells.
Collagenase-dispersed human parathyroid cells from patients with chronic kidney
disease were placed in monolayer cultures and infected with lentivirus expressing
shRNA for human Gcm2. Seventy-two hours after infection, mRNA was processed and
analyzed for Gcm2, PTH, vitamin D receptor (VDR), calcium-sensing receptor (CaR),
25-hydroxyvitamin D(3) 1-alpha-hydroxylase (1-OHase), and proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) by real-time PCR (qPCR). Protein expression of affected
genes was analyzed by immunoblot 72 h after infection. Gcm2 mRNA and protein were
decreased by 74.2 +/- 12.2% (SD; n = 3 experiments; p < 0.01) and 67.5 +/- 15.7% 
(n = 2; p < 0.01), respectively. CaR mRNA and protein were reduced by 47.8 +/-
21.1% (n = 3; p < 0.01) and 48.1 +/- 4.3% (n = 3; p < 0.01), respectively.
However, VDR, PTH, 1-OHase, and PCNA were not significantly affected by Gcm2
silencing. Further analysis of CaR mRNA indicated that transcripts containing
exon 1B, derived by transcription from CaR promoter 2, were downregulated (58.8
+/- 19.27%; n = 3; p < 0.05) by Gcm2 silencing. Exon 1A-containing transcripts
from promoter 1 were expressed at very low levels in the cultures. These results 
indicate that one function of Gcm2 is to maintain high levels of CaR expression
in parathyroid cells.

PMCID: PMC2697623
PMID: 19257819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009 Apr;296(4):R1192-201. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.90973.2008. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

The transcription factor, glial cell missing 2, is involved in differentiation
and functional regulation of H+-ATPase-rich cells in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Chang WJ(1), Horng JL, Yan JJ, Hsiao CD, Hwang PP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009 Apr;296(4):R1190-1.

H(+)-ATPase-rich (HR) cells in zebrafish are known to be involved in acid
secretion and Na(+) uptake mechanisms in zebrafish gills/skin; however, little is
known about how HR cells are functionally regulated. In the present work, we
studied the roles of Drosophila glial cell missing (gcm), a cell fate-related
transcription factor, in the differentiation and functional regulation of
zebrafish HR cells. Zebrafish gcm2 (zgcm2) was found to begin expression in
zebrafish embryos at 10 h postfertilization (hpf), and to be extensively
expressed in gills but only mildly so in eyes, heart, muscles, and testes. By
whole mount in situ hybridization, zgcm2 mRNA signals were found in a group of
cells on the zebrafish yolk sac surface initially in the tail bud stage (10 hpf);
they had disappeared at 36 hpf and thereafter appeared again in the gill region
from 48 hpf. Double fluorescence in situ hybridization further demonstrated
specific colocalization of zgcm2 mRNA in HR cells in zebrafish embryos. Knockdown
of zgcm2 with a specific morpholino oligonucleotide caused the complete
disappearance of HR cells with a concomitant decrease in H(+) activity at the
apical surface of HR cells, but it did not affect the occurrence of
Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase-rich cells. A decrease in the H(+)-ATPase subunit A (zatp6v1a) 
expression and no change in zgcm2 expression in zebrafish gills were seen from 12
h to 3 days after transfer to acidic fresh water, but a compensatory stimulation 
in the expressions of both genes appeared 4 days post-transfer. In conclusion,
functional regulation of HR cells is probably achieved by enhancing cell
differentiation via zGCM2 activation.

PMID: 19193938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009 Apr;296(4):R1190-1. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00031.2009. Epub 2009 Jan 28.

Changing expression patterns: focus on "the transcription factor, glial cell
missing 2, is involved in differentiation and functional regulation of
H+-ATPase-rich cells in zebrafish (Danio rerio)".

Pelster B.

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009 Apr;296(4):R1192-201.

PMID: 19176892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 1;327(1):216-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.019. Epub 2008
Dec 25.

Increased thymus- and decreased parathyroid-fated organ domains in Splotch mutant
embryos.

Griffith AV(1), Cardenas K, Carter C, Gordon J, Iberg A, Engleka K, Epstein JA,
Manley NR, Richie ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Science Park Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

Embryos that are homozygous for Splotch, a null allele of Pax3, have a severe
neural crest cell (NCC) deficiency that generates a complex phenotype including
spina bifida, exencephaly and cardiac outflow tract abnormalities. Contrary to
the widely held perception that thymus aplasia or hypoplasia is a characteristic 
feature of Pax3(Sp/Sp) embryos, we find that thymic rudiments are larger and
parathyroid rudiments are smaller in E11.5-12.5 Pax3(Sp/Sp) compared to Pax3(+/+)
embryos. The thymus originates from bilateral third pharyngeal pouch primordia
containing endodermal progenitors of both thymus and parathyroid glands. Analyses
of Foxn1 and Gcm2 expression revealed a dorsal shift in the border between
parathyroid- and thymus-fated domains at E11.5, with no change in the overall
cellularity or volume of each shared primordium. The border shift increases the
allocation of third pouch progenitors to the thymus domain and correspondingly
decreases allocation to the parathyroid domain. Initial patterning in the E10.5
pouch was normal suggesting that the observed change in the location of the organ
domain interface arises during border refinement between E10.5 and E11.5. Given
the well-characterized NCC defects in Splotch mutants, these findings implicate
NCCs in regulating patterning of third pouch endoderm into thymus- versus
parathyroid-specified domains, and suggest that organ size is determined in part 
by the number of progenitor cells specified to a given fate.

PMCID: PMC2643307
PMID: 19135046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Sex Transm Infect. 2008 Nov;84(6):509-11. doi: 10.1136/sti.2008.031807.

Alcohol and drug use in the context of anal sex and other factors associated with
sexually transmitted infections: results from a multi-city study of high-risk men
who have sex with men in the USA.

Mansergh G(1), Flores S, Koblin B, Hudson S, McKirnan D, Colfax GN; Project MIX
Study Group.

Collaborators: Purcell D, Taylor R, Spikes P, Hopwood J, Martin N, Jimenez D,
Powers C, Rodriguez P, Gatson B, Copeland J, Fernandez L, Curtis K, Goodman K,
Frye V, Bonner S, Bonelli J, Matheson T, Guzman R, Das-Douglas M.

Author information: 
(1)CDC Divison of HIV/AIDS Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd, Mailstop E37, Atlanta
30333, USA. gcm2@cdc.gov

Men who have sex with men (MSM) who use alcohol and drugs are at especially high 
risk for sexually transmitted infections (STIs); more information is needed about
associated factors to improve risk reduction. We assessed reported STIs and
demographic and event-level alcohol and drug use characteristics associated with 
STIs in a diverse, multi-city study in the USA of MSM who use substances.
Improved risk reduction efforts are needed for this group as well as some
initiatives tailored to men who are HIV positive, younger and use drugs (not
alcohol) in the context of anal sex.

PMID: 19028957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Sep;18(7):1071-80. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0337.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to a parathyroid-like phenotype.

Bingham EL(1), Cheng SP, Woods Ignatoski KM, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratory, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism is the most common complication of cervical
endocrine surgery. Current management is limited and palliative. As the molecular
steps in parathyroid development have been defined, they may be replicable in
vitro, with a goal of cellular replacement therapy. Human embryonic stem cell
(hESC) lines were investigated as a model for parathyroid regeneration in vitro. 
BG01 was selected as a model based on expression of genes of interest in embryoid
bodies (EBs). Established strategies for mouse embryonic stem cell
differentiation into definitive endoderm were modified and extended to maximize
the expression of definitive markers of parathyroid development. The optimal
approach included the use of Activin A at 100 ng/mL with BG01 cells grown on
murine embryonic fibroblasts for 5 days under conditions of increasing serum
concentration. After 5 days, the cells were allowed to mature further in tissue
culture without murine fibroblasts but with continuous Activin A. Our strategy
produced differentiated cell cultures that expressed intermediate markers of
endoderm and parathyroid development (CXCR4, EYA1, Six1, and Pax1), as well as
markers of committed parathyroid precursors or developed parathyroid glands
(glial cell missing-2 [Gcm2], CCL21, calcium sensing receptor [CaSR], and
parathyroid hormone [PTH]). We further characterized the cells by testing
conditioned medium from various time points in our differentiation scheme for the
presence of PTH. We found that by keeping the cells in culture 2 weeks after the 
withdrawal of Activin A, the cells were able to produce PTH. Further in vivo work
will be needed to demonstrate proper functionality of the cells developed in this
way.

PMID: 19025488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Mutat. 2009 Jan;30(1):85-92. doi: 10.1002/humu.20827.

Glial cells missing-2 (GCM2) transactivates the calcium-sensing receptor gene:
effect of a dominant-negative GCM2 mutant associated with autosomal dominant
hypoparathyroidism.

Canaff L(1), Zhou X, Mosesova I, Cole DE, Hendy GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, and Calcium Research Laboratory and
Hormones and Cancer Research Unit, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Glial cells missing-2 (GCM2) is a transcription factor expressed in the
parathyroid hormone (PTH)-secreting cells of the parathyroid gland and is
essential for their development. Thus far, downstream targets of GCM2 have not
been identified. Here, we show that both promoters (P1 and P2) of the
calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene, a differentiation marker for the
parathyroid gland, are transactivated by wild-type GCM2. GCM response elements
within CASR P1 (-451 to -441; relative to the transcription start site at +1) and
CASR P2 (-166 to -156) were identified by mutated promoter-reporter studies as
well as oligonucleotide precipitation assays. Primary hypoparathyroidism is a
heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by hypocalcemia and
hyperphosphatemia due to deficient PTH secretion. A few cases of familial
isolated hypoparathyroidism with autosomal recessive inheritance have been
identified that are caused by homozygous inactivating mutations in the GCM2 gene.
We describe the GCM2 mutations in two families with hypoparathyroidism, one
inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and the other in an autosomal
dominant manner. In transfection studies using a promoter-reporter construct
having synthetic multimerized GCM elements in the promoter, the dominantly
inherited mutant GCM2 exerted a dominant-negative effect on wild-type GCM2
activity, whereas recessively inherited mutants did not. In addition, we show
that the transactivation of the CASR promoter-reporter constructs by wild-type
GCM2 is completely abolished in the presence of the dominant-negative mutant
GCM2.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18712808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2008 Jul;17(4):353-6. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0b013e328304651c.

The development of the parathyroid gland: from fish to human.

Zajac JD(1), Danks JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Austin Health & Northern
Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia. j.zajac@unimelb.edu.au

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to describe the development and 
function of the parathyroid gland from fish to mammals. We describe the molecular
mechanisms regulating parathyroid gland embryogenesis and the clinical syndromes 
related to mutations in control genes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies have shown that fish express parathyroid hormone.
This is contrary to the long held view that the earliest animals to possess
parathyroid hormone were amphibians. Two fish species have been demonstrated to
express parathyroid hormone but the source and physiological function of this
peptide in fish remains to be determined. There is strong recent evidence that
regulation and development of the parathyroid gland in mammals is controlled by a
cascade of genes. A number of these regulatory factors have been identified using
genetically modified mouse models or as genes causing human disease. These
include, Gcm2/GCMB, Pax1 and Pax9, Hox3a, Tbx1, GATA3, TBCE, Sox3, Eya1 and
Six1/4. Expression of a number of these factors occurs in the gill in fish.
SUMMARY: The function of parathyroid hormone and the parathyroid gland in humans 
is to regulate serum calcium levels to maintain homeostasis. Parathyroid hormone 
genes are present in fish but their function remains to be elucidated.
Parathyroid development is regulated by a cascade of genes, which are now being
rapidly defined in mouse models and in human mutations.

PMID: 18660669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Sep;93(9):3568-76. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2167. Epub 
2008 Jun 26.

Dominant-negative GCMB mutations cause an autosomal dominant form of
hypoparathyroidism.

Mannstadt M(1), Bertrand G, Muresan M, Weryha G, Leheup B, Pulusani SR,
Grandchamp B, Jüppner H, Silve C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Thier 1051, 55 Fruit Street,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

CONTEXT: Hypoparathyroidism (HP) is characterized by low PTH levels,
hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia. Heterozygous mutations in pre-pro-PTH or the
calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) cause some forms of autosomal dominant HP
(AD-HP). Furthermore, homozygous mutations in glial cells missing B (GCMB) have
been implicated in autosomal recessive HP (AR-HP). In most other HP patients,
however, the molecular defect remains undefined.
OBJECTIVE: Our objectives were to determine the genetic defect in the affected
members of two unrelated families with AD-HP and define the underlying disease
mechanism.
SUBJECTS: Several family members affected by AD-HP were investigated. The proband
in family A had low calcium detected on routine blood testing, whereas the
proband in family B had symptomatic hypocalcemia.
METHODS: Mutational analysis of the genes encoding pre-pro-PTH, CaSR, and GCMB
was performed using PCR-amplified genomic DNA of the probands and other available
members of each family. The identified GCMB mutants were characterized by Western
blot analysis and luciferase reporter assay using DF-1 fibroblasts.
RESULTS: Two novel heterozygous mutations located in the last GCMB exon
(c.1389delT and c.1399delC in families A and B, respectively) were identified
that both lead to frame-shifts and replacement of the putative second
transactivation domain within carboxyl-terminal region by unrelated amino acid
sequence. The mutant GCMB proteins were well expressed, and both showed
dose-dependent inhibition of the transactivation capacity of wild-type protein in
luciferase reporter assays.
CONCLUSIONS: The dominant-negative effect observed in vitro for both GCMB
mutations provides a plausible explanation for the impaired PTH secretion
observed in the two unrelated families with AD-HP.

PMCID: PMC2567849
PMID: 18583467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1699-708. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21556.

Expression of the semaphorins Sema 3D and Sema 3F in the developing parathyroid
and thymus.

Takahashi K(1), Ishida M, Hirokawa K, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Machida-shi, Tokyo, Japan.

We have identified two Semaphorin genes, Sema 3D and Sema 3F, as being
specifically expressed in the developing parathyroid and thymus. The thymus and
parathyroid originate from a common primordium that develops from the third
pharyngeal pouch in mice. The expression of Sema 3D and Sema 3F was compared with
that of gcm2, Pax1, and Neuropilin-1 and -2, and genes encoding a variety of
Plexins by in situ hybridization during mouse pharyngeal development. Sema 3D was
specifically expressed in the dorsal and cranial portions of the primordium
developing from the third pouch at mouse embryonic day (E) 10.5. That the
expression pattern of Sema 3D was consistent with that of gcm2 indicates that
Sema 3D was expressed in the parathyroid-specific domains of the developing third
pouch. The parathyroid-specific pattern of Sema 3D expression continued until
E17.5. By contrast, Sema 3F was expressed in both the parathyroid and thymic
domains of the common primordium at E10.5, and the expression levels in both
tissues were decreased during development. The Semaphorin receptors were
expressed in the blood vessels, nerves, and mesenchymal cells adjacent to the
common primordium or the separated parathyroid and thymus during development. Our
results show that Sema 3D and Sema 3F genes were overlappingly and distinctly
expressed in the developing parathyroid and thymus, respectively, and that
Semaphorin signaling might play roles in the interactions between these organs
and surrounding tissues such as nerves and blood vessels, and in the recruitment 
of lymphoid cells.

PMID: 18489001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Apr;93(4):1426-32. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-1783. Epub 
2008 Jan 8.

Analysis of the GCM2 gene in isolated hypoparathyroidism: a molecular and
biochemical study.

Maret A(1), Ding C, Kornfield SL, Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University Hospital of Geneva, CH-1211
Geneva, Switzerland.

CONTEXT: Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, 
and absent or markedly reduced serum levels of intact PTH. The transcription
factor GCM2 is critical for the development of parathyroid glands in mice and
humans.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the prevalence of GCM2 gene mutations in
patients with familial or sporadic forms of isolated hypoparathyroidism (IH).
DESIGN AND SETTING: We used PCR to analyze the promoter, the exons, and flanking 
intronic sequences in 10 IH families with 17 affected members and in 10 patients 
with sporadic IH. Wild-type and mutant GCM2 proteins were expressed in HEK293
cells and characterized.
RESULTS: We identified nine single nucleotide changes, three in the 5'
untranslated region and six in exon 5, that led to nonsynonymous changes in the
GCM2 protein (G203S, I227V, Y282D, N315D, Q330L, and M354V). Variant GCM2
proteins had normal size, nuclear localization, and transactivational function
when expressed in HEK293 cells. Similar analyses of two previously described GCM2
missense mutations, R47L and G63S, revealed decreased nuclear expression and
markedly reduced (5-20% of normal) transactivational activity. The variant
alleles did not segregate with inheritance of IH, and many of the single
nucleotide substitutions were present in DNA from unrelated normal subjects,
suggesting that these base changes were polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: Our study describes nine single nucleotide changes in the GCM2 gene
that represent polymorphisms. Although GCM2 mutations appear to be an uncommon
cause of IH, the wide variety of GCM2 polymorphisms suggests that variant alleles
may have a role in determining parathyroid function.

PMID: 18182452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Clin Calcium. 2007 Aug;17(8):1206-13.

[Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism due to abnormalities in parathyroid
organogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Japan.

Recent advance in mouse genomics has provided us lots of information concerning
genes playing critical roles during organogenesis of parathyroid gland. And human
counterparts of murine hypoparathyroidism produced by gene manipulation have been
identified. Large part of genes which is responsible for hypoparathyroidism
consisted from transcription factors such as TBX1, GATA3, SOX3. This may
contribute to the abnormalities in the other organogenesis. Systematic survey of 
the anomalies in face and the other organ is important to confirm the diagnosis. 
And people should keep in mind that PTH could not be produced only in parathyroid
in parathyroid agenesis.

PMID: 17660617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Clin Calcium. 2007 Aug;17(8):1175-81.

[Pathophysiology and classitication of parathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Endo I(1), Matsumoto T, Fukumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokushima Graduate School of Health Biosciences, Department of
Medicine and Bioregulatory Sciences, Japan.

Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by decreased actions of parathyroid hormone
(PTH) either by reduced secretion of or resistance to PTH. The understanding in
the pathogenesis of hypoparathyroidism has been greatly increased by recent
findings in genetic abnormalities of patients with hypoparathyroidism. A new
classification of hypoparathyroidism based upon these genetic abnormalities is
proposed, and a diagnostic approach to patients with hypoparathyroidism is
summarized.

PMID: 17660612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Dyn. 2007 Aug;236(8):2101-8.

Novel gcm-dependent lineages in the postembryonic nervous system of Drosophila
melanogaster.

Soustelle L(1), Giangrande A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Strasbourg, France.

glial cells missing genes (gcm and gcm2) act as the glial fate determinants in
the Drosophila embryo. However, their requirement in the adult central nervous
system (CNS) is at present not known, except for their role in lamina glia. This 
is particularly important with respect to two recent sets of data. Adult glial
subpopulations differentiate through embryonic glia proliferation. Also, gcm-gcm2
are required for the differentiation of specific adult neurons. We here show that
gcm is expressed in precursors and postmitotic, migrating, cells of the medulla
neuropile glia (mng) lineage. It is also expressed in a thoracic glial lineage
and in neurons of the ventral nerve cord (VNC). Finally, while gcm is required
for gliogenesis in medulla and VNC, it does not seem to be required for the
generation of VNC neurons.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17654713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nihon Naika Gakkai Zasshi. 2007 Apr 10;96(4):707-12.

[Progress in diagnosis and therapy: Hypocalcemia due to idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka H.

PMID: 17506308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Biol. 2007 May 1;305(1):333-46. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Gcm2 is required for the differentiation and survival of parathyroid precursor
cells in the parathyroid/thymus primordia.

Liu Z(1), Yu S, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

The parathyroid glands develop with the thymus from bilateral common primordia
that develop from the 3rd pharyngeal pouch endoderm in mouse embryos at about
E11, each of which separates into one parathyroid gland and one thymus lobe by
E13.5. Gcm2, a mouse ortholog of the Drosophila Glial Cells Missing gene, is
expressed in the parathyroid-specific domains in the 3rd pouches from E9.5. The
null mutation of Gcm2 causes aparathyroidism in the fetal and adult mouse and has
been proposed to be a master regulator for parathyroid development. In order to
study how Gcm2 functions in parathyroid development, we investigated the
mechanism that causes the loss of parathyroids in Gcm2 null mutants. Analysis of 
the 3rd pouch-derived primordium in Gcm2-/- mutants showed the
parathyroid-specific domain was present before E12.5 but underwent programmed
cell death between E12 and 12.5. RNA and protein localization studies for
parathyroid hormone (Pth) in wild-type embryos showed that the presumptive
parathyroid domain in the parathyroid/thymus primordia started to transcribe Pth 
mRNA and produce PTH protein from E11.5 before the separation of parathyroid and 
thymus domains. However in Gcm2-/- mutants, the parathyroid-specific domain in
the common primordium did not express Pth and could not maintain the expression
of two other parathyroid marker genes, CasR and CCL21, although expression of
these two genes was initiated. Marker gene analysis placed Gcm2 downstream of the
known transcription and signaling pathways for parathyroid/thymus organogenesis. 
These results suggest that Gcm2 is not required for pouch patterning or to
establish the parathyroid domain, but is required for differentiation and
subsequent survival of parathyroid cells.

PMCID: PMC1931567
PMID: 17382312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mech Dev. 2007 May;124(5):327-40. Epub 2007 Jan 21.

Segregation of postembryonic neuronal and glial lineages inferred from a mosaic
analysis of the Drosophila larval brain.

Colonques J(1), Ceron J, Tejedor FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, CSIC--Universidad Miguel Hernandez, Campus de San 
Juan, 03550 San Juan (Alicante), Spain.

Due to its intermediate complexity and its sophisticated genetic tools, the
larval brain of Drosophila is a useful experimental system to study the
mechanisms that control the generation of cell diversity in the CNS. In order to 
gain insight into the neuronal and glial lineage specificity of neural progenitor
cells during postembryonic brain development, we have carried an extensive mosaic
analysis throughout larval brain development. In contrast to embryonic CNS
development, we have found that most postembryonic neurons and glial cells of the
optic lobe and central brain originate from segregated progenitors. Our analysis 
also provides relevant information about the origin and proliferation patterns of
several postembryonic lineages such as the superficial glia and the
medial-anterior Medulla neuropile glia. Additionally, we have studied the
spatio-temporal relationship between gcm expression and gliogenesis. We found
that gcm expression is restricted to the post-mitotic cells of a few neuronal and
glial lineages and it is mostly absent from postembryonic progenitors. Thus, in
contrast to its major gliogenic role in the embryo, the function of gcm during
postembryonic brain development seems to have evolved to the specification and
differentiation of certain neuronal and glial lineages.

PMID: 17344035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Development. 2007 Feb;134(3):625-34.

Neurogenic role of Gcm transcription factors is conserved in chicken spinal cord.

Soustelle L(1), Trousse F, Jacques C, Ceron J, Cochard P, Soula C, Giangrande A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Although glial cells missing (gcm) genes are known as glial determinants in the
fly embryo, the role of vertebrate orthologs in the central nervous system is
still under debate. Here we show for the first time that the chicken ortholog of 
fly gcm (herein referred to as c-Gcm1), is expressed in early neuronal lineages
of the developing spinal cord and is required for neural progenitors to
differentiate as neurons. Moreover, c-Gcm1 overexpression is sufficient to
trigger cell cycle exit and neuronal differentiation in neural progenitors. Thus,
c-Gcm1 expression constitutes a crucial step in the developmental cascade that
prompts progenitors to generate neurons: c-Gcm1 acts downstream of proneural
(neurogenin) and progenitor (Sox1-3) factors and upstream of NeuroM neuronal
differentiation factor. Strikingly, this neurogenic role is not specific to the
vertebrate gene, as fly gcm and gcm2 are also sufficient to induce the expression
of neuronal markers. Interestingly, the neurogenic role is restricted to
post-embryonic stages and we identify two novel brain neuronal lineages
expressing and requiring gcm genes. Finally, we show that fly gcm and the chick
and mouse orthologs induce expression of neural markers in HeLa cells. These
data, which demonstrate a conserved neurogenic role for Gcm transcription
factors, call for a re-evaluation of the mode of action of these genes during
evolution.

PMID: 17215311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Tissue Res. 2007 Jan;327(1):15-23. Epub 2006 Sep 23.

Expression of glial progenitor markers p75NTR and S100 protein in the developing 
mouse parathyroid gland.

Kameda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Drosophila glial cells missing (Drosophila Gcm) is a transcription factor that is
required for the differentiation of glial cells. Gcm2, a mouse homologue of
Drosophila Gcm, is a master regulatory gene of parathyroid development and is
expressed in the parathyroid rudiment. We have found that the mouse parathyroid
exhibits the glial progenitor markers, p75(NTR) and S100 protein, during fetal
development. At embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5), a bulge of the parathyroid rudiment
is formed in the cranial part of the third pharyngeal pouch. The rudiment
exhibits immunoreactivity for p75(NTR) and S100 protein, in addition to secretory
protein 1/chromogranin A. While the thymus rudiment, which arises from the caudal
part of the third pharyngeal pouch, is moving downwards, the parathyroid is
attached to the top of thymus. The parathyroid comes into contact with the
thyroid lobe at E13.5 and then separates from the thymus. The parathyroid
maintains intense immunoreactivity for p75(NTR) and S100 protein during the
migration and development in the thyroid lobe. The co-localization of p75(NTR)
and S100 in the developing parathyroid cells has been confirmed by confocal
microscopy. Other glial markers, viz. glial fibrillary acidic protein, Sox10,
vimentin and nestin, are not expressed in the parathyroid at any stage of
development. The neural progenitor markers, neurofilament 160 and TuJ1, are also 
absent from the parathyroid. Taken together, we suggest that Gcm2 supplies only
some glial progenitor characteristics to the parathyroid rudiment.

PMID: 17024414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mech Dev. 2006 Dec;123(12):925-40. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

An essential role for zebrafish Fgfrl1 during gill cartilage development.

Hall C(1), Flores MV, Murison G, Crosier K, Crosier P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine & Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, The 
University of Auckland, P.O. 92019, Auckland, New Zealand.

The vertebrate craniofacial skeleton develops via a complex process involving
signaling cascades in all three germ layers. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
signaling is essential for several steps in pharyngeal arch development. In
zebrafish, Fgf3 and Fgf8 in the mesoderm and hindbrain have an early role to
pattern the pouch endoderm, influencing craniofacial integrity. Endodermal FGF
signaling is required for the differentiation and survival of postmigratory
neural crest cells that form the pharyngeal skeleton. We identify a novel role
for zebrafish Fgf receptor-like 1a (Fgfrl1a) that is indispensable during gill
cartilage development. We show that depletion of Fgfrl1a is sufficient to abolish
cartilage derivatives of the ceratobranchials. Using an Fgfrl1a-deficient model, 
we analyzed expression of genes critical for chondrogenesis in the different
compartments of the developing pharyngeal arch. Fgfrl1a-depleted animals
demonstrate typical neural crest specification and migration to populate the arch
primordia as well as normal pouch segmentation. However, in the absence of
Fgfrl1a, larvae fail to express the transcription factor glial cells missing 2
(gcm2), a gene necessary for cartilage and gill filament formation, in the
ectodermal lining of the branchial arches. In addition, two transcription factors
essential for chondrogenesis, sox9a and runx2b, fail to express within the
mesenchymal condensations of the branchial arches. A duplicate zebrafish gene,
fgfrl1b, has now been identified. We show that Fgfrl1b is also required for
proper formation of all ventral cartilage elements and acts cooperatively with
Fgfrl1a during gill cartilage formation.

PMID: 17011755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 15;297(2):587-602. Epub 2006 Jun 2.

cis-regulatory processing of Notch signaling input to the sea urchin glial cells 
missing gene during mesoderm specification.

Ransick A(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA. andyr@caltech.edu

The glial cells missing regulatory gene of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (spgcm) 
was proposed earlier to be the genomic target of Delta/Notch (D/N) signaling
required for specification of the mesodermal precursors of pigment cells. Here,
we show that microinjection of a spgcm antisense morpholino oligonucleotide
results in larvae without pigment cells. Microinjection of an mRNA encoding a
dominant negative form of Suppressor of Hairless (dn-Su(H)) results in reduced
levels of spgcm mRNA, disruption of mesodermal founder cell specification and
failure to produce pigment cells. These results confirm that this gene is
required for pigment cell specification. Three cis-regulatory modules of the
spgcm gene were identified, which when incorporated in a GFP expression construct
recapitulate the early expression pattern of this gene. Spatial expression of
this GFP expression construct is severely disrupted by co-expression of dn-Su(H) 
mRNA, confirming that spgcm is a direct target of canonical N signaling mediated 
through Su(H) inputs. cis-perturbation analysis by mutation of consensus Su(H)
sites identified a conserved motif paired-site and a lone site in the middle
module that function both to drive expression in SMC precursors which receive the
Delta signal and to repress expression in ectopic locations which lack this
signal. While these Su(H) target sites provide the cis-regulatory architecture
with the core of an N signaling transcriptional response switch, both the on and 
off outputs from this module require additional inputs.

PMID: 16925988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:43-5.

[Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeuchi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Toranomon Hospital Endocrine Center.

PMID: 16817346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:37-42.

[Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition, School of Medical Sciences, Niigata
University of Health and Welfare.

PMID: 16817345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood. 2006 Oct 15;108(8):2531-9. Epub 2006 Jun 29.

Coordination between CCR7- and CCR9-mediated chemokine signals in prevascular
fetal thymus colonization.

Liu C(1), Saito F, Liu Z, Lei Y, Uehara S, Love P, Lipp M, Kondo S, Manley N,
Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Immunology, Institute for Genome Research, University
of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Thymus seeding by T-lymphoid progenitor cells is a prerequisite for T-cell
development. However, molecules guiding thymus colonization and their roles
before and after thymus vascularization are unclear. Here we show that mice
doubly deficient for chemokine receptors CCR7 and CCR9 were defective
specifically in fetal thymus colonization before, but not after, thymus
vascularization. The defective prevascular fetal thymus colonization was followed
by selective loss of the first wave of T-cell development generating epidermal
Vgamma3(+) gammadelta T cells. Unexpectedly, CCL21, a CCR7 ligand, was expressed 
not by Foxn1-dependent thymic primordium but by Gcm2-dependent parathyroid
primordium, whereas CCL25, a CCR9 ligand, was predominantly expressed by
Foxn1-dependent thymic primordium, revealing the role of the adjacent parathyroid
in guiding fetal thymus colonization. These results indicate coordination between
Gcm2-dependent parathyroid and Foxn1-dependent thymic primordia in establishing
CCL21/CCR7- and CCL25/CCR9-mediated chemokine guidance essential for prevascular 
fetal thymus colonization.

PMID: 16809609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. AIDS Behav. 2006 Nov;10(6):743-51.

Inconsistent condom use with steady and casual partners and associated factors
among sexually-active men who have sex with men in Bangkok, Thailand.

Mansergh G(1), Naorat S, Jommaroeng R, Jenkins RA, Stall R, Jeeyapant S,
Phanuphak P, Tappero JW, van Griensven F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
1600 Clifton Road, Mailstop E-37, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. gcm2@cdc.gov

HIV/STD risk behavior has not been examined in community samples of men who have 
sex with men (MSM) in Thailand. The sexually-active sample (n=927) was recruited 
from bars, saunas, and parks; 20% identified as bisexual and 17% tested
HIV-positive. Inconsistent (<100%) condom use was reported by 45% of those with
steady partners and 21% of those with casual partners in the prior three months. 
21% had heard of effective HIV treatments (n=194), among whom 44% believed HIV
was less serious and 36% said their risk behavior had increased after hearing
about the treatments. In multivariate analysis, HIV-positive status,
gay-identification, getting most HIV information from the radio, believing HIV
can be transmitted by mosquito bite, and concern about acquiring an STD were
associated with inconsistent condom use during anal sex; slightly older age
(25-29 vs. 18-24 years) was associated with more consistent condom use. HIV/STD
risk-reduction strategies for MSM in Bangkok should clearly state sexual risk to 
individuals in this population.

PMID: 16715348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Med Hypotheses. 2006;67(3):482-7. Epub 2006 May 12.

A common structural mechanism underlying GCMB mutations that cause
hypoparathyroidism.

Sticht H(1), Hashemolhosseini S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Fahrstr. 17, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. heinrich.sticht@med.uni-erlangen.de

Hypoparathyroidism, either of acquired or inherited origin, is a heterogenous
group of human disorders caused by a defective calcium homeostasis clinically
known as hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Two mutations (R47L, G63S) in the
DNA binding domain of the parathyroid-specific transcription factor GCMB have
been reported to be linked to hypoparathyroidism. Both mutations cause a loss of 
transactivation either with (R47L) or without (G63S) a concomitant loss of DNA
binding. Despite these differences with respect to their DNA binding ability,
molecular modeling of the wild type and mutant GCMB-DNA complexes reveals a
common regular pattern of molecular interactions which is apparently crucial for 
the integrity of the GCM DNA binding domain and is altered by the respective
mutations. The significance of this model is substantiated from an investigation 
of all biochemically known mutations of the DNA binding domain of GCM proteins
that impede transactivation. All of them share the proposed molecular mechanism
and thus can be predicted correctly by our model. This mechanistic commonness
allows the prediction of 21 additional residues of which mutation might
critically affect the transactivating ability of GCMB and thus might be linked to
disease when present in patients.

PMID: 16697534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 May;17(5):1305-15. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

Fibroblast growth factor 23 is a counter-regulatory phosphaturic hormone for
vitamin D.

Liu S(1), Tang W, Zhou J, Stubbs JR, Luo Q, Pi M, Quarles LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and the Kidney Institute, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Room 6020 WHE, MS 3018, Kansas City, KS
66160, USA. sliu@kumc.edu

The regulation of the phosphaturic factor fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is 
not well understood. It was found that administration of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D(3) (1,25[OH](2)D(3)) to mice rapidly increased serum FGF23 concentrations from 
a basal level of 90.6 +/- 8.1 to 213.8 +/- 14.6 pg/ml at 8 h (mean +/- SEM; P <
0.01) and resulted in a four-fold increase in FGF23 transcripts in bone, the
predominate site of FGF23 expression. In the Hyp-mouse homologue of X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets, administration of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) further increased
circulating FGF23 levels. In Gcm2 null mice, low 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) levels were
associated with a three-fold reduction in FGF23 levels that were increased by
administration of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). In osteoblast cell cultures, 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)
but not calcium, phosphate, or parathyroid hormone stimulated FGF23 mRNA levels
and resulted in a dose-dependent increase in FGF23 promoter activity.
Overexpression of a dominant negative vitamin D receptor inhibited
1,25(OH)(2)D(3) stimulation of FGF23 promoter activity, and mutagenesis of the
FGF23 promoter identified a vitamin D-responsive element (-1180 GGAACTcagTAACCT
-1156) that is responsible for the vitamin D effects. These data suggest that
1,25(OH)(2)D(3) is an important regulator of FGF23 production by osteoblasts in
bone. The physiologic role of FGF23 may be to act as a counterregulatory
phosphaturic hormone to maintain phosphate homeostasis in response to vitamin D.

PMID: 16597685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Sex Transm Infect. 2006 Apr;82(2):131-4.

Methamphetamine and sildenafil (Viagra) use are linked to unprotected receptive
and insertive anal sex, respectively, in a sample of men who have sex with men.

Mansergh G(1), Shouse RL, Marks G, Guzman R, Rader M, Buchbinder S, Colfax GN.

Author information: 
(1)CDC Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, Mailstop E-37,
Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. gcm2@cdc.gov

OBJECTIVES: There is evidence that methamphetamine and sildenafil (Viagra) use
are associated with sexual risk behaviour among men who have sex with men (MSM). 
We investigated the association of methamphetamine, sildenafil, and other
substance use with unprotected receptive and insertive anal sex among MSM by
conducting an encounter specific analysis.
METHODS: Data were from a cross sectional, community based survey of MSM in San
Francisco regarding behaviour during their most recent anal sex encounter.
Mulitvariate regression analysed independent associations of specific substance
use and demographic variables with unprotected anal sex behaviours.
RESULTS: The sample (n = 388) was diverse in race/ethnicity, age, income,
education, HIV status, and homosexual/bisexual identification. More than half
(53%) reported unprotected anal sex, including insertive (29%) and receptive
(37%) during their most recent anal sex encounter; 12% reported unprotected
insertive and 17% reported unprotected receptive anal sex with an HIV discordant 
or unknown partner. Methamphetamine was used by 15% and sildenafil was used by 6%
of the men before or during the encounter; 2% used both drugs. In multivariate
analysis controlling for demographic factors and other substance use,
methamphetamine use was associated with unprotected receptive (odds ratio (OR),
2.03; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.09 to 3.76) and sildenafil use was
associated with unprotected insertive (OR, 6.51; CI, 2.46 to 17.24) anal sex.
Effects were stronger with HIV discordant or unknown sex partners specifically.
CONCLUSION: Encounter specific associations of methamphetamine and sildenafil use
with unprotected receptive and insertive anal sex, respectively, indicate the
importance of assessment specificity and tailoring risk reduction efforts to
address certain drugs and sexual behavioural roles among MSM.

PMCID: PMC2564684
PMID: 16581738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Biol. 2006 May 15;293(2):499-512. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Patterning of the third pharyngeal pouch into thymus/parathyroid by Six and Eya1.

Zou D(1), Silvius D, Davenport J, Grifone R, Maire P, Xu PX.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Great Falls, MT 59405, 
USA.

Previous studies have suggested a role of the homeodomain Six family proteins in 
patterning the developing vertebrate head that involves appropriate segmentation 
of three tissue layers, the endoderm, the paraxial mesoderm and the neural crest 
cells; however, the developmental programs and mechanisms by which the Six genes 
act in the pharyngeal endoderm remain largely unknown. Here, we examined their
roles in pharyngeal pouch development. Six1-/- mice lack thymus and parathyroid
and analysis of Six1-/- third pouch endoderm demonstrated that the patterning of 
the third pouch into thymus/parathyroid primordia is initiated. However, the
endodermal cells of the thymus/parathyroid rudiments fail to maintain the
expression of the parathyroid-specific gene Gcm2 and the thymus-specific gene
Foxn1 and subsequently undergo abnormal apoptosis, leading to a complete
disappearance of organ primordia by E12.5. This thus defines the
thymus/parathyroid defects present in the Six1 mutant. Analyses of the
thymus/parathyroid development in Six1-/-;Six4-/- double mutant show that both
Six1 and Six4 act synergistically to control morphogenetic movements of early
thymus/parathyroid tissues, and the threshold of Six1/Six4 appears to be crucial 
for the regulation of the organ primordia-specific gene expression. Previous
studies in flies and mice suggested that Eya and Six genes may function
downstream of Pax genes. Our data clearly show that Eya1 and Six1 expression in
the pouches does not require Pax1/Pax9 function, suggesting that they may
function independently from Pax1/Pax9. In contrast, Pax1 expression in all
pharyngeal pouches requires both Eya1 and Six1 function. Moreover, we show that
the expression of Tbx1, Fgf8 and Wnt5b in the pouch endoderm was normal in
Six1-/- embryos and slightly reduced in Six1-/-;Six4-/- double mutant, but was
largely reduced in Eya1-/- embryos. These results indicate that Eya1 appears to
be upstream of very early events in the initiation of thymus/parathyroid
organogenesis, while Six genes appear to act in an early differentiation step
during thymus/parathyroid morphogenesis. Together, these analyses establish an
essential role for Eya1 and Six genes in patterning the third pouch into
organ-specific primordia.

PMCID: PMC3882147
PMID: 16530750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Public Health Rep. 2006 Mar-Apr;121(2):127-32.

CDC consultation on methamphetamine use and sexual risk behavior for HIV/STD
infection: summary and suggestions.

Mansergh G(1), Purcell DW, Stall R, McFarlane M, Semaan S, Valentine J,
Valdiserri R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd. NE, Mailstop E37, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
gcm2@cdc.gov

In January 2005, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention hosted a
national consultation of scientists, public health officials, and community
service providers to address growing concerns about the association of
methamphetamine use and sexual risk behavior for HIV/STD infection, which is well
documented among men who have sex with men. The purpose of the consultation was
to review a representation of the current state of the science and practice on
the topic in order to reduce the situational link of methamphetamine use and
sexual risk. A set of suggestions for future research and programs were developed
by the participants. This article provides a summary of content and
recommendations from the consultation, and not an exhaustive review of the
literature.

PMCID: PMC1525267
PMID: 16528944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(8):794-9. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Bmp4 and Noggin expression during early thymus and parathyroid organogenesis.

Patel SR(1), Gordon J, Mahbub F, Blackburn CC, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

The thymus and parathyroids originate from the third pharyngeal pouches, which
form as endodermal outpocketings in the pharyngeal region beginning on embryonic 
day 9 (E9.0) of mouse development. Using organ-specific markers, we have
previously shown that thymus and parathyroid-specific organ domains are
established within the primordium prior to formation of the organs proper: Gcm2
expression defines the prospective parathyroid cells in the dorsal pouch from
E9.5, while Foxn1 is expressed in the thymus domain from E11.25. Bmp (bone
morphogenetic protein) signaling has been implicated in thymic epithelial cell
differentiation and thymus organogenesis. In the present study, we report
expression patterns of Bmp4 and Noggin, a Bmp4 antagonist, in the third
pharyngeal pouch using two lacZ transgenic mouse strains. Results from this gene 
expression study revealed localization of Bmp4 expression to the ventral region
of the third pharyngeal pouch endoderm at E10.5 and E11.5, in those cells that
will express Foxn1 and form the thymus. Conversely, the expression of Noggin was 
confined to the dorsal region of the pouch and primordium at these stages, and
thus appeared to be co-expressed with Gcm2 in the parathyroid domain. This
represents the first detailed study of Bmp4 and Noggin expression during the
early stages of thymus and parathyroid organogenesis.

PMID: 16517216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Clin Calcium. 2005 Dec;15(12):38-44.

[Genes causing parathyroid diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Ikeda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology.

Discovery of Gcm2 as an essential transcription factor for parathyroid gland
development disclosed another, unexpected source of circulating parathyroid
hormone (PTH), the thymus. A recent phylogenetic analysis of Gcm2 has led to a
new theory that parathyroid glands in tetrapods were transformed from the gills
of fish during evolution. I review genes involved in the pathogenesis of hyper-
and hypo-function of parathyroid glands as well as in the development of
parathyroid tumors.

PMID: 16322672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Oct;63 Suppl 10:362-6.

[Translational research on parathyroid hormone].

[Article in Japanese]

Inoue D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Sciences, University of Tokushima
Graduate School Institute of Health Biosciences.

PMID: 16279663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Neuron. 2005 Oct 20;48(2):237-51.

glial cells missing and gcm2 cell autonomously regulate both glial and neuronal
development in the visual system of Drosophila.

Chotard C(1), Leung W, Salecker I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2005 Oct 20;48(2):163-5.

The transcription factors Glial cells missing (Gcm) and Gcm2 are known to play a 
crucial role in promoting glial-cell differentiation during Drosophila
embryogenesis. Our findings reveal a central function for gcm genes in regulating
neuronal development in the postembryonic visual system. We demonstrate that Gcm 
and Gcm2 are expressed in both glial and neuronal precursors within the optic
lobe. Removal of gcm and gcm2 function shows that the two genes act redundantly
and are required for the formation of a subset of glial cells. They also
cell-autonomously control the differentiation and proliferation of specific
neurons. We show that the transcriptional regulator Dachshund acts downstream of 
gcm genes and is required to make lamina precursor cells and lamina neurons
competent for neuronal differentiation through regulation of epidermal growth
factor receptor levels. Our findings further suggest that gcm genes regulate
neurogenesis through collaboration with the Hedgehog-signaling pathway.

PMID: 16242405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Development. 2005 Oct;132(20):4635-44. Epub 2005 Sep 21.

Resolving embryonic blood cell fate choice in Drosophila: interplay of GCM and
RUNX factors.

Bataillé L(1), Augé B, Ferjoux G, Haenlin M, Waltzer L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, CNRS UMR 5547, 118 route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse, France.

Erratum in
    Development. 2016 Jan 1;143(1):180.

The differentiation of Drosophila embryonic blood cell progenitors (prohemocytes)
into plasmatocytes or crystal cells is controlled by lineage-specific
transcription factors. The related proteins Glial cells missing (GCM) and GCM2
control plasmatocyte development, whereas the RUNX factor Lozenge (LZ) is
required for crystal cell differentiation. We have investigated the segregation
process that leads to the formation of these two cell types, and the interplay
between LZ and GCM/GCM2. We show that, surprisingly, gcm is initially expressed
in all prohemocytes but is rapidly downregulated in the anterior-most row of
prohemocytes, which then initiates lz expression. However, the lz+ progenitors
constitute a mixed-lineage population whose fate depends on the relative levels
of LZ and GCM/GCM2. Notably, we demonstrate that GCM/GCM2 play a key role in
controlling the size of the crystal cell population by inhibiting lz activation
and maintenance. Furthermore, we show that prohemocytes are bipotent progenitors,
and that downregulation of gcm/gcm2 is required for lz-induced crystal cell
formation. These results provide new insight into the mechanisms controlling
Drosophila hematopoiesis and establish the basis for an original model for the
resolution of the choice of blood cell fate.

PMID: 16176949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):554-69.

Microarray analysis detects differentially expressed genes in the pharyngeal
region of mice lacking Tbx1.

Ivins S(1), Lammerts van Beuren K, Roberts C, James C, Lindsay E, Baldini A,
Ataliotis P, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

22q11-deletion (DiGeorge/velocardiofacial) syndrome (22q11DS) is modeled by
mutation of murine transcription factor Tbx1. As part of efforts to identify
transcriptional targets of Tbx1, we analyzed the transcriptome of the pharyngeal 
region of Df1/+;Tbx1+/- embryos at 9.5 days of embryonic development using two
independent microarray platforms. In this model, embryos are null for Tbx1, with 
hemizygosity of genes in cis with Tbx1 on one chromosome providing a positive
control for array sensitivity. Reduced mRNA levels of genes deleted from Df1 were
detected on both platforms. Expression level filtering and statistical analysis
identified several genes that were consistently differentially expressed between 
mutant and wild type embryos. Real-time quantitative PCR and in situ
hybridization validated diminished expression of Pax9 and Gcm2, genes known to be
required for normal thymus and parathyroid gland morphogenesis, whereas Pax1,
Hoxa3, Eya1, and Foxn1, which are similarly required, were not down-regulated.
Gbx2, a gene required for normal arch artery development, was down-regulated
specifically in the pharyngeal endoderm and the posterior part of pharyngeal arch
1, and is a potential point of cross talk between the Tbx1 and Fgf8 controlled
pathways. These experiments highlight which genes and pathways potentially
affected by lack of Tbx1, and whose role may be explored further by testing for
epistasis using mouse mutants.

PMID: 16109395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Med Genet. 2005 May;42(5):443-8.

Identification of a novel mutation disrupting the DNA binding activity of GCM2 in
autosomal recessive familial isolated hypoparathyroidism.

Baumber L, Tufarelli C, Patel S, King P, Johnson CA, Maher ER, Trembath RC.

PMCID: PMC1736051
PMID: 15863676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 May;90(5):2487-92. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

GCMB mutation in familial isolated hypoparathyroidism with residual secretion of 
parathyroid hormone.

Thomée C(1), Schubert SW, Parma J, Lê PQ, Hashemolhosseini S, Wegner M,
Abramowicz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine,Children's Unit, Centre Hospitalier
Etterbeek-Ixelles, Brussels.

Isolated hypoparathyroidism is an uncommon metabolic disorder characterized by
hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, with absent or low levels of PTH. It may
present as an apparently sporadic disorder or may be transmitted in families as a
genetic trait. Mutations of the calcium-sensing receptor gene and of the
preproPTH gene have been reported in occasional cases, and a mutation of the
parathyroid-specific transcription factor GCMB gene has been reported in one
familial case. We report a second family with isolated hypoparathyroidism and a
GCMB mutation. The patients were two siblings from asymptomatic, first-cousin
parents, indicating autosomal recessive inheritance. The mutation consisted of
the substitution of a glycine residue with a serine at position 63 (G63S) in the 
DNA-binding GCM domain of GCMB. Functional studies in transfected cells showed
that the mutation caused loss of GCMB function, as it abolished transactivation
capacity, despite normal subcellular localization, protein stability, and
DNA-binding specificity. Contrary to the previously reported family, our patients
displayed low but clearly detectable levels of PTH in plasma. This residual
hormone secretion probably results from a very small residual activity of the
G63S mutant GCMB.

PMID: 15728199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 15;278(2):323-35.

Differential expression of Sonic hedgehog along the anterior-posterior axis
regulates patterning of pharyngeal pouch endoderm and pharyngeal endoderm-derived
organs.

Moore-Scott BA(1), Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Previous studies have implicated Sonic hedgehog (Shh) as an important regulator
of pharyngeal region development. Here we show that Shh is differentially
expressed within the pharyngeal endoderm along the anterior-posterior axis. In
Shh-/- mutants, the pharyngeal pouches and arches formed by E9.5 and marker
expression showed that initial patterning was normal. However, by E10.5-E11.0,
the first arch had atrophied and the first pouch was missing. Although small, the
second, third, and fourth arches and pouches were present. The expression
patterns of Fgf8, Pax1, and Bmp4 suggested that pouch identity was abnormal at
E10.5 and that Shh is a negative regulator of these genes in the pouches. Despite
the loss of pouch identity and an increase in mesenchymal cell death, arch
identity markers were expressed normally. Our data show that a Shh-dependent
patterning mechanism is required to maintain pouch patterning, independent or
downstream of arch identity. Changes in the distribution of Bmp4 and Gcm2 in the 
third pouch endoderm and subsequent organ phenotypes in Shh-/- mutants suggested 
that exclusion of Shh from the third pouch is required for dorsal-ventral
patterning and for parathyroid specification and organogenesis. Furthermore, this
function for Shh may be opposed by Bmp4. Our data suggest that, as in the
posterior gut endoderm, exclusion of Shh expression from developing primordia is 
required for the proper development of pharyngeal-derived organs.

PMID: 15680353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Surgery. 2004 Dec;136(6):1261-6.

GCMB gene, a master regulator of parathyroid gland development, expression, and
regulation in hyperparathyroidism.

Kebebew E(1), Peng M, Wong MG, Ginzinger D, Duh QY, Clark OH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California-San Francisco, Box 1674, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: The glial cell missing gene, GCMB , encodes a transcription factor,
which is a master regulator of parathyroid development. We postulated that the
GCMB gene might play a role in parathyroid tumorigenesis in hyperparathyroidism.
METHODS: We used real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction to study GCMB mRNA expression in parathyroid tissue: normal (n = 3),
hyperplastic (n = 16), adenomas (n = 19), and cancers (n = 8). In primary
parathyroid culture, the effect of CaCl 2 on parathyroid hormone secretion and
GCMB mRNA expression was studied by using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, respectively.
RESULTS: GCMB mRNA expression was lower in normal (0.4 +/- 0.1, mean +/- standard
error of mean) parathyroid glands as compared to adenoma (3.5 +/- 1.7),
hyperplasia (3.2 +/- 1.3 primary hyperparathyroidism [n = 11] and 7.6 +/- 4.8
secondary hyperparathyroidism [n = 5]), and cancer (3.6 +/- 1.3) ( P = .001).
There was no difference in the level of GCMB mRNA expression between parathyroid 
adenoma, hyperplasia, and cancer. In primary culture of parathyroid adenoma (n = 
9) and hyperplasia (n = 2), parathyroid hormone secretion was increased 2- to
15-fold with low calcium concentration (0.5 to 4.0 mmol/L CaCl 2 from 2 to 6
hours, P < .005). The level of GCMB mRNA expression was down-regulated with lower
extracellular CaCl 2 concentration ( P < .005).
CONCLUSIONS: GCMB expression is upregulated in abnormal parathyroid glands of
hyperparathyroidism and decreases in response to hypocalcemia. The GCMB
transcription factor might mediate the effect of calcium on parathyroid cell
parathyroid hormone expression/secretion.

PMID: 15657585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Dec 21;101(51):17716-9. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

The origin of the parathyroid gland.

Okabe M(1), Graham A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, Guy's Campus,
King's College London, London SE1 1UL, United Kingdom.

It has long been held that the parathyroid glands and parathyroid hormone evolved
with the emergence of the tetrapods, reflecting a need for new controls on
calcium homeostasis in terrestrial, rather than aquatic, environments.
Developmentally, the parathyroid gland is derived from the pharyngeal pouch
endoderm, and studies in mice have shown that its formation is under the control 
of a key regulatory gene, Gcm-2. We have used a phylogenetic analysis of Gcm-2 to
probe the evolutionary origins of the parathyroid gland. We show that in chicks, 
as in mice, Gcm-2 is expressed in the pharyngeal pouches and the forming
parathyroid gland. We find that Gcm-2 is present not only in tetrapods but also
in teleosts and chondrichthyans, and that in these species, Gcm-2 is expressed
within the pharyngeal pouches and internal gill buds that derive from them in
zebrafish (Danio rerio), a teleost, and dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula), a
chondrichthyan. We further demonstrate that Gcm-2 is required for the formation
of the internal gill buds in zebrafish. We also have identified parathyroid
hormone 1/2-encoding genes in fish and show that these genes are expressed by the
gills. We further show that the gills express the calcium-sensing receptor, which
is used in tetrapods to monitor serum calcium levels. These results indicate that
the tetrapod parathyroid gland and the gills of fish are evolutionarily related
structures, and that the parathyroid likely came into being as a result of the
transformation of the gills during tetrapod evolution.

PMCID: PMC539734
PMID: 15591343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):508-22.

Zebrafish gcm2 is required for gill filament budding from pharyngeal ectoderm.

Hogan BM(1), Hunter MP, Oates AC, Crowhurst MO, Hall NE, Heath JK, Prince VE,
Lieschke GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Victoria 3050,
Australia.

The pharyngeal arches give rise to multiple organs critical for diverse
processes, including the thymus, thyroid and parathyroids. Several molecular
regulators of thymus and thyroid organogenesis are strikingly conserved between
mammals and zebrafish. However, land animals have parathyroids whereas fish have 
gills. The murine transcription factor Glial cells missing 2 (Gcm2) is expressed 
specifically in the parathyroid primordium in the endodermal epithelium of the
third pharyngeal pouch, and in both mice and humans is required for normal
development of parathyroid glands. The molecular regulation of fish gill
organogenesis remains to be described. We report the expression of gcm2 in the
zebrafish pharyngeal epithelium and a requirement for Hox group 3 paralogs for
gcm2 expression. Strikingly, zebrafish gcm2 is expressed in the ectodermal
portion of the pharyngeal epithelium and is required for the development of the
gill filament buds, precursors of fish-specific gill filaments. This study
identifies yet another role for a GCM gene in embryonic development and indicates
a role for gcm2 during the evolution of divergent pharyngeal morphologies.

PMID: 15581882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4521-32.

Terminal tendon cell differentiation requires the glide/gcm complex.

Soustelle L(1), Jacques C, Altenhein B, Technau GM, Volk T, Giangrande A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

Locomotion relies on stable attachment of muscle fibres to their target sites, a 
process that allows for muscle contraction to generate movement. Here, we show
that glide/gcm and glide2/gcm2, the fly glial cell determinants, are expressed in
a subpopulation of embryonic tendon cells and required for their terminal
differentiation. By using loss-of-function approaches, we show that in the
absence of both genes, muscle attachment to tendon cells is altered, even though 
the molecular cascade induced by stripe, the tendon cell determinant, is normal. 
Moreover, we show that glide/gcm activates a new tendon cell gene independently
of stripe. Finally, we show that segment polarity genes control the epidermal
expression of glide/gcm and determine, within the segment, whether it induces
glial or tendon cell-specific markers. Thus, under the control of positional
cues, glide/gcm triggers a new molecular pathway involved in terminal tendon cell
differentiation, which allows the establishment of functional muscle attachment
sites and locomotion.

PMID: 15342477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mech Dev. 2004 Oct;121(10):1235-47.

Zebrafish gcmb is required for pharyngeal cartilage formation.

Hanaoka R(1), Ohmori Y, Uyemura K, Hosoya T, Hotta Y, Shirao T, Okamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Gene Regulation, The Institute of Physical and
Chemical Research, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako-shi, Saitama
351-0198, Japan.

The glial cells missing (gcm) gene in Drosophila encodes a GCM-motif
transcription factor that functions as a binary switch to select between glial
and neuronal cell fates. To understand the function of gcm in vertebrates, we
isolated the zebrafish gcmb and analyzed the function of this gene using
antisense morpholino oligonucleotides against gcmb mRNA (gcmb-MO) and transgenic 
overexpression. Zebrafish gcmb is expressed in the pharyngeal arch epithelium and
in cells of the macrophage lineage. gcmb-MO-injected larvae show significantly
reduced branchial arch cartilages. fgf3-MO-injected larvae display a similar
phenotype to that of gcmb-MO-injected larvae with respect to the lack of
pharyngeal cartilage formation. In addition, gcmb expression in the pharyngeal
arches is down-regulated in fgf3-MO-injected larvae. The gcmb transgenic larvae
show a protrusion of the lower jaw and abnormal spatial arrangement of the
pharyngeal cartilage elements. These results suggest that gcmb is required for
normal pharyngeal cartilage formation in zebrafish and that its expression is
dependent on fgf3 activity.

PMID: 15327784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jan;89(1):8-12.

Expression of GCMB by intrathymic parathyroid hormone-secreting adenomas
indicates their parathyroid cell origin.

Maret A(1), Bourdeau I, Ding C, Kadkol SS, Westra WH, Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jan;89(1):6-7.

GCMA and GCMB are related transcription factors that are critically important for
embryological development of the placenta and parathyroid glands, respectively.
Mice in which parathyroid glands have been surgically removed or fail to develop 
due to genetic loss of GCMB show continued production of PTH from a subset of
thymic cells that express GCMA. In this study we examined whether human thymus
produces PTH and/or GCMA and whether intrathymic PTH-secreting adenomas express
GCMA or GCMB to determine the embryological origin of the secretory cells. By
contrast to mouse thymus, analysis of 22 samples of human thymus tissue by RT-PCR
and/or immunohistochemistry failed to demonstrate the expression of either PTH or
GCMA. RT-PCR analysis of 16 intrathymic adenomas from patients with surgically
cured primary hyperparathyroidism showed that these tumors expressed PTH and GCMB
and not GCMA. We conclude that the normal human thymus does not express GCMA or
PTH, and therefore, in contrast to the mouse, the human thymus is not a source of
PTH production. Finally, intrathymic PTH-secreting adenomas express the
parathyroid-specific GCMB gene, which suggests that these tumors were derived
from parathyroid cells that migrated errantly during embryogenesis.

PMID: 14715818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jan;89(1):6-7.

GCMB--another serendipitous gift from evolution to clinical investigators.

Kronenberg HM.

Comment on
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jan;89(1):8-12.

PMID: 14715817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neonatal Netw. 2003 Sep-Oct;22(5):45-50.

An evidence-based guideline for introducing oral feeding to healthy preterm
infants.

McCain GC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106-4904, USA. gcm2@cwru.edu

The ability of a preterm infant to make the transition from gavage to oral nipple
feeding depends on the infant's neurodevelopment in relation to behavioral
organization, to a rhythmic suck-swallow-breathe pattern, and to
cardiorespiratory regulation. Research-based knowledge about infant
neurodevelopment in these three areas has led to the creation of a semidemand
feeding method to aid in this transition. The method combines the use of
nonnutritive sucking to promote awake behavior for feeding, use of behavioral
assessment to identify readiness for feeding, and systematic observation of and
response to infant behavior cues to regulate frequency, length, and volume of
oral feedings. Semidemand feeding may be individualized for healthy preterm
infants. This article discusses both the relevant knowledge about
neurodevelopment and the semidemand feeding method itself.

PMID: 14598979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Clin Invest. 2003 Apr;111(7):1029-37.

Rescue of the skeletal phenotype in CasR-deficient mice by transfer onto the Gcm2
null background.

Tu Q(1), Pi M, Karsenty G, Simpson L, Liu S, Quarles LD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bone and Mineral Disorders, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2003 Apr;111(7):945-7.

To understand the role of the calcium-sensing receptor (CasR) in the skeleton, we
used a genetic approach to ablate parathyroid glands and remove the confounding
effects of elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) in CasR-deficient mice. CasR
deficiency was transferred onto the glial cells missing 2-deficient
(Gcm2-deficient) background by intercrossing CasR- and Gcm2-deficient mice.
Superimposed Gcm2 deficiency rescued the perinatal lethality in CasR-deficient
mice in association with ablation of the parathyroid glands and correction of the
severe hyperparathyroidism. In addition, the double homozygous CasR- and
Gcm2-deficient mice demonstrated healing of the abnormal mineralization of
cartilage and bone associated with CasR deficiency, indicating that rickets and
osteomalacia in CasR-deficient mice are not due to an independent function of
CasR in bone and cartilage but to the effect of severe hyperparathyroidism in the
neonate. Analysis of the skeleton of 6-week-old homozygous CasR- and
Gcm2-deficient mice also failed to identify any essential, nonredundant role for 
CasR in regulating chondrogenesis or osteogenesis, but further studies are needed
to establish the function of CasR in the skeleton. In contrast, concomitant Gcm2 
and CasR deficiency failed to rescue the hypocalciuria in CasR-deficient mice,
consistent with direct regulation of urinary calcium excretion by CasR in the
kidney. Double Gcm2- and CasR-deficient mice provide an important model for
evaluating the extraparathyroid functions of CasR.

PMCID: PMC152586
PMID: 12671052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2002 Oct;57(4):501-5.

Underexpression of Gcm2, a master regulatory gene of parathyroid gland
development, in adenomas of primary hyperparathyroidism.

Correa P(1), Akerström G, Westin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Endocrine Unit, Uppsala University Hospital, 
Klinisk forskningsavdelning 2, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Glial cells missing (Gcm) was first identified as a binary switch
between neuronal and glial determination in Drosophila. Two homologues of
Drosophila Gcm have been identified in mice and humans, namely Gcm1 and Gcm2.
Mouse Gcm2 is restricted to parathyroid tissues and Gcm2 was recently identified 
as a master regulatory gene of parathyroid gland development as Gcm2 knockout
mice lack parathyroid glands.
DESIGN/PATIENTS: To identify Gcm2 transcripts in human non-neural tissues and to 
examine whether Gcm2 is involved in parathyroid gland tumorigenesis we analysed
Gcm2 transcript levels in several non-neural tissues by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and performed real-time quantitative RT-PCR
analysis on five normal glands, 15 parathyroid adenomas of primary
hyperparathyroidism (HPT) and nine hyperplastic glands of secondary HPT.
RESULTS: We found high Gcm2 mRNA expression in human parathyroid glands in
comparison with other non-neural tissues and underexpression in parathyroid
adenomas but not in lesions of HPT secondary to uraemia.
CONCLUSION: Because adenomas demonstrate lower Gcm2 expression than normal glands
we suggest that reduced expression of Gcm2 contributes to parathyroid gland
tumorigenesis. We speculate that a proper expression level of the Gcm2
transcription factor could be important for maintaining a fully differentiated
state of the parathyroid cell.

PMID: 12354132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 15;248(2):369-83.

gcm2 promotes glial cell differentiation and is required with glial cells missing
for macrophage development in Drosophila.

Alfonso TB(1), Jones BW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

glial cells missing (gcm) is the primary regulator of glial cell fate in
Drosophila. In addition, gcm has a role in the differentiation of the
plasmatocyte/macrophage lineage of hemocytes. Since mutation of gcm causes only a
decrease in plasmatocyte numbers without changing their ability to convert into
macrophages, gcm cannot be the sole determinant of plasmatocyte/macrophage
differentiation. We have characterized a gcm homolog, gcm2. gcm2 is expressed at 
low levels in glial cells and hemocyte precursors. We show that gcm2 has
redundant functions with gcm and has a minor role promoting glial cell
differentiation. More significant, like gcm, mutation of gcm2 leads to reduced
plasmatocyte numbers. A deletion removing both genes has allowed us to clarify
the role of these redundant genes in plasmatocyte development. Animals deficient 
for both gcm and gcm2 fail to express the macrophage receptor Croquemort.
Plasmatocytes are reduced in number, but still express the early marker
Peroxidasin. These Peroxidasin-expressing hemocytes fail to migrate to their
normal locations and do not complete their conversion into macrophages. Our
results suggest that both gcm and gcm2 are required together for the
proliferation of plasmatocyte precursors, the expression of Croquemort protein,
and the ability of plasmatocytes to convert into macrophages.

PMID: 12167411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2002 Jul;129(13):3033-44.

Eya1 is required for the morphogenesis of mammalian thymus, parathyroid and
thyroid.

Xu PX(1), Zheng W, Laclef C, Maire P, Maas RL, Peters H, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Great Falls, MT 59405, 
USA. pxu@po.mri.montana.edu

Eyes absent (Eya) genes regulate organogenesis in both vertebrates and
invertebrates. Mutations in human EYA1 cause congenital Branchio-Oto-Renal (BOR) 
syndrome, while targeted inactivation of murine Eya1 impairs early developmental 
processes in multiple organs, including ear, kidney and skeletal system. We have 
now examined the role of Eya1 during the morphogenesis of organs derived from the
pharyngeal region, including thymus, parathyroid and thyroid. The thymus and
parathyroid are derived from 3rd pharyngeal pouches and their development is
initiated via inductive interactions between neural crest-derived arch
mesenchyme, pouch endoderm, and possibly the surface ectoderm of 3rd pharyngeal
clefts. Eya1 is expressed in all three cell types during thymus and parathyroid
development from E9.5 and the organ primordia for both of these structures failed
to form in Eya1(-/-) embryos. These results indicate that Eya1 is required for
the initiation of thymus and parathyroid gland formation. Eya1 is also expressed 
in the 4th pharyngeal region and ultimobranchial bodies. Eya1(-/-) mice show
thyroid hypoplasia, with severe reduction in the number of parafollicular cells
and the size of the thyroid lobes and lack of fusion between the ultimobranchial 
bodies and the thyroid lobe. These data indicate that Eya1 also regulates mature 
thyroid gland formation. Furthermore, we show that Six1 expression is markedly
reduced in the arch mesenchyme, pouch endoderm and surface ectoderm in the
pharyngeal region of Eya1(-/-) embryos, indicating that Six1 expression in those 
structures is Eya1 dependent. In addition, we show that in Eya1(-/-) embryos, the
expression of Gcm2 in the 3rd pouch endoderm is undetectable at E10.5, however,
the expression of Hox and Pax genes in the pouch endoderm is preserved at
E9.5-10.5. Finally, we found that the surface ectoderm of the 3rd and 4th
pharyngeal region show increased cell death at E10.5 in Eya1(-/-) embryos. Our
results indicate that Eya1 controls critical early inductive events involved in
the morphogenesis of thymus, parathyroid and thyroid.

PMCID: PMC3873877
PMID: 12070080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002 Mar;146(3):281-2.

A molecular switch for parathyroid cell differentiation.

Berg JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Central Laboratory, Aker University Hospital, 0514 Oslo, Norway.
j.p.berg@ioks.uio.no

PMID: 11888832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. AIDS. 2002 Mar 8;16(4):653-9.

"Barebacking" in a diverse sample of men who have sex with men.

Mansergh G(1), Marks G, Colfax GN, Guzman R, Rader M, Buchbinder S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 1600 Clifton Road, Mailstop E-45, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. gcm2@cdc.gov

OBJECTIVES: To assess the prevalence of and factors associated with "Barebacking"
as a sociocultural phenomenon in a sample of HIV-positive and -negative men who
have sex with men (MSM), and to assess the reasons for barebacking and venues for
meeting partners.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional survey of MSM recruited in the San Francisco Bay Area
from July 2000 to February 2001.
METHODS: Barebacking, defined as "intentional anal sex without a condom with
someone other than a primary partner", was assessed among men who had heard of
the term. Participants were recruited outside multiple venues and interviewed
later at community locations. Chi-square and multivariate logistic regression
were used for analysis.
RESULTS: The sample (n = 554) of MSM were African-American (28%), Latino (27%),
white (31%) and other race/ethnicity (14%); 35% reported being HIV-positive.
Seventy per cent of the men had heard of barebacking. Among men aware of the
term, 14% had barebacked in the past 2 years (22% of HIV-positive versus 10% of
HIV-negative men, P < 0.001); 10% of the full sample did so. The prevalence of
barebacking did not differ by race/ethnicity or sexual orientation
identification. Men tended to report bareback partners who had the same HIV
serostatus; however, a sizeable proportion of men had partners of different or
unknown serostatus. Increased physical stimulation and emotional connectedness
were the primary reasons for barebacking.
CONCLUSION: New approaches are needed to reduce bareback behavior and the risk of
HIV transmission, including innovative health-promoting behavioral and biomedical
interventions.

PMID: 11873010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Clin Invest. 2001 Oct;108(8):1215-20.

Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism caused by a mutation in the gene for the
transcription factor GCMB.

Ding C(1), Buckingham B, Levine MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.

Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and
absent or markedly reduced circulating concentrations of parathyroid hormone. The
transcription factor GCMB is predominantly, if not exclusively, expressed in
parathyroid cells and is critical for development of the parathyroid glands in
mice. Thus, in the present study we examined the GCMB gene, mapped to 6p23-24, as
a candidate for isolated hypoparathyroidism. We defined the boundaries of the
five exons of the human GCMB gene and then identified a large intragenic mutation
in the GCMB genes of the proband of an extensive kindred with isolated
hypoparathyroidism. Her parents and several other unaffected relatives were
heterozygous for the mutation. Despite an absence of any history of
consanguinity, microsatellite analysis showed shared genotypes that flanked the
GCMB gene over a span of 5 cM, suggesting that both of the proband's GCMB alleles
had been derived from a single common ancestor. Analysis of additional, unrelated
cases did not disclose the same mutation. We conclude that homozygous loss of
function of the GCMB gene impairs normal parathyroid gland embryology and is
responsible for isolated hypoparathyroidism in a subset of patients with this
disease.

PMCID: PMC209530
PMID: 11602629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Biol. 2001 Aug 15;236(2):316-29.

Hoxa3 and pax1 regulate epithelial cell death and proliferation during thymus and
parathyroid organogenesis.

Su D(1), Ellis S, Napier A, Lee K, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The thymus and parathyroid glands in mice develop from a thymus/parathyroid
primordium that forms from the endoderm of the third pharyngeal pouch. We
investigated the molecular mechanisms that promote this unique process in which
two distinct organs form from a single primordium, using mice mutant for Hoxa3
and Pax1. Thymic ectopia in Hoxa3(+/-)Pax1(-/-) compound mutants is due to
delayed separation of the thymus/parathyroid primordium from the pharynx. The
primordium is hypoplastic at its formation, and has increased levels of
apoptosis. The developing third pouch in Hoxa3(+/-)Pax1(-/-) compound mutants
initiates normal expression of the parathyroid-specific Gcm2 and thymus-specific 
Foxn1 genes. However, Gcm2 expression is reduced at E11.5 in Pax1(-/-) single
mutants, and further reduced or absent in Hoxa3(+/-)Pax1(-/-) compound mutants.
Subsequent to organ-specific differentiation from the shared primordium, both the
parathyroids and thymus developed defects. Parathyroids in compound mutants were 
smaller at their formation, and absent at later stages. Parathyroids were also
reduced in Pax1(-/-) mutants, revealing a new function for Pax1 in parathyroid
organogenesis. Thymic hypoplasia at later fetal stages in compound mutants was
associated with increased death and decreased proliferation of thymic epithelial 
cells. Our results suggest that a Hoxa3-Pax1 genetic pathway is required for both
epithelial cell growth and differentiation throughout thymus and parathyroid
organogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11476574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Am J Public Health. 2001 Jun;91(6):953-8.

The Circuit Party Men's Health Survey: findings and implications for gay and
bisexual men.

Mansergh G(1), Colfax GN, Marks G, Rader M, Guzman R, Buchbinder S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
1600 Clifton Rd, Mail Stop E-45, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. gcm2@cdc.gov

OBJECTIVES: This study examined characteristics of gay and bisexual men who
attend circuit parties, frequency of and motivations for attending parties, drug 
use and sexual behavior during circuit party weekends, and use of risk reduction 
materials available at parties.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was conducted among 295 gay and bisexual men
from the San Francisco Bay Area who had attended a circuit party in the previous 
year.
RESULTS: One fourth of the men reported a drug "overuse" incident in the previous
year. Nearly all respondents reported use of drugs during circuit party weekends,
including ecstasy (75%), ketamine (58%), crystal methamphetamine (36%), gamma
hydroxybutyrate or gamma butyrolactone (25%), and Viagra (12%). Two thirds of the
men reported having sex (oral or anal), 49% reported having anal sex, and 28%
reported having unprotected anal sex during the 3-day period. An association was 
found between use of drugs and sexual risk behavior. Prevention materials were
observed at party events by some men; however, relatively few men used the
materials. Common motivations for attending the parties were "to listen to music 
and dance" and "to be with friends."
CONCLUSIONS: Intensive, targeted health promotion efforts are needed for gay and 
bisexual men who attend circuit parties.

PMCID: PMC1446474
PMID: 11392940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mech Dev. 2001 May;103(1-2):141-3.

Gcm2 and Foxn1 mark early parathyroid- and thymus-specific domains in the
developing third pharyngeal pouch.

Gordon J(1), Bennett AR, Blackburn CC, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genome Research / Institute of Cell, Animal and Population Biology,
University of Edinburgh, King's Buildings, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JQ,
UK.

The thymus and parathyroids originate from a common primordium that develops from
the third pharyngeal pouch in mice and humans. The molecular mechanism that
specifies this primordium into distinct organ domains is not known. The Gcm2 and 
Foxn1 transcription factors are required for development of the parathyroid and
thymus respectively, and are attractive candidates for this role. However, their 
embryonic expression patterns during pharyngeal pouch development and early
thymus and parathyroid organogenesis have not been described. Here we report that
Gcm2 is expressed specifically in the developing second and third pharyngeal
pouches at E9.5, and is further confined to a small domain of the third pouch
endoderm by E10.5. In contrast, Foxn1 is not expressed until after the common
primordium is formed, beginning at E11.25. Our results show that Gcm2 and Foxn1
expression mark two complementary domains that prefigure parathyroid and thymus
regions within the common primordium before morphological distinctions are
present.

PMID: 11335122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nature. 2000 Jul 13;406(6792):199-203.

Genetic ablation of parathyroid glands reveals another source of parathyroid
hormone.

Günther T(1), Chen ZF, Kim J, Priemel M, Rueger JM, Amling M, Moseley JM, Martin 
TJ, Anderson DJ, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The parathyroid glands are the only known source of circulating parathyroid
hormone (PTH), which initiates an endocrine cascade that regulates serum calcium 
concentration. Glial cells missing2 (Gcm2), a mouse homologue of Drosophila Gcm, 
is the only transcription factor whose expression is restricted to the
parathyroid glands. Here we show that Gcm2-deficient mice lack parathyroid glands
and exhibit a biological hypoparathyroidism, identifying Gcm2 as a master
regulatory gene of parathyroid gland development. Unlike PTH receptor-deficient
mice, however, Gcm2-deficient mice are viable and fertile, and have only a mildly
abnormal bone phenotype. Despite their lack of parathyroid glands, Gcm2-deficient
mice have PTH serum levels identical to those of wild-type mice, as do
parathyroidectomized wild-type animals. Expression and ablation studies
identified the thymus, where Gcm1, another Gcm homologue, is expressed, as the
additional, downregulatable source of PTH. Thus, Gcm2 deletion uncovers an
auxiliary mechanism for the regulation of calcium homeostasis in the absence of
parathyroid glands. We propose that this backup mechanism may be a general
feature of endocrine regulation.

PMID: 10910362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 18;275(7):4774-82.

Protein stability and domain topology determine the transcriptional activity of
the mammalian glial cells missing homolog, GCMb.

Tuerk EE(1), Schreiber J, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie, Universität Hamburg, Martinistrasse 52, 
D-20246 Hamburg, Germany.

The glial cells missing (GCM) family of transcription factors consists of
Drosophila GCM and the mammalian proteins GCMa and GCMb. They are expressed in a 
highly restricted manner during development and are known or assumed to be
important regulators of developmental fate decisions. As the biochemical
properties of GCMb have not been studied so far, we have undertaken a detailed
structure-function analysis of the mouse GCMb (mGCMb) protein. DNA-binding
specificity was very similar to that of other GCM proteins. Nevertheless, mGCMb
was only a weak transcriptional activator in a number of different tissue culture
systems. Interestingly, this was not due to an intrinsic absence of
transactivation potential. In effect, we were able to identify two separate
transactivation domains within mGCMb, one carboxyl-terminally adjacent to the
DNA-binding domain and the second within the extreme carboxyl terminus. Activity 
of both transactivation domains was, however, modulated by an inhibitory region
unique to mGCMb and located between the two transactivation domains. Furthermore,
pulse-chase experiments proved that the mGCMb protein has a half-life
approximately four times shorter than mGCMa. Introduction of the above mentioned 
inhibitory domain of mGCMb into mGCMa shortened the half-life of mGCMa to a value
typical of mGCMb with a concomitant reduction in transactivation potential. Given
the strong correlation between protein stability and transactivation potential,
functional differences between the two mammalian GCM homologs are likely due to
differences in stability with a single inhibitory region in mGCMb being involved 
in the reduction of both.

PMID: 10671510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1999;84(1-2):43-7.

GCMB, a second human homolog of the fly glide/gcm gene.

Kammerer M(1), Pirola B, Giglio S, Giangrande A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
IGBMC/CNRS/ULP/INSERM - BP 163, Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

Glial cells play fundamental roles in neurogenesis. In addition, defective or
abnormal gliogenesis is associated with severe diseases. To understand the
molecular basis of such diseases, it is crucial to identify the genes promoting
normal gliogenesis. Here we identify GCMB, which encodes a human protein
homologous to the fly glial promoting factor glial cell deficient/glial cell
missing (glide/gcm).

PMID: 10343099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 13;95(21):12364-9.

Isolation and characterization of mammalian homologs of the Drosophila gene glial
cells missing.

Kim J(1), Jones BW, Zock C, Chen Z, Wang H, Goodman CS, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Biology, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

The glial cells missing (gcm) gene in Drosophila encodes a transcription factor
that determines the choice between glial and neuronal fates. We report here the
isolation of two mammalian gcm homologs, Gcm1 and Gcm2, and the characterization 
of their expression patterns during embryonic development. Although Gcm2 is
expressed in neural tissues at a low level, the major sites of expression for
both of the mammalian genes are nonneural, suggesting that the functions of the
mammalian homologs have diverged and diversified. However, when expressed
ectopically, Gcm1 can substitute functionally for Drosophila gcm by transforming 
presumptive neurons into glia. Thus, certain biochemical properties, although not
the specificity of the tissue in which the gene is expressed, have been conserved
through the evolution of the Gcm gene family.

PMCID: PMC22837
PMID: 9770492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd. 1995 Nov;55(11):647-52.

[Gerontologic aspects of postmenopausal measurement of bone density and
prevention of osteoporosis].

[Article in German]

Wenderlein JM(1), Eissfeldt K, Heber F, Dannert E.

Author information: 
(1)Universitäts-Frauenklinik Ulm.

I. Among 454 postmenopausal women to undergo bone mineral density (BMD)
examination 7 out of 10 were aged 50 to 70 years. 1. 50 of patients older than 70
years had BMD examination because of being clinically suspicious of osteoporosis.
2. In this group of age 4 out of 10 women had BMD results of the lumbar spine
below 0,8 gcm2. 3. Half of all women aged up to 50 years had a positive family
history of osteoporosis. 4. Patients older than 60 years often underestimated
their own risk of osteoporosis. 5. 50 of women up to the age of 50 and only one
sixth of women older than 70 said they had very good to good knowledge of
osteoporosis. 6. Resentments against estrogen substitution are rapidly growing
with every decade of age. 7. Only one third of the women selected by
BMD-indication were ready to accept longterm estrogen substitution to prevent
osteoporosis. II. 4 out of 10 women had entered menopause maximally 8 years
ago.1. Out of this group 6 of 10 patients were substituted with estrogen. 2. When
menstruation had sisted more than 15 years ago the BMD examination indication,
clinically suspicious of osteoporosis, rose immensely and made up for 50 of
patients. 3. One third to one half of patients who had reached menopause more
than 22 years ago showed pathological BMD results, which means they were at risk 
of fractures. 4. In this group only 1 in 10 women had a positive history of
osteoporosis. III. Obese postmenopausal women (more than 25 of overweight
according to Broca) had pathologic BMD results only half as often as
postmenopausal women with normal weight. Summing it up these facts may be the
basis of special counselling on the prevention of osteoporosis by estrogen
substitution.

PMID: 8707043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


