
1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2016 Mar 27. pii: 1535370216642047. [Epub ahead of print]

A case-control genome-wide association study identifies genetic modifiers of
fetal hemoglobin in sickle cell disease.

Liu L(1), Pertsemlidis A(2), Ding LH(3), Story MD(3), Steinberg MH(4), Sebastiani
P(5), Hoppe C(6), Ballas SK(7), Pace BS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX
75083, USA. (2)Departments of Pediatrics and Cellular & Structural Biology,
Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (3)Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Center of Excellence in Sickle Cell Disease Boston Medical Center, Pediatrics,
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. (6)Department of Hematology/Oncology, UCSF Benioff
Children's Hospital, Oakland, CA 94609, USA. (7)Cardeza Foundation for
Hematologic Research, Department of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Augusta University,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA bpace@gru.edu.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a group of inherited blood disorders that have in
common a mutation in the sixth codon of the ß-globin (HBB) gene on chromosome 11.
However, people with the same genetic mutation display a wide range of clinical
phenotypes. Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) expression is an important genetic modifier of
SCD complications leading to milder symptoms and improved long-term survival.
Therefore, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) using a
case-control experimental design in 244 African Americans with SCD to discover
genetic factors associated with HbF expression. The case group consisted of
subjects with HbF=8.6% (133 samples) and control group subjects with HbF=£3.1%
(111 samples). Our GWAS results replicated SNPs previously identified in an
erythroid-specific enhancer region located in the second intron of theBCL11Agene 
associated with HbF expression. In addition, we identified SNPs in
theSPARC,GJC1,EFTUD2andJAZF1genes as novel candidates associated with HbF levels.
To gain insights into mechanisms of globin gene regulation in theHBBlocus,
linkage disequilibrium (LD) and haplotype analyses were conducted. We observed
strong LD in the low HbF group in contrast to a loss of LD and greater number of 
haplotypes in the high HbF group. A search of knownHBBlocus regulatory elements
identified SNPs 5' of d-globin located in an HbF silencing region. In particular,
SNP rs4910736 created a binding site for a known transcription repressor GFi1
which is a candidate protein for further investigation. Another HbF-associated
SNP, rs2855122 in the cAMP response element upstream of G<U+03B3>-globin, was analyzed
for functional relevance. Studies performed with siRNA-mediated CREB binding
protein (CBP) knockdown in primary erythroid cells demonstrated <U+03B3>-globin
activation and HbF induction, supporting a repressor role for CBP. This study
identifies possible molecular determinants of HbF production.

© 2016 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 27022141  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Mar 18;12(3):e1005507. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005507.
eCollection 2016.

Promotion of Expansion and Differentiation of Hematopoietic Stem Cells by
Interleukin-27 into Myeloid Progenitors to Control Infection in Emergency
Myelopoiesis.

Furusawa J(1), Mizoguchi I(1), Chiba Y(1), Hisada M(2), Kobayashi F(3), Yoshida
H(4), Nakae S(5), Tsuchida A(2), Matsumoto T(6), Ema H(7), Mizuguchi J(8),
Yoshimoto T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo Medical
University, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal and Pediatric
Surgery, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Infectious
Diseases, Kyorin University of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Systems Biology, Center for Experimental Medicine and Systems
Biology, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Cell Differentiation, The Sakaguchi Laboratory of Developmental 
Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of
Immunology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Emergency myelopoiesis is inflammation-induced hematopoiesis to replenish myeloid
cells in the periphery, which is critical to control the infection with
pathogens. Previously, pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interferon (IFN)-a and 
IFN-<U+03B3> were demonstrated to play a critical role in the expansion of hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) and myeloid progenitors, leading to production of mature
myeloid cells, although their inhibitory effects on hematopoiesis were also
reported. Therefore, the molecular mechanism of emergency myelopoiesis during
infection remains incompletely understood. Here, we clarify that one of the
interleukin (IL)-6/IL-12 family cytokines, IL-27, plays an important role in the 
emergency myelopoiesis. Among various types of hematopoietic cells in bone
marrow, IL-27 predominantly and continuously promoted the expansion of only
Lineage-Sca-1+c-Kit+ (LSK) cells, especially long-term repopulating HSCs and
myeloid-restricted progenitor cells with long-term repopulating activity, and the
differentiation into myeloid progenitors in synergy with stem cell factor. These 
progenitors expressed myeloid transcription factors such as Spi1, Gfi1, and
Cebpa/b through activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 
and 3, and had enhanced potential to differentiate into migratory dendritic cells
(DCs), neutrophils, and mast cells, and less so into macrophages, and basophils, 
but not into plasmacytoid DCs, conventional DCs, T cells, and B cells. Among
various cytokines, IL-27 in synergy with the stem cell factor had the strongest
ability to augment the expansion of LSK cells and their differentiation into
myeloid progenitors retaining the LSK phenotype over a long period of time. The
experiments using mice deficient for one of IL-27 receptor subunits, WSX-1, and
IFN-<U+03B3> revealed that the blood stage of malaria infection enhanced IL-27
expression through IFN-<U+03B3> production, and the IL-27 then promoted the expansion of
LSK cells, differentiating and mobilizing them into spleen, resulting in enhanced
production of neutrophils to control the infection. Thus, IL-27 is one of the
limited unique cytokines directly acting on HSCs to promote differentiation into 
myeloid progenitors during emergency myelopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4798290
PMID: 26991425  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Mar 7. pii: MCB.01001-15. [Epub ahead of print]

SUMOYLATION REGULATES GROWTH FACTOR INDEPENDENCE (GFI)-1 IN TRANSCRIPTIONAL
CONTROL AND HEMATOPOIESIS.

Andrade D(1), Velinder M(1), Singer J(1), Maese L(2), Bareyan D(1), Nguyen H(3), 
Chandrasekharan MB(4), Lucente H(1), McClellan D(1), Jones D(1), Sharma S(5), Liu
F(6), Engel ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine Primary
Children's Hospital. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Utah School of
Medicine. (5)Department of Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine Center
for Investigational Therapeutics, Huntsman Cancer Institute. (6)Department of
Chemical Biology, Rutgers University, Cancer Institute of New Jersey and Center
for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine. (7)Department of Oncological Sciences,
University of Utah School of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, University of
Utah School of Medicine Primary Children's Hospital michael.engel@hci.utah.edu.

Cell fate specification requires precise coordination of transcription factors
and their regulators to achieve fidelity and flexibility in lineage allocation.
The transcriptional repressor Growth factor independence (GFI)-1 is comprised of 
conserved SNAG and zinc-finger motifs separated by a linker region poorly
conserved with GFI1B, its closest homolog. Moreover, GFI1 and GFI1B coordinate
distinct developmental fates in hematopoiesis, suggesting their functional
differences may derive from structures within their linkers. We show a binding
interface between the GFI1 linker and the SP-RING domain of PIAS3, an E3-SUMO
ligase. The PIAS3 binding region in GFI1 contains a conserved type-I SUMOylation 
consensus element, centered on lysine-239 (K239). In silico prediction algorithms
identify K239 as the only high probability site for SUMO modification. We show
GFI1 is modified by SUMO at K239. SUMOylation-resistant derivatives of GFI1 fail 
to complement Gfi1 depletion phenotypes in zebrafish primitive erythropoiesis and
granulocytic differentiation in cultured human cells. LSD1/CoREST recruitment and
MYC repression by GFI1 are profoundly impaired for SUMOylation-resistant GFI1
derivatives, while enforced expression of MYC blocks granulocytic
differentiation. These findings suggest that SUMOylation within the GFI1 linker
favors LSD1/CoREST recruitment and MYC repression to govern hematopoietic
differentiation.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26951200  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 3;11(3):e0150809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150809.
eCollection 2016.

In Vivo Deletion of the Cebpa +37 kb Enhancer Markedly Reduces Cebpa mRNA in
Myeloid Progenitors but Not in Non-Hematopoietic Tissues to Impair
Granulopoiesis.

Guo H(1), Cooper S(1), Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

The murine Cebpa gene contains a +37 kb, evolutionarily conserved 440 bp enhancer
that directs high-level expression to myeloid progenitors in transgenic mice. The
enhancer is bound and activated by Runx1, Scl, GATA2, C/EBPa, c-Myb, Pu.1, and
additional Ets factors in myeloid cells. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated replacement of the 
wild-type enhancer with a variant mutant in its seven Ets sites leads to 20-fold 
reduction of Cebpa mRNA in the 32Dcl3 myeloid cell line. To determine the effect 
of deleting the enhancer in vivo, we now characterize C57BL/6 mice in which loxP 
sites flank a 688 bp DNA segment containing the enhancer. CMV-Cre mediated
germline deletion resulted in diminution of the expected number of viable
Enh(f/f);CMV-Cre offspring, with 28-fold reduction in marrow Cebpa mRNA but
normal levels in liver, lung, adipose, intestine, muscle, and kidney.
Cre-transduction of lineage-negative marrow cells in vitro reduced Cebpa mRNA
12-fold, with impairment of granulocytic maturation, morphologic blast
accumulation, and IL-3 dependent myeloid colony replating for >12 generations.
Exposure of Enh(f/f);Mx1-Cre mice to pIpC led to 14-fold reduction of Cebpa mRNA 
in GMP or CMP, 30-fold reduction in LSK, and <2-fold reduction in the LSK/SLAM
subset. FACS analysis of marrow from these mice revealed 10-fold reduced
neutrophils, 3-fold decreased GMP, and 3-fold increased LSK cells. Progenitor
cell cycle progression was mildly impaired. Granulocyte and B lymphoid colony
forming units were reduced while monocytic and erythroid colonies were increased,
with reduced Pu.1 and Gfi1 and increased Egr1 and Klf4 in GMP. Finally,
competitive transplantation indicated preservation of functional long-term
hematopoietic stem cells upon enhancer deletion and confirmed marrow-intrinsic
impairment of granulopoiesis and B cell generation with LSK and monocyte lineage 
expansion. These findings demonstrate a critical role for the +37 kb Cebpa
enhancer for hematopoietic-specific Cebpa expression, with enhancer deletion
leading to impaired myelopoiesis and potentially preleukemic progenitor
expansion.

PMCID: PMC4777376
PMID: 26937964  [PubMed - in process]


5. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 18;6:20156. doi: 10.1038/srep20156.

Rapamycin attenuates acute lung injury induced by LPS through inhibition of Th17 
cell proliferation in mice.

Yan Z(1), Xiaoyu Z(1), Zhixin S(2), Di Q(1), Xinyu D(1), Jing X(1), Jing H(1),
Wang D(1), Xi Z(1), Chunrong Z(3), Daoxin W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, the Second Affiliated
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 76 Linjiang Road, Yuzhong District,
Chongqing 400010, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Diagnostic Medicine Designated by
the Ministry of Education, Chongqing Medical University, 1 Yixueyuan Road,
Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400010, China. (3)Department of Emergency Medicine,
the Yongchuan Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 439 Xuanhua
Road, Yongchuan District, Chongqing 402160, China.

Th17 cells have been confirmed to increase neutrophils through cytokine
secretions. ALI/ARDS are characterized as neutrophil infiltration in inflammation
cases; however, there is conflicting information concerning the role of Th17
cells in ALI/ARDS, as well as their potential treatment value. We measured
Th17-linear cytokines in the plasma of patients with sepsis-related ARDS. The
consistently high levels of IL-17 and IL-22 in the nonsurvivors suggested that
overreaction of the Th17-mediated immune response may be a risk factor for poor
outcomes. Th17 linear cytokines were also increased in an LPS-induced murine
model of acute lung injury, along with neutrophil accumulation. The mice that
completely lacked IL-17 failed to accumulate and activate neutrophils. Lung
inflammation was obviously attenuated in the IL-17(-)/(-) mice. Meanwhile, the
neutrophil count was markedly increased in the healthy WT mice challenged with
recombinant IL-22 and IL-17. Rapamycin attenuated lung injury by inhibiting the
differentiation of Th17 cells through ROR<U+03B3>t and STAT3 dysfunction. Furthermore,
we demonstrated that SOCS3 and Gfi1, which were responsible for the molecular
suppression of ROR<U+03B3>t and STAT3, were up-regulated by rapamycin. These results
point toward a pivotal view to treatment of ALI through weakening the
proliferation of Th17 cells with rapamycin.

PMCID: PMC4757870
PMID: 26888095  [PubMed - in process]


6. Leukemia. 2016 Feb 5. doi: 10.1038/leu.2016.11. [Epub ahead of print]

GFI1 as a novel prognostic and therapeutic factor for AML/MDS.

Hönes JM(1), Botezatu L(1), Helness A(2), Vadnais C(2), Vassen L(1), Robert F(3),
Hergenhan SM(1), Thivakaran A(1), Schütte J(1), Al-Matary YS(1), Lams RF(1),
Fraszscak J(2), Makishima H(4), Radivoyevitch T(4), Przychodzen B(4), da
Conceição Castro SV(5,)(6), Görgens A(5), Giebel B(5), Klein-Hitpass L(7),
Lennartz K(7), Heuser M(8), Thiede C(9), Ehninger G(9), Dührsen U(1), Maciejewski
J(4), Möröy T(2,)(10), Khandanpour C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. (2)Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), Hematopoiesis and Cancer Research Unit, and Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada. (3)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal
(IRCM), Chromatin and Genomic Expression Research Unit, and Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada. (4)Department of Translational Hematology and
Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland, USA. (5)Institute for
Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen,
Germany. (6)CAPES Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil, Brasília.
(7)Institute for Cell Biology (Tumor Research), University Hospital Essen,
University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. (8)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis,
Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (9)Medical Clinic and Polyclinic, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (10)Département de microbiologie,
infectiologie et immunologie, Université de Montréal.

Genetic and epigenetic aberrations contribute to the initiation and progression
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). GFI1, a zinc-finger transcriptional repressor
exerts its function by recruiting histone-deacetylases (HDACs) to target genes.
We present data that low expression of GFI1 is associated with an inferior
prognosis of AML patients. To elucidate the mechanism behind this, we generated a
humanized mouse strain with reduced GFI1expression (GFI1-KD). Here we show that
AML development induced by onco-fusion proteins such as MLL-AF9 or NUP98-HOXD13
is accelerated in mice with low human GFI1 expression. Leukemic cells from
animals that express low levels of GFI1 show increased H3K9 acetylation compared 
to leukemic cells from mice with normal human GFI1 expression resulting in the
upregulation of genes involved in leukemogenesis. We investigated a new
epigenetic therapy approach for this subgroup of AML patients. We could show that
AML blasts from GFI1-KD mice and from AML patients with low GFI1 levels were more
sensitive to treatment with histone acetyltransferase inhibitors (HATis) than
cells with normal GFI1 expression levels. We suggest therefore that GFI1 has a
dose-dependent role in AML progression and development. GFI1 level are involved
in epigenetic regulation that could open new therapeutic approaches for
AML-patients.Leukemia accepted article preview online, 05 February 2016.
doi:10.1038/leu.2016.11.

PMID: 26847026  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Environ Res. 2016 Apr;146:395-403. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2016.01.026. Epub 2016
Jan 29.

Self-reported smoking, serum cotinine, and blood DNA methylation.

Zhang Y(1), Florath I(2), Saum KU(3), Brenner H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research, German Cancer Research
Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
y.zhang@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (2)Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging
Research, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: ines.florath@curtin.edu.au. (3)Division 
of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research, German Cancer Research Center, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
k.saum@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (4)Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging
Research, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany; Division of Preventive Oncology, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im Neuenheimer Feld
460, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
Electronic address: h.brenner@dkfz-Heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Epigenome-wide profiling of DNA methylation pattern with respect to
tobacco smoking has given rise to a new measure of smoking exposure. We
investigated the relationships of methylation markers with both cotinine, an
established marker of internal smoking exposure, and self-reported smoking.
METHODS: Blood DNA methylation levels across the genome and serum cotinine were
measured in 1000 older adults aged 50-75 years. Epigenome-wide scans were
performed to identify methylation markers associated with cotinine. The
inter-dose-response relationships between the number of cigarettes smoked per
day, cotinine concentration, and DNA methylation were modeled by restricted cubic
spline regression.
RESULTS: Of 61 CpGs that passed the genome-wide significance threshold
(p<1.13×10(-7)), 40 CpGs in 25 chromosomal regions were successfully replicated, 
showing 0.2-3% demethylation per 10ng/ml increases in cotinine. The strongest
associations were observed for several loci at AHRR, F2RL3, 2q37.1, 6p21.33, and 
GFI1 that were previously identified to be related to self-reported smoking. One 
locus at RAB34 was newly discovered. Both cotinine and methylation markers
exhibited non-linear relationships with the number of cigarettes smoked per day, 
where the highest rates of increase in cotinine and decreases in methylation were
observed at low smoking intensity (1-15 cigarettes/day) and plateaued at high
smoking intensity (>15-20 cigarettes/day). A clear linear relationship was
observed between cotinine concentration and methylation level. Both cotinine and 
methylation markers showed similar accuracy in distinguishing current from never 
smoker, but only methylation markers distinguished former from never smoker with 
high accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study corroborates and expands the list of smoking-associated
DNA methylation markers. Methylation levels were linearly related to cotinine
concentration and provided accurate measures for both current and past smoking
exposure.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26826776  [PubMed - in process]


8. Immunology. 2016 Apr;147(4):476-87. doi: 10.1111/imm.12580. Epub 2016 Feb 9.

Gfi1, a transcriptional repressor, inhibits the induction of the T helper type 1 
programme in activated CD4 T cells.

Suzuki J(1,)(2), Maruyama S(3), Tamauchi H(4), Kuwahara M(2,)(3,)(5), Horiuchi
M(3), Mizuki M(3), Ochi M(3,)(6), Sawasaki T(6), Zhu J(7), Yasukawa M(1),
Yamashita M(2,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Clinical Immunology and Infectious Diseases,
Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (2)Department 
of Translational Immunology, Translational Research Center, Ehime University
Hospital, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (3)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (4)Division of Fundamental
Medical Technology, Department of Medical Technology, Ehime Prefectural
University of Health Science, Iyo-gun, Ehime, Japan. (5)Division of Immune
Regulation, Department of Proteo-Inovation, Proteo-Science Centre, Ehime
University, Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan. (6)Division of Cell-Free Sciences,
Department of Proteo-Research, Proteo-Science Centre, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan. (7)Molecular and Cellular Immunoregulation Unit,
Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

A transcriptional repressor Gfi1 promotes T helper type 2 (Th2) cell development 
and inhibits Th17 and inducible regulatory T-cell differentiation. However, the
role of Gfi1 in regulating Th1 cell differentiation and the Th1-type immune
response remains to be investigated. We herein demonstrate that Gfi1 inhibits the
induction of the Th1 programme in activated CD4 T cells. The activated
Gfi1-deficient CD4 T cells spontaneously develop into Th1 cells in an
interleukin-12- and interferon-<U+03B3>-independent manner. The increase of Th1-type
immune responses was confirmed in vivo in Gfi1-deficient mice using a murine
model of nickel allergy and delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH). The expression
levels of Th1-related transcription factors were found to increase in
Gfi1-deficient activated CD4 T cells. Tbx21, Eomes and Runx2 were identified as
possible direct targets of Gfi1. Gfi1 binds to the Tbx21, Eomes and Runx2 gene
loci and reduces the histone H3K4 methylation levels in part by modulating Lsd1
recruitment. Together, these findings demonstrate a novel regulatory role of Gfi1
in the regulation of the Th1-type immune response.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26749286  [PubMed - in process]


9. Genom Data. 2015 Aug 18;6:77-80. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.08.017. eCollection
2015.

Transcriptome profiling of induced hair cells (iHCs) generated by combined
expression of Gfi1, Pou4f3 and Atoh1 during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Costa A(1), Henrique D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa 1649-028, Portugal.

To gain new insights about the genetic networks controlling hair cell (HC)
development, we previously developed a direct genetic programming strategy to
generate an inexhaustible supply of HC-like cells (induced HCs, iHCs) in vitro,
starting from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESC). We found that combined activity
of three transcription factors, Gfi1, Pou4f3, and Atoh1, can program ESC-derived 
progenitors towards HC fate with efficiencies of 55%-80%. These iHCs express
several HC markers and exhibit polarized structures that are highly reminiscent
of the mechanosensitive hair bundles, with many microvilli-like stereocilia.
Here, we describe the experimental design, methodology, and data validation for
the microarray analysis used to characterize the transcriptome profile of iHCs at
different stages of their differentiation. This approach based on FACS sorting
and microarray analysis revealed a highly similar iHC transcriptome to that of
endogenous HCs in vivo. The data obtained in this study is available in the Gene 
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (accession number GSE60352).

PMCID: PMC4664721
PMID: 26697340  [PubMed]


10. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2015 Dec 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovering condition specific topological pattern changes in coexpression
network: an application to HIV1 progression.

Ray S, Bandyopadhyay S.

The natural progression of HIV-1 begins with a short acute retroviral syndrome
which typically transit to chronic and clinical latency stages and subsequently
progresses to a symptomatic, life-threatening immunodeficiency disease known as
AIDS. Microarray analysis based on gene coexpression is widely used to
investigate the coregulation pattern of a group (or cluster) of genes in a
specific phenotype. Moreover, an investigation on the topological patterns across
multiple phenotypes can facilitate the understanding of stage specific infection 
pattern of HIV-1 virus. Here, we develop a novel framework to identify
topological patterns of gene coexpression network and detect changes of modular
structure across different stages of HIV progression. This is achieved by
comparing the topological and intramodular properties of HIV infection modules.
To capture the diversity in modular structure, some topological, correlation
based and eigengene based measures are utilized here. We have applied a rank
aggregation scheme to rank all the modules to provide a good agreement between
these measures. Some novel transcription factors like 'FOXO1','GATA3',
'GFI1','IRF1', 'IRF7', 'MAX', 'STAT1', 'STAT3', 'XBP1' and 'YY1' that emerge from
the modules show significant change in expression pattern over HIV progression
stages. Moreover, we have performed an eigengene based analysis to reveal the
perturbation in modular structure across three stages of HIV-1 progression.

PMID: 26661789  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Nat Cell Biol. 2016 Jan;18(1):21-32. doi: 10.1038/ncb3276. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

GFI1 proteins orchestrate the emergence of haematopoietic stem cells through
recruitment of LSD1.

Thambyrajah R(1), Mazan M(1,)(2), Patel R(1), Moignard V(3), Stefanska M(1),
Marinopoulou E(1), Li Y(4), Lancrin C(1,)(5), Clapes T(6), Möröy T(7), Robin
C(6), Miller C(4), Cowley S(8), Göttgens B(3), Kouskoff V(9), Lacaud G(1).

Author information: 
(1)CRUK Stem Cell Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.
(2)Haematological Cancer Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (3)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research &Wellcome Trust and MRC Stem Cell Institute, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK. (4)CRUK Computational Biology Group, Cancer Research UK
Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20
4BX, UK. (5)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Mouse Biology Unit, 00015
Monterotondo, Italy. (6)Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht,
Netherlands. (7)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM) and
département de microbiologie et immunologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal,
Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada. (8)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester,
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, UK. (9)CRUK Stem Cell Haematopoiesis Group,
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Wilmslow
Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

In vertebrates, the first haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) with multi-lineage and
long-term repopulating potential arise in the AGM (aorta-gonad-mesonephros)
region. These HSCs are generated from a rare and transient subset of endothelial 
cells, called haemogenic endothelium (HE), through an
endothelial-to-haematopoietic transition (EHT). Here, we establish the absolute
requirement of the transcriptional repressors GFI1 and GFI1B (growth factor
independence 1 and 1B) in this unique trans-differentiation process. We first
demonstrate that Gfi1 expression specifically defines the rare population of HE
that generates emerging HSCs. We further establish that in the absence of GFI1
proteins, HSCs and haematopoietic progenitor cells are not produced in the AGM,
revealing the critical requirement for GFI1 proteins in intra-embryonic EHT.
Finally, we demonstrate that GFI1 proteins recruit the chromatin-modifying
protein LSD1, a member of the CoREST repressive complex, to epigenetically
silence the endothelial program in HE and allow the emergence of blood cells.

PMID: 26619147  [PubMed - in process]


12. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015 Nov 13;12(11):14461-76. doi:
10.3390/ijerph121114461.

Assessment of Offspring DNA Methylation across the Lifecourse Associated with
Prenatal Maternal Smoking Using Bayesian Mixture Modelling.

de Vocht F(1), Simpkin AJ(2,)(3), Richmond RC(4), Relton C(5,)(6,)(7), Tilling
K(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8
2PS, UK. frank.devocht@bristol.ac.uk. (2)School of Social and Community Medicine,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2PS, UK. Andrew.Simpkin@bristol.ac.uk. (3)MRC 
Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 2BN, UK.
Andrew.Simpkin@bristol.ac.uk. (4)School of Social and Community Medicine,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2PS, UK. Rebecca.Richmond@bristol.ac.uk.
(5)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8
2PS, UK. Caroline.Relton@bristol.ac.uk. (6)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit,
University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 2BN, UK. Caroline.Relton@bristol.ac.uk.
(7)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1
3BZ, UK. Caroline.Relton@bristol.ac.uk. (8)School of Social and Community
Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2PS, UK. Kate.Tilling@bristol.ac.uk.

A growing body of research has implicated DNA methylation as a potential mediator
of the effects of maternal smoking in pregnancy on offspring ill-health. Data
were available from a UK birth cohort of children with DNA methylation measured
at birth, age 7 and 17. One issue when analysing genome-wide DNA methylation data
is the correlation of methylation levels between CpG sites, though this can be
crudely bypassed using a data reduction method. In this manuscript we investigate
the effect of sustained maternal smoking in pregnancy on longitudinal DNA
methylation in their offspring using a Bayesian hierarchical mixture model. This 
model avoids the data reduction used in previous analyses. Four of the 28
previously identified, smoking related CpG sites were shown to have offspring
methylation related to maternal smoking using this method, replicating findings
in well-known smoking related genes MYO1G and GFI1. Further weak associations
were found at the AHRR and CYP1A1 loci. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the
utility of the Bayesian mixture model method for investigation of longitudinal
DNA methylation data and this method should be considered for use in whole genome
applications.

PMCID: PMC4661660
PMID: 26580635  [PubMed - in process]


13. Blood. 2015 Dec 10;126(24):2561-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-06-655043. Epub 2015
Oct 7.

From cytopenia to leukemia: the role of Gfi1 and Gfi1b in blood formation.

Möröy T(1), Vassen L(2), Wilkes B(3), Khandanpour C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada; Department
de microbiologie, infectiologie et immunologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal,
QC, Canada; Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, QC,
Canada; and. (2)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC,
Canada; Department of Hematology, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada;

The DNA-binding zinc finger transcription factors Gfi1 and Gfi1b were discovered 
more than 20 years ago and are recognized today as major regulators of both early
hematopoiesis and hematopoietic stem cells. Both proteins function as
transcriptional repressors by recruiting histone-modifying enzymes to promoters
and enhancers of target genes. The establishment of Gfi1 and Gfi1b reporter mice 
made it possible to visualize their cell type-specific expression and to
understand their function in hematopoietic lineages. We now know that Gfi1 is
primarily important in myeloid and lymphoid differentiation, whereas Gfi1b is
crucial for the generation of red blood cells and platelets. Several rare
hematologic diseases are associated with acquired or inheritable mutations in the
GFI1 and GFI1B genes. Certain patients with severe congenital neutropenia carry
mutations in the GFI1 gene that lead to the disruption of the C-terminal zinc
finger domains. Other mutations have been found in the GFI1B gene in families
with inherited bleeding disorders. In addition, the Gfi1 locus is frequently
found to be a proviral integration site in retrovirus-induced lymphomagenesis,
and new, emerging data suggest a role of Gfi1 in human leukemia and lymphoma,
underlining the role of both factors not only in normal hematopoiesis, but also
in a wide spectrum of human blood diseases.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4671106
PMID: 26447191  [PubMed - in process]


14. Front Oncol. 2015 Aug 27;5:191. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00191. eCollection 2015.

Disseminated Medulloblastoma in a Child with Germline BRCA2 6174delT Mutation and
without Fanconi Anemia.

Xu J(1), Margol AS(2), Shukla A(3), Ren X(1), Finlay JL(2), Krieger MD(4), Gilles
FH(5), Couch FJ(6), Aziz M(7), Fung ET(3), Asgharzadeh S(8), Barrett MT(7),
Erdreich-Epstein A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital
Los Angeles , Los Angeles, CA , USA. (2)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles , Los Angeles, CA , USA
; Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California , Los Angeles, CA , USA. (3)Affymetrix , Santa Clara, CA , USA.
(4)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital Los Angeles , Los Angeles, CA , 
USA ; Department of Neurological Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California , Los Angeles, CA , USA. (5)Department of Pathology,
Children's Hospital Los Angeles and Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California , Los Angeles, CA , USA. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine
and Pathology, Mayo Clinic , Rochester, MN , USA. (7)Translational Genomics
Research Institute (TGen) , Phoenix, AZ , USA. (8)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles , 
Los Angeles, CA , USA ; Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California , Los Angeles, CA , USA ; Department of
Pathology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles and Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California , Los Angeles, CA , USA.

Medulloblastoma, the most common malignant brain tumor in children, occurs with
increased frequency in individuals with Fanconi anemia who have biallelic
germline mutations in BRCA2. We describe an 8-year-old child who had disseminated
anaplastic medulloblastoma and a deleterious heterozygous BRCA2 6174delT germline
mutation. Molecular profiling was consistent with Group 4 medulloblastoma. The
posterior fossa mass was resected and the patient received intensive chemotherapy
and craniospinal irradiation. Despite this, the patient succumbed to a second
recurrence of his medulloblastoma, which presented 8<U+2009>months after diagnosis as
malignant pleural and peritoneal effusions. Continuous medulloblastoma cell lines
were isolated from the original tumor (CHLA-01-MED) and the malignant pleural
effusion (CHLA-01R-MED). Here, we provide their analyses, including in vitro and 
in vivo growth, drug sensitivity, comparative genomic hybridization, and next
generation sequencing analysis. In addition to the BRCA2 6174delT, the
medulloblastoma cells had amplification of MYC, deletion at Xp11.2, and
isochromosome 17, but no structural variations or overexpression of GFI1 or
GFI1B. To our knowledge, this is the first pair of diagnosis/recurrence
medulloblastoma cell lines, the only medulloblastoma cell lines with BRCA2
6174delT described to date, and the first reported case of a child with
medulloblastoma associated with a germline BRCA2 6174delT who did not also have
Fanconi anemia.

PMCID: PMC4550790
PMID: 26380221  [PubMed]


15. Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 15;75(20):4312-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3590. Epub 
2015 Aug 6.

CCL5-Mediated Th2 Immune Polarization Promotes Metastasis in Luminal Breast
Cancer.

Zhang Q(1), Qin J(2), Zhong L(3), Gong L(3), Zhang B(4), Zhang Y(5), Gao WQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem
Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Pathology, The First
Affiliate Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Yuhuangding Hospital, Yantai, China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes 
and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji
Hospital, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China. gao.weiqiang@sjtu.edu.cn yanzh@sjtu.edu.cn. (6)State Key
Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem Cell
Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China. Collarative Innovation Center of Systems
Biomedicine, Sanghai, China. gao.weiqiang@sjtu.edu.cn yanzh@sjtu.edu.cn.

The tumor-promoting chemokine CCL5 has been implicated in malignant
transformation of breast epithelial cells, with studies to date focusing mainly
on basal-type breast cancers. In this study, we investigated the consequences of 
CCL5 deletion in the MMTV-PyMT transgenic mouse model of luminal breast cancer.
In this model, primary tumor burden and pulmonary metastases were reduced
significantly in CCL5-deficient subjects, an effect found to be associated with a
deficit of Th2 (IL4<U+207A>CD4<U+207A> T) cells. Mechanistic investigations revealed that CCL5 
activates CCR3, a highly expressed chemokine receptor on CD4<U+207A> T cells, and also
boosts Gfi1 expression to promote the differentiation of Th2 cells, which enhance
the prometastatic activity of tumor-associated myeloid cells. Clinically,
polarization toward this immunosuppressive Th2 phenotype was also evident in
patients with advanced luminal breast cancer. Thus, our findings showed that
CCL5/CCR3 signaling promotes metastasis by inducing Th2 polarization of CD4<U+207A> T
cells, with implications for prognosis and immunotherapy of luminal breast
cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26249173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Immunity. 2015 Aug 18;43(2):354-68. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.07.005. Epub 2015 
Jul 28.

Transcription Factor Bcl11b Controls Identity and Function of Mature Type 2
Innate Lymphoid Cells.

Califano D(1), Cho JJ(2), Uddin MN(2), Lorentsen KJ(2), Yang Q(3), Bhandoola
A(4), Li H(5), Avram D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical Center, 47 New
Scotland Avenue, MC-165, Albany, NY 12208, USA. (2)Center for Immunology and
Microbial Disease, Albany Medical Center, 47 New Scotland Avenue, MC-165, Albany,
NY 12208, USA; Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, 1600 Southwest Archer Road, MSB, Gainesville, FL 32610-0225, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)T-Cell Biology and
Development Section, Laboratory of Genome Integrity, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)Wadsworth Center, New
York State Department of Health, Albany, NY 12208, USA. (6)Center for Immunology 
and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical Center, 47 New Scotland Avenue, MC-165,
Albany, NY 12208, USA; Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, 1600 Southwest Archer Road, MSB, Gainesville, FL 32610-0225, USA.
Electronic address: dorina.avram@medicine.ufl.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2015 Aug 18;43(2):220-2.

Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) promote anti-helminth responses and
contribute to allergies. Here, we report that Bcl11b, previously considered a
T-cell-specific transcription factor, acted directly upstream of the key ILC2
transcription factor Gfi1 to maintain its expression in mature ILC2s.
Consequently, Bcl11b(-/-) ILC2s downregulated Gata3 and downstream genes,
including Il1rl1 (encoding IL-33 receptor), and upregulated Rorc and type 3 ILC
(ILC3) genes. Additionally, independent of Gfi1, Bcl11b directly repressed
expression of the gene encoding the ILC3 transcription factor Ahr, further
contributing to silencing of ILC3 genes in ILC2s. Thus, Bcl11b(-/-) ILC2s lost
their functions and gained ILC3 functions, and although they expanded in response
to the protease allergen papain, they produced ILC3 but not ILC2 cytokines and
caused increased airway infiltration of neutrophils instead of eosinophils. Our
results demonstrate that Bcl11b is more than just a T-cell-only transcription
factor and establish that Bcl11b sustains mature ILC2 genetic and functional
programs and lineage fidelity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4657441 [Available on 2016-08-18]
PMID: 26231117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(4):1430-9.

MiR-495 is a Predictive Biomarker that Downregulates GFI1 Expression in
Medulloblastoma.

Wang C, Yun Z, Zhao T, Liu X, Ma X.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in the expression level of miR-495 were recently observed
in various tumours. Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumour in 
children. However, the clinical significance of miR-495 in medulloblastomas
remains unclear.
METHODS: The expression levels of miR-495 was examined in 62 archival
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) medulloblastoma specimens using TaqMan
Real-time Quantitative PCR arrays. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the
expression of Gfi1 in medulloblastoma tissues, and a luciferase reporter assay
was carried out to confirm whether Gfi1 is a direct target of miR-495.
RESULTS: MiR-495 expression is repressed in medulloblastoma samples compared with
normal cerebellum tissues. Furthermore, patients with a low level of miR- 495
showed significantly poorer survival, as determined by the log-rank test (P =
0.033). The multivariate analysis results showed that the miR-495 expression
levels were an independent predictor of overall survival in medulloblastoma
patients (P = 0.027; hazard ratio = 0.267). Our study provides the first
demonstration that miR-495 directly interacts with the Gfi1 3UTR to regulate
Gfi1 at a post-transcriptional level and that the expression level of miR-495 is 
inversely correlated with the Gfi1 protein level in medulloblastoma specimens.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that miR-495 may be a prognostic predictor in
medulloblastoma and that Gfi1 is a potential functional target of miR-495.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26160036  [PubMed - in process]


18. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun 26;11(6):e1005303. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005303.
eCollection 2015.

Orthodenticle Is Required for the Expression of Principal Recognition Molecules
That Control Axon Targeting in the Drosophila Retina.

Mencarelli C(1), Pichaud F(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.

Parallel processing of neuronal inputs relies on assembling neural circuits into 
distinct synaptic-columns and layers. This is orchestrated by matching
recognition molecules between afferent growth cones and target areas. Controlling
the expression of these molecules during development is crucial but not well
understood. The developing Drosophila visual system is a powerful genetic model
for addressing this question. In this model system, the achromatic R1-6
photoreceptors project their axons in the lamina while the R7 and R8
photoreceptors, which are involved in colour detection, project their axons to
two distinct synaptic-layers in the medulla. Here we show that the conserved
homeodomain transcription factor Orthodenticle (Otd), which in the eye is a main 
regulator of rhodopsin expression, is also required for R1-6 photoreceptor
synaptic-column specific innervation of the lamina. Our data indicate that otd
function in these photoreceptors is largely mediated by the recognition molecules
flamingo (fmi) and golden goal (gogo). In addition, we find that otd regulates
synaptic-layer targeting of R8. We demonstrate that during this process, otd and 
the R8-specific transcription factor senseless/Gfi1 (sens) function as
independent transcriptional inputs that are required for the expression of fmi,
gogo and the adhesion molecule capricious (caps), which govern R8 synaptic-layer 
targeting. Our work therefore demonstrates that otd is a main component of the
gene regulatory network that regulates synaptic-column and layer targeting in the
fly visual system.

PMCID: PMC4482733
PMID: 26114289  [PubMed - in process]


19. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 23;10(6):e0130441. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130441.
eCollection 2015.

Loss of IKKß but Not NF-<U+03BA>B p65 Skews Differentiation towards Myeloid over
Erythroid Commitment and Increases Myeloid Progenitor Self-Renewal and Functional
Long-Term Hematopoietic Stem Cells.

Zhang J(1), Li L(1), Baldwin AS Jr(2), Friedman AD(1), Paz-Priel I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center and Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, United States of America.

NF-<U+03BA>B is an important regulator of both differentiation and function of
lineage-committed hematopoietic cells. Targeted deletion of I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) ß
results in altered cytokine signaling and marked neutrophilia. To investigate the
role of IKKß in regulation of hematopoiesis, we employed Mx1-Cre mediated IKKß
conditional knockout mice. As previously reported, deletion of IKKß in
hematopoietic cells results in neutrophilia, and we now also noted decreased
monocytes and modest anemia. Granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMPs)
accumulated markedly in bone marrow of IKKß deleted mice whereas the proportion
and number of megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitors (MEP) decreased. Accordingly,
we found a significantly reduced frequency of proerythroblasts and basophilic and
polychromatic erythroblasts, and IKKß-deficient bone marrow cells yielded a
significantly decreased number of BFU-E compared to wild type. These changes are 
associated with elevated expression of C/EBPa, Gfi1, and PU.1 and diminished
Gata1, Klf1, and SCL/Tal1 in IKKß deficient Lineage-Sca1+c-Kit+ (LSK) cells. In
contrast, no effect on erythropoiesis or expression of lineage-related
transcription factors was found in marrow lacking NF-<U+03BA>B p65. Bone marrow from
IKKß knockout mice has elevated numbers of phenotypic long and short term
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). A similar increase was observed when IKKß was
deleted after marrow transplantation into a wild type host, indicating cell
autonomous expansion. Myeloid progenitors from IKKß- but not p65-deleted mice
demonstrate increased serial replating in colony-forming assays, indicating
increased cell autonomous self-renewal capacity. In addition, in a competitive
repopulation assay deletion of IKKß resulted in a stable advantage of bone marrow
derived from IKKß knockout mice. In summary, loss of IKKß resulted in significant
effects on hematopoiesis not seen upon NF-<U+03BA>B p65 deletion. These include
increased myeloid and reduced erythroid transcription factors, skewing
differentiation towards myeloid over erythroid differentiation, increased
progenitor self-renewal, and increased number of functional long term HSCs. These
data inform ongoing efforts to develop IKK inhibitors for clinical use.

PMCID: PMC4477978
PMID: 26102347  [PubMed - in process]


20. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2015 Jun;159(2):236-9. doi: 10.1007/s10517-015-2931-8. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

Effects of Immunoregulatory Cytokines (IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15) on Expression of
Gfi1 and U2afll4 Genes in T Cells at Different Stages of Differentiation.

Sokhonevich NA(1), Yurova KA, Gutsol AA, Khaziakhmatova OG, Mazunin IO, Litvinova
LS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology and Cell Technologies, Innovation Park, I. Kant
Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russia.

Opposite effects of common <U+03B3>-chain cytokines (IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15) on the
expression of Gfi1 and U2af1l4 genes regulating alternative splicing of Ptprc
gene in T cells at different stages of differentiation were demonstrated in
vitro. Generally, produced a dose-dependent activating effect on T cells, while
to the effects of rIL-7 and rIL-15 on T cells at different stages of
differentiation were opposite to that of rIL-2: maximum concentrations of
recombinant cytokines IL-7 and IL-15 produced the most pronounced inhibitory
effect on U2af1l4 and to a lesser extent on Gfi1 gene expression, thus limiting
activation of resting cells. This is consistent with their biological effects on 
T cells. In general, common <U+03B3>-chain cytokines IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15 prevent
differentiation of naïve T cells in vitro and limit activation of primed T cells 
in the absence of antigenic stimulus, which can contribute to the formation of
cytokine imbalance.

PMID: 26085358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Development. 2015 Jun 1;142(11):1948-59. doi: 10.1242/dev.119149.

Generation of sensory hair cells by genetic programming with a combination of
transcription factors.

Costa A(1), Sanchez-Guardado L(2), Juniat S(3), Gale JE(3), Daudet N(3), Henrique
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa 1649-028, Portugal. (2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade 
de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa 1649-028, Portugal Champalimaud
Neuroscience Programme, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Avenida Brasilia,
Lisboa 1400-038, Portugal. (3)UCL Ear Institute, University College London, 332
Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8EE, UK. (4)Instituto de Medicina Molecular,
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa 1649-028, Portugal
Champalimaud Neuroscience Programme, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Avenida
Brasilia, Lisboa 1400-038, Portugal henrique@medicina.ulisboa.pt.

Mechanosensory hair cells (HCs) are the primary receptors of our senses of
hearing and balance. Elucidation of the transcriptional networks regulating HC
fate determination and differentiation is crucial not only to understand inner
ear development but also to improve cell replacement therapies for hearing
disorders. Here, we show that combined expression of the transcription factors
Gfi1, Pou4f3 and Atoh1 can induce direct programming towards HC fate, both during
in vitro mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation and following ectopic
expression in chick embryonic otic epithelium. Induced HCs (iHCs) express
numerous HC-specific markers and exhibit polarized membrane protrusions
reminiscent of stereociliary bundles. Transcriptome profiling confirms the
progressive establishment of a HC-specific gene signature during in vitro iHC
programming. Overall, this work provides a novel approach to achieve robust and
highly efficient HC production in vitro, which could be used as a model to study 
HC development and to drive inner ear HC regeneration.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26015538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int J Epidemiol. 2015 Aug;44(4):1224-37. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyv048. Epub 2015 Apr
10.

DNA methylation mediates the effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy on
birthweight of the offspring.

Küpers LK(1), Xu X(2), Jankipersadsing SA(3), Vaez A(4), la Bastide-van Gemert
S(4), Scholtens S(5), Nolte IM(4), Richmond RC(6), Relton CL(6), Felix JF(7),
Duijts L(8), van Meurs JB(9), Tiemeier H(4), Jaddoe VW(7), Wang X(2), Corpeleijn 
E(4), Snieder H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology, l.k.kupers@umcg.nl. (2)Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia, USA. (3)Pulmonology and Genetics, and.
(4)Departments of Epidemiology. (5)Departments of Epidemiology, LifeLines Cohort 
Study, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (6)MRC
Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. (7)Departments
of Epidemiology, Pediatrics, The Generation R Study Group and. (8)Departments of 
Epidemiology, Pediatrics. (9)Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: We examined whether the effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy
on birthweight of the offspring was mediated by smoking-induced changes to DNA
methylation in cord blood.
METHODS: First, we used cord blood of 129 Dutch children exposed to maternal
smoking vs 126 unexposed to maternal and paternal smoking (53% male)
participating in the GECKO Drenthe birth cohort. DNA methylation was measured
using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 Beadchip. We performed an epigenome-wide
association study for the association between maternal smoking and methylation
followed by a mediation analysis of the top signals [false-discovery rate
(FDR)<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05]. We adjusted both analyses for maternal age, education,
pre-pregnancy BMI, offspring's sex, gestational age and white blood cell
composition. Secondly, in 175 exposed and 1248 unexposed newborns from two
independent birth cohorts, we replicated and meta-analysed results of eight
cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites in the GFI1 gene, which showed the most
robust mediation. Finally, we performed functional network and enrichment
analysis.
RESULTS: We found 35 differentially methylated CpGs (FDR<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in newborns
exposed vs unexposed to smoking, of which 23 survived Bonferroni correction
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)). These 23 CpGs mapped to eight genes: AHRR, GFI1, MYO1G, CYP1A1,
NEUROG1, CNTNAP2, FRMD4A and LRP5. We observed partial confirmation as three of
the eight CpGs in GFI1 replicated. These CpGs partly mediated the effect of
maternal smoking on birthweight (Sobel P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in meta-analysis of GECKO and
the two replication cohorts. Differential methylation of these three GFI1 CpGs
explained 12-19% of the 202 g lower birthweight in smoking mothers. Functional
enrichment analysis pointed towards activation of cell-mediated immunity.
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal smoking during pregnancy was associated with cord blood
methylation differences. We observed a potentially mediating role of methylation 
in the association between maternal smoking during pregnancy and birthweight of
the offspring. Functional network analysis suggested a role in activating the
immune system.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
International Epidemiological Association.

PMCID: PMC4588868
PMID: 25862628  [PubMed - in process]


23. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):e0121730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121730.
eCollection 2015.

Gene expression profiles associated with pediatric relapsed AML.

Bachas C(1), Schuurhuis GJ(2), Zwaan CM(3), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(3), den
Boer ML(3), de Bont ES(4), Kwidama ZJ(5), Reinhardt D(6), Creutzig U(6), de Haas 
V(7), Kaspers GJ(8), Cloos J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Hematology, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Hematology, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC/Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Division of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (6)AML-BFM Study Group,
Department of Pediatric Hematology/ Oncology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, 
Germany. (7)Dutch Childhood Oncology Group (DCOG), The Hague, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Dutch Childhood Oncology Group (DCOG), The Hague, The
Netherlands.

Development of relapse remains a problem for further improvements in the survival
of pediatric AML patients. While virtually all patients show a good response to
initial treatment, more patients respond poorly when treated at relapse. The
cellular characteristics of leukemic blast cells that allow survival of initial
treatment, relapse development and subsequent resistance to salvage treatment
remain largely elusive. Therefore, we studied if leukemic blasts at relapse
biologically resemble their initial diagnosis counterparts. We performed
microarray gene expression profiling on paired initial and relapse samples of 23 
pediatric AML patients. In 11 out of 23 patients, gene expression profiles of
initial and corresponding relapse samples end up in different clusters in
unsupervised analysis, indicating altered gene expression profiles. In addition, 
shifts in type I/II mutational status were found in 5 of these 11 patients, while
shifts were found in 3 of the remaining 12 patients. Although differentially
expressed genes varied between patients, they were commonly related to
hematopoietic differentiation, encompassed genes involved in chromatin remodeling
and showed associations with similar transcription factors. The top five were
CEBPA, GFI1, SATB1, KLF2 and TBP. In conclusion, the leukemic blasts at relapse
are biologically different from their diagnosis counterparts. These differences
may be exploited for further development of novel treatment strategies.

PMCID: PMC4388534
PMID: 25849371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(4):558-66. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1017154. Epub
2015 Feb 26.

Radioresistance in a human laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cell line is
associated with DNA methylation changes and topoisomerase II a.

Kim JS(1), Kim SY, Lee M, Kim SH, Kim SM, Kim EJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Radiation Cancer Research; Korea Institute of Radiological &
Medical Sciences ; Seoul , Korea.

Accumulating evidence suggests that changes in methylation patterns may help
mediate the sensitivity or resistance of cancer cells to ionizing radiation. The 
present study provides evidence for the involvement of radioresistance-induced
DNA methylation changes in tumor radioresistance. We established radioresistant
laryngeal cancer cells via long-term fractionated irradiation, and examined
differences in DNA methylation between control and radioresistant laryngeal
cancer cells. Interestingly, we found that the promoter-CpG islands of 5
previously identified radioresistance-related genes (TOPO2A, PLXDC2, ETNK2, GFI1,
and IL12B) were significantly altered in the radioresistant laryngeal cancer
cells. Furthermore, the demethylation of these gene promoters with a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine) increased their
transcription levels. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine also sensitized the
radioresistant laryngeal cancer cells to irradiation, indicating that changes in 
DNA methylation contributed to their radioresistance. Of the tested genes, the
expression and activity levels of TOPO2A were tightly associated with the
radioresistant phenotype in our system, suggesting that the hypermethylation of
TOPO2A might be involved in this radioresistance. Collectively, our data suggest 
that radiation-induced epigenetic changes can modulate the radioresistance of
laryngeal cancer cells, and thus may prove useful as prognostic indicators for
radiotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4622512
PMID: 25719218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Feb 5;9:26. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00026. eCollection 
2015.

Opportunities and limits of the one gene approach: the ability of Atoh1 to
differentiate and maintain hair cells depends on the molecular context.

Jahan I(1), Pan N(1), Fritzsch B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa Iowa City, IA, USA.

Atoh1 (Math1) was the first gene discovered in ear development that showed no
hair cell (HC) differentiation when absent and could induce HC differentiation
when misexpressed. These data implied that Atoh1 was both necessary and
sufficient for hair cell development. However, other gene mutations also result
in loss of initially forming HCs, notably null mutants for Pou4f3, Barhl1, and
Gfi1. HC development and maintenance also depend on the expression of other genes
(Sox2, Eya1, Gata3, Pax2) and several genes have been identified that can induce 
HCs when misexpressed (Jag1) or knocked out (Lmo4). In the ear Atoh1 is not only 
expressed in HCs but also in some supporting cells and neurons that do not
differentiate into HCs. Simple removal of one gene, Neurod1, can de-repress Atoh1
and turns those neurons into HCs suggesting that Neurod1 blocks Atoh1 function in
neurons. Atoh1 expression in inner pillar cells may also be blocked by too many
Hes/Hey factors but conversion into HCs has only partially been achieved through 
Hes/Hey removal. Detailed analysis of cell cycle exit confirmed an apex to base
cell cycle exit progression of HCs of the organ of Corti. In contrast, Atoh1
expression progresses from the base toward the apex with a variable delay
relative to the cell cycle exit. Most HCs exit the cell cycle and are thus
defined as precursors before Atoh1 is expressed. Atoh1 is a potent
differentiation factor but can differentiate and maintain HCs only in the ear and
when other factors are co-expressed. Upstream factors are essential to regulate
Atoh1 level of expression duration while downstream, co-activated by other
factors, will define the context of Atoh1 action. We suggest that these insights 
need to be taken into consideration and approaches beyond the simple Atoh1
expression need to be designed able to generate the radial and longitudinal
variations in hair cell types for normal function of the organ of Corti.

PMCID: PMC4318345
PMID: 25698932  [PubMed]


26. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Apr 15;24(8):2201-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu739. Epub 2014 Dec 
30.

Prenatal exposure to maternal smoking and offspring DNA methylation across the
lifecourse: findings from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children
(ALSPAC).

Richmond RC(1), Simpkin AJ(1), Woodward G(1), Gaunt TR(1), Lyttleton O(1),
McArdle WL(1), Ring SM(1), Smith AD(1), Timpson NJ(1), Tilling K(1), Davey Smith 
G(1), Relton CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit (IEU), School of Social and Community
Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2BN, UK and. (2)MRC Integrative
Epidemiology Unit (IEU), School of Social and Community Medicine, University of
Bristol, Bristol BS8 2BN, UK and Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK caroline.relton@bristol.ac.uk.

Maternal smoking during pregnancy has been found to influence newborn DNA
methylation in genes involved in fundamental developmental processes. It is
pertinent to understand the degree to which the offspring methylome is sensitive 
to the intensity and duration of prenatal smoking. An investigation of the
persistence of offspring methylation associated with maternal smoking and the
relative roles of the intrauterine and postnatal environment is also warranted.
In the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, we investigated
associations between prenatal exposure to maternal smoking and offspring DNA
methylation at multiple time points in approximately 800 mother-offspring pairs. 
In cord blood, methylation at 15 CpG sites in seven gene regions (AHRR, MYO1G,
GFI1, CYP1A1, CNTNAP2, KLF13 and ATP9A) was associated with maternal smoking, and
a dose-dependent response was observed in relation to smoking duration and
intensity. Longitudinal analysis of blood DNA methylation in serial samples at
birth, age 7 and 17 years demonstrated that some CpG sites showed reversibility
of methylation (GFI1, KLF13 and ATP9A), whereas others showed persistently
perturbed patterns (AHRR, MYO1G, CYP1A1 and CNTNAP2). Of those showing
persistence, we explored the effect of postnatal smoke exposure and found that
the major contribution to altered methylation was attributed to a critical window
of in utero exposure. A comparison of paternal and maternal smoking and offspring
methylation showed consistently stronger maternal associations, providing further
evidence for causal intrauterine mechanisms. These findings emphasize the
sensitivity of the methylome to maternal smoking during early development and the
long-term impact of such exposure.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4380069
PMID: 25552657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 28;588(23):4513-9.

The transcription factor GFI1 negatively regulates NLRP3 inflammasome activation 
in macrophages.

Zhu L(1), Meng Q, Liang S, Ma Y, Li R, Li G, Zeng H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious
Diseases, Beijing, China.

Interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) secretion downstream of Toll-like receptor (TLR)
activation is tightly controlled at the transcriptional and post-translational
levels. NLRP3 inflammasome is involved in the maturation of pro-IL-1ß, with NLRP3
expression identified as the limiting factor for inflammasome activation.
Previously, we had demonstrated that the zinc-finger protein GFI1 inhibits
pro-IL-1ß transcription. Here, we show that GFI1 inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome
activation and IL-1ß secretion in macrophages. GFI1 suppressed Nlrp3
transcription via two mechanisms: (1) by binding to the Gli-responsive element 1 
(GRE1) in the Nlrp3 promoter; and (2) by antagonizing the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) transcriptional activity. Thus, GFI1 negatively regulates TLR-mediated
IL-1ß production at both transcriptional and post-translational levels.

PMID: 25447538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Feb;87(2):162-73. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.094672. Epub 2014 Nov 
14.

The inverse agonist DG172 triggers a PPARß/d-independent myeloid lineage shift
and promotes GM-CSF/IL-4-induced dendritic cell differentiation.

Lieber S(1), Scheer F(1), Finkernagel F(1), Meissner W(1), Giehl G(1), Brendel
C(1), Diederich WE(1), Müller-Brüsselbach S(1), Müller R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (S.L., F.F., 
W.M., S.M.-B., R.M.); Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (F.S.,
W.E.D.); and Clinic for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology (G.G., C.B.); Center 
for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (S.L., F.F., 
W.M., S.M.-B., R.M.); Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Center for Tumor
Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany (F.S.,
W.E.D.); and Clinic for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology (G.G., C.B.); Center 
for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Marburg, Germany
rmueller@imt.uni-marburg.de.

The stilbene derivative
(Z)-2-(2-bromophenyl)-3-{[4-(1-methylpiperazine)amino]phenyl}acrylonitrile
(DG172) was developed as a highly selective inhibitory peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)ß/d ligand. Here, we describe a novel
PPARß/d-independent, yet highly specific, effect of DG172 on the differentiation 
of bone marrow cells (BMCs). DG172 strongly augmented
granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced differentiation
of primary BMCs from Ppard null mice into two specific populations, characterized
as mature (CD11c(hi)MHCII(hi)) and immature (CD11c(hi)MHCII(lo)) dendritic cells 
(DCs). IL-4 synergized with DG172 to shift the differentiation from MHCII(lo)
cells to mature DCs in vitro. The promotion of DC differentiation occurred at the
expense of differentiation to granulocytic Gr1(+)Ly6B(+) cells. In agreement with
these findings, transcriptome analyses showed a strong DG172-mediated repression 
of genes encoding neutrophilic markers in both differentiating wild-type and
Ppard null cells, while macrophage/DC marker genes were up-regulated. DG172 also 
inhibited the expression of transcription factors driving granulocytic
differentiation (Cebpe, Gfi1, and Klf5), and increased the levels of
transcription factors promoting macrophage/DC differentiation (Irf4, Irf8, Spib, 
and Spic). DG172 exerted these effects only at an early stage of BMC
differentiation induced by GM-CSF, did not affect macrophage-colony-stimulating
factor-triggered differentiation to macrophages and had no detectable
PPARß/d-independent effect on other cell types tested. Structure-function
analyses demonstrated that the 4-methylpiperazine moiety in DG172 is required for
its effect on DC differentiation, but is dispensable for PPARß/d binding. Based
on these data we developed a new compound,
(Z)-2-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-[4-(4-methylpiperazine-1-yl)phenyl]acrylonitrile
(DG228), which enhances DC differentiation in the absence of significant PPARß/d 
binding.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25398837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. FASEB J. 2015 Mar;29(3):786-95. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-254284. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

The transcriptional corepressor MTGR1 regulates intestinal secretory lineage
allocation.

Parang B(1), Rosenblatt D(1), Williams AD(1), Washington MK(1), Revetta F(1),
Short SP(1), Reddy VK(1), Hunt A(1), Shroyer NF(1), Engel ME(1), Hiebert SW(1),
Williams CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Departments of Cancer
Biology, Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, and Biochemistry, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Department of Biology, Lipscomb
University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Division of Pediatrics-Gastroenterology,
Baylor University School of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA; Division of Pediatric 
Hematology/Oncology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah; and **Vanderbilt
Ingram Cancer Center, Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Health Care System,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (2)*Department of Medicine, Division of
Gastroenterology, Departments of Cancer Biology, Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, and Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA;
Department of Biology, Lipscomb University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA; Division
of Pediatrics-Gastroenterology, Baylor University School of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, USA; Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah; and **Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Veterans Affairs,
Tennessee Valley Health Care System, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
christopher.williams@vanderbilt.edu.

Notch signaling largely determines intestinal epithelial cell fate. High Notch
activity drives progenitors toward absorptive enterocytes by repressing secretory
differentiation programs, whereas low Notch permits secretory cell assignment.
Myeloid translocation gene-related 1 (MTGR1) is a transcriptional corepressor in 
the myeloid translocation gene/Eight-Twenty-One family. Given that Mtgr1(-/-)
mice have a dramatic reduction of intestinal epithelial secretory cells, we
hypothesized that MTGR1 is a key repressor of Notch signaling. In support of
this, transcriptome analysis of laser capture microdissected Mtgr1(-/-)
intestinal crypts revealed Notch activation, and secretory markers Mucin2,
Chromogranin A, and Growth factor-independent 1 (Gfi1) were down-regulated in
Mtgr1(-/-) whole intestines and Mtgr1(-/-) enteroids. We demonstrate that MTGR1
is in a complex with Suppressor of Hairless Homolog, a key Notch effector, and
represses Notch-induced Hairy/Enhancer of Split 1 activity. Moreover,
pharmacologic Notch inhibition using a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor (GSI) rescued the
hyperproliferative baseline phenotype in the Mtgr1(-/-) intestine and increased
production of goblet and enteroendocrine lineages in Mtgr1(-/-) mice. GSI
increased Paneth cell production in wild-type mice but failed to do so in
Mtgr1(-/-) mice. We determined that MTGR1 can interact with GFI1, a
transcriptional corepressor required for Paneth cell differentiation, and repress
GFI1 targets. Overall, the data suggest that MTGR1, a transcriptional corepressor
well characterized in hematopoiesis, plays a critical role in intestinal lineage 
allocation.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4763883
PMID: 25398765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Environ Health Perspect. 2015 Feb;123(2):193-9. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1408614. Epub
2014 Oct 17.

Prenatal exposure to maternal cigarette smoking and DNA methylation:
epigenome-wide association in a discovery sample of adolescents and replication
in an independent cohort at birth through 17 years of age.

Lee KW(1), Richmond R, Hu P, French L, Shin J, Bourdon C, Reischl E, Waldenberger
M, Zeilinger S, Gaunt T, McArdle W, Ring S, Woodward G, Bouchard L, Gaudet D,
Smith GD, Relton C, Paus T, Pausova Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal exposure to maternal cigarette smoking (prenatal smoke
exposure) had been associated with altered DNA methylation (DNAm) at birth.
OBJECTIVE: We examined whether such alterations are present from birth through
adolescence.
METHODS: We used the Infinium HumanMethylation450K BeadChip to search across
473,395 CpGs for differential DNAm associated with prenatal smoke exposure during
adolescence in a discovery cohort (n = 132) and at birth, during childhood, and
during adolescence in a replication cohort (n = 447).
RESULTS: In the discovery cohort, we found five CpGs in MYO1G (top-ranking CpG:
cg12803068, p = 3.3 × 10-11) and CNTNAP2 (cg25949550, p = 4.0 × 10-9) to be
differentially methylated between exposed and nonexposed individuals during
adolescence. The CpGs in MYO1G and CNTNAP2 were associated, respectively, with
higher and lower DNAm in exposed versus nonexposed adolescents. The same CpGs
were differentially methylated at birth, during childhood, and during adolescence
in the replication cohort. In both cohorts and at all developmental time points, 
the differential DNAm was in the same direction and of a similar magnitude, and
was not altered appreciably by adjustment for current smoking by the participants
or their parents. In addition, four of the five EWAS (epigenome-wide association 
study)-significant CpGs in the adolescent discovery cohort were also among the
top sites of differential methylation in a previous birth cohort, and
differential methylation of CpGs in CYP1A1, AHRR, and GFI1 observed in that study
was also evident in our discovery cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that modifications of DNAm associated with
prenatal maternal smoking may persist in exposed offspring for many years-at
least until adolescence.

PMCID: PMC4314251
PMID: 25325234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2015 Jan;62(1):103-8. doi: 10.1002/pbc.25251. Epub 2014 Oct
4.

Genetic analysis and clinical picture of severe congenital neutropenia in Israel.

Lebel A(1), Yacobovich J, Krasnov T, Koren A, Levin C, Kaplinsky C, Ravel-Vilk S,
Laor R, Attias D, Ben Barak A, Shtager D, Stein J, Kuperman A, Miskin H, Dgany O,
Giri N, Alter BP, Tamary H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics B, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel,
Petach Tikva, Israel and Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The relative frequency of mutated genes among patients with severe
congenital neutropenia (SCN) may differ between various ethnic groups. To date,
few population-based genetic studies have been reported. This study describes the
genetic analysis of 32 Israeli patients with SCN.
PROCEDURES: Clinical data were retrieved from the prospective Israeli Inherited
Bone Marrow Failure Registry. Recruitment included living and deceased patients
who were diagnosed between 1982 and 2012, for whom molecular diagnosis was
performed. ELANE, HAX1 and G6PC3 genes were sequenced in all patients, and GFI-1 
and WAS genes were sequenced if other genes were wildtype.
RESULTS: Eleven patients (34%) had heterozygous mutations in ELANE (10 kindreds),
eight (25%) had homozygous mutations in G6PC3 (5 kindreds) and 13 (41%) had no
detected mutations. No patients had mutations in HAX1 or WAS. Four of the eight
patients with G6PC3 mutations had congenital anomalies. The probability of
survival for all patients was 50% at age of 18. Deaths were mainly due to sepsis 
(5 patients, 4/5 not responding to G-CSF, none with G6PC3 mutation). Two patients
developed acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and one myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS), none with G6PC3 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a unique pattern of SCN mutations in Israel with homozygous
G6PC3 mutations in eight (25%) patients, the highest frequency described so far. 
HAX1 mutations, reported mainly in Sweden and Iran, were absent. Patients with
G6PC3 mutations had congenital anomalies, appeared to have a better response to
G-CSF, and so far have not developed AML or MDS.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25284454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 29;9(9):e108160. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108160.
eCollection 2014.

Activated notch causes deafness by promoting a supporting cell phenotype in
developing auditory hair cells.

Savoy-Burke G(1), Gilels FA(2), Pan W(3), Pratt D(1), Que J(4), Gan L(5), White
PM(2), Kiernan AE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York, United States of America. (2)Department of Neurobiology and 
Anatomy, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United
States of America. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America; Department of
Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York,
United States of America. (4)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York, United States of America; Department of Neurobiology and
Anatomy, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United
States of America.

PURPOSE: To determine whether activated Notch can promote a supporting cell fate 
during sensory cell differentiation in the inner ear.
METHODS: An activated form of the Notch1 receptor (NICD) was expressed in early
differentiating hair cells using a Gfi1-Cre mouse allele. To determine the
effects of activated Notch on developing hair cells, Gfi1-NICD animals and their 
littermate controls were assessed at 5 weeks for hearing by measuring auditory
brainstem responses (ABRs) and distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs).
The differentiation of NICD-expressing hair cells was assessed at postnatal day
(P) 6, 11 and 20, using histological and molecular markers for hair cells, as
well as supporting cells/progenitor cells. We also examined whether the effects
of Notch were mediated by SOX2, a gene expressed in supporting cells and a likely
downstream target of Notch, by crossing an inducible form of SOX2 to the
Gfi1-Cre.
RESULTS: Activation of Notch1 in developing auditory hair cells causes profound
deafness. The NICD-expressing hair cells switch off a number of hair cell markers
and lose their characteristic morphology. Instead, NICD-expressing hair cells
adopt a morphology resembling supporting cells and upregulate a number of
supporting cell markers. These effects do not appear to be mediated by SOX2,
because although expression of SOX2 caused some hearing impairment, the
SOX2-expressing hair cells did not downregulate hair cell markers nor exhibit a
supporting cell-like phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that Notch signaling inhibits hair cell
differentiation and promotes a supporting cell-like phenotype, and that these
effects are unlikely to be mediated by SOX2.

PMCID: PMC4180070
PMID: 25264928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:15-44. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-9487-9_2.

TH1/TH2 cell differentiation and molecular signals.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y, Gu W, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China.

Erratum in
    Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;841:E1-2.

The distinctive differentiated states of the CD4+ T helper cells are determined
by the set of transcription factors and the genes transcribed by the
transcription factors. In vitro induction models, the major determinants of the
cytokines present during the T-cell receptor (TCR)-mediated activation process.
IL-12 and IFN-<U+03B3> make Naive CD4+ T cells highly express T-bet and STAT4 and
differentiate to TH1 cells, while IL-4 make Naive CD4+ T cells highly express
STAT6 and GATA3 and differentiated to TH2 cells. Even through T-bet and GATA3 are
master regulators for TH1/TH2 cells differentiation. There are many other
transcription factors, such as RUNX family proteins, IRF4, Dec2, Gfi1, Hlx, and
JunB that can impair TH1/TH2 cells differentiation. In recent years, noncoding
RNAs (microRNA and long noncoding RNA) join in the crowd. The leukocytes should
migrate to the right place to show their impact. There are some successful
strategies, which are revealed to targeting chemokines and their receptors, that 
have been developed to treat human immune-related diseases.

PMID: 25261203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Cell. 2014 Aug 11;26(2):160-1. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.07.021.

When deletions gain functions: commandeering epigenetic mechanisms.

Chen J(1), Weiss WA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology, Pediatrics, Neurosurgery, and Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (2)Departments of Neurology, Pediatrics, Neurosurgery, 
and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address:
waweiss@gmail.com.

Comment on
    Nature. 2014 Jul 24;511(7510):428-34.

Recurrent chromosomal deletions in cancer are typically thought to harbor tumor
suppressors. In a recent publication in Nature, Northcott and colleagues identify
a novel region of structural variation in medulloblastoma that leads to oncogenic
activation of GFI1B and GFI1 by repositioning these genes next to
super-enhancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4134099
PMID: 25117708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Anticancer Res. 2014 Aug;34(8):4539-50.

Multicolor analysis of cell surface marker of human leukemia cell lines using
flow cytometry.

Inoue T(1), Swain A(2), Nakanishi Y(3), Sugiyama D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development of Next-Generation Medicine, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
yokotomo@hsc.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp ds-mons@yb3.so-net.ne.jp. (2)Department of
Research and Development of Next-Generation Medicine, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Center for Clinical and
Translational Research, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia cell lines are utilized as tools for molecular analysis.
Their implementation in therapy will require standards for quality control,
including appropriate selection criteria for functional analysis and efficacy
determination.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Characteristics of six human leukemia cell lines
-Kasumi-1, NB-4, MOLM-13, MV-4-11, K562, and Jurkat cells-were investigated using
multiple color analysis of surface antigen expression and comparative analysis of
gene expression.
RESULTS: Differentiation states of Kasumi-1 and MOLM-13 cells are colony-forming 
units-granulocyte/macrophage equivalent cells to myeloblasts with comparatively
high Growth factor independent-1(GFI1) and Transcription factor PU.1 (PU.1)
expression, respectively. NB4 and MV-4-11 express high levels of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha (CEBPa) and differentiate from myeloblasts
to pro-monocytes and myeloblasts, respectively. K562 cells are colony-forming
units-erythroid equivalent cells to erythroblasts, with the highest expression of
GATA-binding factor 2 (GATA2), GATA1 and Friend of gata-1 (FOG1). Jurkat cells
are pro-T to mature T-cells with the highest Neurogenic locus notch-1 homolog
protein 1 (NOTCH1) expression.
CONCLUSION: Our study gives a useful guideline of standards for appropriate usage
of leukemia cell lines for examining novel targets in vitro.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25075097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Blood. 2014 Sep 4;124(10):1586-96. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-02-556522. Epub 2014
Jul 22.

Gfi-1 regulates the erythroid transcription factor network through Id2 repression
in murine hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Kim W(1), Klarmann KD(1), Keller JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Mouse Cancer and
Genetics Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick,
MD.

Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi-1) is a part of the transcriptional network
that regulates the development of adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. 
Gfi-1-null (Gfi-1(-/-)) mice have reduced numbers of hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs), impaired radioprotective function of hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPCs), and myeloid and erythroid hyperplasia. We found that the development of
HPCs and erythropoiesis, but not HSC function, was rescued by reducing the
expression of inhibitor of DNA-binding protein 2 (Id2) in Gfi-1(-/-) mice.
Analysis of Gfi-1(-/-);Id2(+/-) mice revealed that short-term HSCs, common
myeloid progenitors (CMPs), erythroid burst-forming units, colony-forming units
in spleen, and more differentiated red cells were partially restored by reducing 
Id2 levels in Gfi-1(-/-) mice. Moreover, short-term reconstituting cells, and, to
a greater extent, CMP and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor development, and red
blood cell production (anemia) were rescued in mice transplanted with
Gfi-1(-/-);Id2(+/-) bone marrow cells (BMCs) in comparison with Gfi-1(-/-) BMCs. 
Reduction of Id2 expression in Gfi-1(-/-) mice increased the expression of Gata1,
Eklf, and EpoR, which are required for proper erythropoiesis. Reducing the levels
of other Id family members (Id1 and Id3) in Gfi-1(-/-) mice did not rescue
impaired HPC function or erythropoiesis. These data provide new evidence that
Gfi-1 is linked to the erythroid gene regulatory network by repressing Id2
expression.

PMCID: PMC4155270
PMID: 25051963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nature. 2014 Jul 24;511(7510):428-34. doi: 10.1038/nature13379. Epub 2014 Jun 22.

Enhancer hijacking activates GFI1 family oncogenes in medulloblastoma.

Northcott PA(1), Lee C(2), Zichner T(3), Stütz AM(4), Erkek S(5), Kawauchi D(6), 
Shih DJ(7), Hovestadt V(8), Zapatka M(8), Sturm D(6), Jones DT(6), Kool M(6),
Remke M(7), Cavalli FM(7), Zuyderduyn S(9), Bader GD(9), VandenBerg S(10),
Esparza LA(11), Ryzhova M(12), Wang W(8), Wittmann A(6), Stark S(6), Sieber L(6),
Seker-Cin H(6), Linke L(6), Kratochwil F(6), Jäger N(13), Buchhalter I(13),
Imbusch CD(14), Zipprich G(14), Raeder B(4), Schmidt S(15), Diessl N(15), Wolf
S(15), Wiemann S(15), Brors B(13), Lawerenz C(14), Eils J(14), Warnatz HJ(16),
Risch T(16), Yaspo ML(16), Weber UD(8), Bartholomae CC(17), von Kalle C(18),
Turányi E(19), Hauser P(20), Sanden E(21), Darabi A(21), Siesjö P(21), Sterba
J(22), Zitterbart K(22), Sumerauer D(23), van Sluis P(24), Versteeg R(24),
Volckmann R(24), Koster J(24), Schuhmann MU(25), Ebinger M(25), Grimes HL(26),
Robinson GW(27), Gajjar A(28), Mynarek M(29), von Hoff K(29), Rutkowski S(29),
Pietsch T(30), Scheurlen W(31), Felsberg J(32), Reifenberger G(32), Kulozik
AE(33), von Deimling A(34), Witt O(33), Eils R(35), Gilbertson RJ(27), Korshunov 
A(34), Taylor MD(36), Lichter P(37), Korbel JO(38), Wechsler-Reya RJ(11), Pfister
SM(39).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2]. (2)1] Biomedical Sciences
Graduate Program, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La
Jolla, California 92093-0685, USA [2] Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program,
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA [3]. (3)1] European Molecular Biology Laboratory
(EMBL), Genome Biology Unit, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg 69117, Germany [2].
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology Unit,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg 69117, Germany. (5)1] Division of Pediatric
Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL),
Genome Biology Unit, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg 69117, Germany. (6)Division of
Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer
Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (7)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumor
Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada. (8)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(9)The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada. (10)Department of Pathology, University of California
San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. (11)Tumor
Initiation and Maintenance Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute,
10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. (12)Department of
Neuropathology, NN Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute, 4th Tverskaya-Yamskaya 16,
Moscow 125047, Russia. (13)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(14)Data Management Facility, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (15)Genomics and Proteomics Core
Facility, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (16)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73, Berlin 14195, Germany.
(17)Division of Translational Oncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and 
National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, Heidelberg
69120, Germany. (18)1] Division of Translational Oncology, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im Neuenheimer Feld
460, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] Heidelberg Center for Personalised Oncology
(DKFZ-HIPO), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (19)1st
Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis University
SE, II.sz. Gyermekklinika, Budapest 1094, Hungary. (20)2nd Department of
Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, SE, II.sz. Gyermekklinika, Budapest 1094,
Hungary. (21)1] Glioma Immunotherapy Group, Division of Neurosurgery, Lund
University, Paradisgatan 2, Lund 221 00, Sweden [2] Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Paradisgatan 2, Lund 221 00, Sweden. (22)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Masaryk University and University Hospital, Brno, Cernopolni 
9 Brno 613 00, Czech Republic. (23)Department of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital
Motol, V Úvalu 84, Prague 150 06, Czech Republic. (24)Department of Oncogenomics,
AMC, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105, AZ Netherlands.
(25)Department of Neurosurgery, Tübingen University Hospital, Hoppe-Seyler
Strasse 3, Tübingen 72076, Germany. (26)Division of Immunobiology, Program in
Cancer Pathology of the Divisions of Experimental Hematology and Pathology,
Program in Hematologic Malignancies of the Cancer and Blood Disease Insitute,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati,
Ohio 452229, USA. (27)1] Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105,
USA [2] Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny
Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. (28)Department of Oncology, St Jude 
Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105,
USA. (29)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, Hamburg 20246, Germany.
(30)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, Bonn
53105, Germany. (31)Cnopf'sche Kinderklinik, Nürnberg Children's Hospital,
St-Johannis-Mühlgasse 19, Nürnberg 90419, Germany. (32)Department of
Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Moorenstrasse 5, Düsseldorf
40225, Germany. (33)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology & Immunology,
Heidelberg University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, Heidelberg 69120,
Germany. (34)Department of Neuropathology, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 220, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (35)1] Division of Theoretical
Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] Heidelberg Center for Personalised Oncology
(DKFZ-HIPO), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (36)1] The
Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumor Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada [2] Division of
Neurosurgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto,
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada. (37)1] Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2]
Heidelberg Center for Personalised Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (38)1] European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL),
Genome Biology Unit, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg 69117, Germany [2] EMBL,
European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,
Hinxton, Saffron Walden CB10 1SD, UK. (39)1] Division of Pediatric Neurooncology,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, 
Germany [2] Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology & Immunology, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Aug 11;26(2):160-1.

Medulloblastoma is a highly malignant paediatric brain tumour currently treated
with a combination of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, posing a considerable 
burden of toxicity to the developing child. Genomics has illuminated the
extensive intertumoral heterogeneity of medulloblastoma, identifying four
distinct molecular subgroups. Group 3 and group 4 subgroup medulloblastomas
account for most paediatric cases; yet, oncogenic drivers for these subtypes
remain largely unidentified. Here we describe a series of prevalent, highly
disparate genomic structural variants, restricted to groups 3 and 4, resulting in
specific and mutually exclusive activation of the growth factor independent 1
family proto-oncogenes, GFI1 and GFI1B. Somatic structural variants juxtapose
GFI1 or GFI1B coding sequences proximal to active enhancer elements, including
super-enhancers, instigating oncogenic activity. Our results, supported by
evidence from mouse models, identify GFI1 and GFI1B as prominent medulloblastoma 
oncogenes and implicate 'enhancer hijacking' as an efficient mechanism driving
oncogene activation in a childhood cancer.

PMCID: PMC4201514
PMID: 25043047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nature. 2014 Jul 17;511(7509):312-8. doi: 10.1038/nature13547. Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Reprogramming human endothelial cells to haematopoietic cells requires vascular
induction.

Sandler VM(1), Lis R(2), Liu Y(1), Kedem A(2), James D(2), Elemento O(3), Butler 
JM(1), Scandura JM(4), Rafii S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ansary Stem Cell Institute, Department of Genetic Medicine, and Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA. 
(2)1] Ansary Stem Cell Institute, Department of Genetic Medicine, and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
10065, USA [2] Ronald O. Perelman and Claudia Cohen Center for Reproductive
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA. (3)HRH
Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational
Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Hematology-Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical College and
the New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2014 Jul 17;511(7509):301-2.

Generating engraftable human haematopoietic cells from autologous tissues is a
potential route to new therapies for blood diseases. However, directed
differentiation of pluripotent stem cells yields haematopoietic cells that
engraft poorly. Here, we have devised a method to phenocopy the vascular-niche
microenvironment of haemogenic cells, thereby enabling reprogramming of human
endothelial cells into engraftable haematopoietic cells without transition
through a pluripotent intermediate. Highly purified non-haemogenic human
umbilical vein endothelial cells or adult dermal microvascular endothelial cells 
were transduced with the transcription factors FOSB, GFI1, RUNX1 and SPI1
(hereafter referred to as FGRS), and then propagated on serum-free instructive
vascular niche monolayers to induce outgrowth of haematopoietic colonies
containing cells with functional and immunophenotypic features of multipotent
progenitor cells (MPPs). These endothelial cells that have been reprogrammed into
human MPPs (rEC-hMPPs) acquire colony-forming-cell potential and durably engraft 
into immune-deficient mice after primary and secondary transplantation, producing
long-term rEC-hMPP-derived myeloid (granulocytic/monocytic, erythroid,
megakaryocytic) and lymphoid (natural killer and B cell) progenies. Conditional
expression of FGRS transgenes, combined with vascular induction, activates
endogenous FGRS genes, endowing rEC-hMPPs with a transcriptional and functional
profile similar to that of self-renewing MPPs. Our approach underscores the role 
of inductive cues from the vascular niche in coordinating and sustaining
haematopoietic specification and may prove useful for engineering autologous
haematopoietic grafts to treat inherited and acquired blood disorders.

PMCID: PMC4159670
PMID: 25030167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Front Oncol. 2014 May 15;4:109. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00109. eCollection 2014.

Genetic Modeling of PIM Proteins in Cancer: Proviral Tagging and Cooperation with
Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor Genes, and Carcinogens.

Aguirre E(1), Renner O(1), Narlik-Grassow M(1), Blanco-Aparicio C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Section, Experimental Therapeutics Programme, Spanish National Cancer 
Research Centre (CNIO) , Madrid , Spain.

The PIM proteins, which were initially discovered as proviral insertion sites in 
Moloney-murine leukemia virus infection, are a family of highly homologous
serine/threonine kinases that have been reported to be overexpressed in
hematological malignancies and solid tumors. The PIM proteins have also been
associated with metastasis and overall treatment responses and implicated in the 
regulation of apoptosis, metabolism, the cell cycle, and homing and migration,
which makes these proteins interesting targets for anti-cancer drug discovery.
The use of retroviral insertional mutagenesis and refined approaches such as
complementation tagging has allowed the identification of myc, pim, and a third
group of genes (including bmi1 and gfi1) as complementing genes in
lymphomagenesis. Moreover, mouse modeling of human cancer has provided an
understanding of the molecular pathways that are involved in tumor initiation and
progression at the physiological level. In particular, genetically modified mice 
have allowed researchers to further elucidate the role of each of the Pim
isoforms in various tumor types. PIM kinases have been identified as weak
oncogenes because experimental overexpression in lymphoid tissue, prostate, and
liver induces tumors at a relatively low incidence and with a long latency.
However, very strong synergistic tumorigenicity between Pim1/2 and c-Myc and
other oncogenes has been observed in lymphoid tissues. Mouse models have also
been used to study whether the inhibition of specific PIM isoforms is required to
prevent carcinogen-induced sarcomas, indicating that the absence of Pim2 and Pim3
greatly reduces sarcoma growth and bone invasion; the extent of this effect is
similar to that observed in the absence of all three isoforms. This review will
summarize some of the animal models that have been used to understand the
isoform-specific contribution of PIM kinases to tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4030178
PMID: 24860787  [PubMed]


40. PLoS One. 2014 May 23;9(5):e97311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097311. eCollection
2014.

CDC2 mediates progestin initiated endometrial stromal cell proliferation: a PR
signaling to gene expression independently of its binding to chromatin.

Vallejo G(1), La Greca AD(1), Tarifa-Reischle IC(1), Mestre-Citrinovitz AC(1),
Ballaré C(2), Beato M(3), Saragüeta P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, IByME-Conicet, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (2)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, (CRG), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Centre de
Regulació Genòmica, (CRG), Barcelona, Spain; University Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
Barcelona, Spain.

Although non-genomic steroid receptor pathways have been studied over the past
decade, little is known about the direct gene expression changes that take place 
as a consequence of their activation. Progesterone controls proliferation of rat 
endometrial stromal cells during the peri-implantation phase of pregnancy. We
showed that picomolar concentration of progestin R5020 mimics this control in
UIII endometrial stromal cells via ERK1-2 and AKT activation mediated by
interaction of Progesterone Receptor (PR) with Estrogen Receptor beta (ERb) and
without transcriptional activity of endogenous PR and ER. Here we identify early 
downstream targets of cytoplasmic PR signaling and their possible role in
endometrial stromal cell proliferation. Microarray analysis of global gene
expression changes in UIII cells treated for 45 min with progestin identified 97 
up- and 341 down-regulated genes. The most over-represented molecular functions
were transcription factors and regulatory factors associated with cell
proliferation and cell cycle, a large fraction of which were repressors
down-regulated by hormone. Further analysis verified that progestins regulate
Ccnd1, JunD, Usf1, Gfi1, Cyr61, and Cdkn1b through PR-mediated activation of
ligand-free ER, ERK1-2 or AKT, in the absence of genomic PR binding. ChIP
experiments show that progestin promoted the interaction of USF1 with the
proximal promoter of the Cdc2 gene. Usf1 knockdown abolished Cdc2
progestin-dependent transcriptional regulation and cell proliferation, which also
blocked Cdc2 knockdown. We conclude that progestin-induced proliferation of
endometrial stromal cells is mediated by ERK1-2 and AKT dependent early
regulation of USF1, which directly induces Cdc2. To our knowledge, this is the
first description of early target genes of progestin-activated classical PR via
crosstalk with protein kinases and independently of hormone receptor binding to
the genomic targets.

PMCID: PMC4032247
PMID: 24859236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS Pathog. 2014 May 15;10(5):e1004136. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004136.
eCollection 2014.

The downregulation of GFI1 by the EZH2-NDY1/KDM2B-JARID2 axis and by human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) associated factors allows the activation of the HCMV major
IE promoter and the transition to productive infection.

Sourvinos G(1), Morou A(2), Sanidas I(3), Codruta I(4), Ezell SA(3), Doxaki C(4),
Kampranis SC(5), Kottakis F(3), Tsichlis PN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Laboratory of Virology, Medical School, 
University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. (2)Laboratory of Virology, Medical
School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. (3)Molecular Oncology
Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (4)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece. (5)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Laboratory of
Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Earlier studies had suggested that epigenetic mechanisms play an important role
in the control of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection. Here we show that
productive HCMV infection is indeed under the control of histone H3K27
trimethylation. The histone H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2, and its regulators
JARID2 and NDY1/KDM2B repress GFI1, a transcriptional repressor of the major
immediate-early promoter (MIEP) of HCMV. Knocking down EZH2, NDY1/KDM2B or JARID2
relieves the repression and results in the upregulation of GFI1. During
infection, the incoming HCMV rapidly downregulates the GFI1 mRNA and protein in
both wild-type cells and in cells in which EZH2, NDY1/KDM2B or JARID2 were
knocked down. However, since the pre-infection levels of GFI1 in the latter cells
are significantly higher, the virus fails to downregulate it to levels permissive
for MIEP activation and viral infection. Following the
EZH2-NDY1/KDM2B-JARID2-independent downregulation of GFI1 in the early stages of 
infection, the virus also initiates an EZH2-NDY1/<U+039A>DM2<U+0392>-JARID2-dependent program
that represses GFI1 throughout the infection cycle. The EZH2 knockdown also
delays histone H3K27 trimethylation in the immediate early region of HCMV, which 
is accompanied by a drop in H3K4 trimethylation that may contribute to the
shEZH2-mediated repression of the major immediate early HCMV promoter. These data
show that HCMV uses multiple mechanisms to allow the activation of the HCMV MIEP 
and to prevent cellular mechanisms from blocking the HCMV replication program.

PMCID: PMC4022736
PMID: 24830456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 21;9(4):e95784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095784. eCollection
2014.

Granulopoiesis requires increased C/EBPa compared to monopoiesis, correlated with
elevated Cebpa in immature G-CSF receptor versus M-CSF receptor expressing cells.

Ma O(1), Hong S(1), Guo H(1), Ghiaur G(2), Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America. (2)Division of Hematologic Malignancies, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

C/EBPa is required for the formation of granulocyte-monocyte progenitors;
however, its role in subsequent myeloid lineage specification remains uncertain. 
Transduction of murine marrow with either of two Cebpa shRNAs markedly increases 
monocyte and reduces granulocyte colonies in methylcellulose or the monocyte to
neutrophil ratio in liquid culture. Similar findings were found after marrow
shRNA transduction and transplantation and with CEBPA knockdown in human marrow
CD34+ cells. These results apparently reflect altered myeloid lineage
specification, as similar knockdown allowed nearly complete 32Dcl3 granulocytic
maturation. Cebpa knockdown also generated lineage-negative blasts with increased
colony replating capacity but unchanged cell cycle parameters, likely reflecting 
complete differentiation block. The shRNA having the greatest effect on lineage
skewing reduced Cebpa 3-fold in differentiating cells but 6-fold in accumulating 
blasts. Indicating that Cebpa is the relevant shRNA target, shRNA-resistant
C/EBPa-ER rescued marrow myelopoiesis. Cebpa knockdown in murine marrow cells
also increased in vitro erythropoiesis, perhaps reflecting 1.6-fold reduction in 
PU.1 leading to GATA-1 derepression. Global gene expression analysis of
lineage-negative blasts that accumulate after Cebpa knockdown demonstrated
reduction in Cebpe and Gfi1, known transcriptional regulators of granulopoiesis, 
and also reduced Ets1 and Klf5. Populations enriched for immature granulocyte or 
monocyte progenitor/precursors were isolated by sorting Lin-Sca-1-c-Kit+ cells
into GCSFR+MCSFR- or GCSFR-MCSFR+ subsets. Cebpa, Cebpe, Gfi1, Ets1, and Klf5
RNAs were increased in the c-Kit+GCSFR+ and Klf4 and Irf8 in the c-Kit+MCSFR+
populations, with PU.1 levels similar in both. In summary, higher levels of
C/EBPa are required for granulocyte and lower levels for monocyte lineage
specification, and this myeloid bifurcation may be facilitated by increased Cebpa
gene expression in granulocyte compared with monocyte progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3994156
PMID: 24752325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jan 14;94(2):134-8.

[Complicated effects of Gfi-1 on proliferation and apoptosis of murine 32D
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye Y(1), Wang H, Liu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital, Nantong University, Nantong
226001, China. (2)Email: hongliu63@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between growth factor independence 1
(Gfi-1) and apoptosis as well as proliferation in 32D cell and observe the
effects of Gfi-1 and N382S on 32D cell so as to further explore its possible
mechanism of apoptosis and proliferation in hemopoietic stem cells.
METHODS: 32D cells expressed a high level of Gfi-1 or its mutant N382S by plasmid
transduction, cell apoptosis was examined by flow cytometry and the levels of
Bax, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and Gfi-1 protein
by Western blot.
RESULTS: The apoptotic cell ratios were lower in the 32D/Gfi-1 groups than those 
in the 32D/puro groups (4.0% ± 1.8%, 7.0% ± 1.6%, 10.0% ± 2.4% vs 6.0% ± 1.0%,
11.0% ± 1.5% and 23.0% ± 1.5% respectively, all P < 0.05)after culture for 48, 96
and 144 h. The apoptotic rates were compared between the 32D/N382S and 32D/puro
groups.However, there were no marked statistical difference (5.0% ± 1.3%, 12.0% ±
2.1%, 21.0% ± 2.2% vs 6.0% ± 1.0%, 11.0% ± 1.5%, 23.0% ± 1.5% respectively, P >
0.05).Interestingly, the number of 32D cells expressed Gfi-1 decreased compared
to the controls (0.96 × 106, 2.03 × 106, 3.47 × 106 vs 1.42 × 106, 3.26 × 106,
6.12 × 106 respectively, all P < 0.05). But no marked difference existed between 
32D/N382S groups and the controls (1.51 × 106, 3.36 × 106, 6.54 × 106 vs 1.42 ×
106, 3.26 × 106 and 6.12 × 106 respectively, P > 0.05) after culturing for 48, 96
and 144 h. The expression level of Bax decreased significantly in 32D/Gfi-1
groups (1.090 ± 0.062 vs 1.707 ± 0.025, P < 0.05), but showed no marked in
32D/N382S groups (1.710 ± 0.062 vs 1.707 ± 0.025, P > 0.05), compared to 32D/puro
groups. The expression level of STAT3 increased significantly in 32D/Gfi-1 groups
(1.723 ± 0.168 vs 1.203 ± 0.168, P < 0.05) and 32D/N382S groups (1.797 ± 0.292 vs
1.203 ± 0.168, P < 0.05) compared to 32D/puro groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Gfi-1 inhibits cell apoptosis and proliferation.Such an effect is
associated with Bax down-regulation.Zinc finger structure of Gfi-1 has no marked 
interaction with the expression of STAT3. And Gfi-1 is both unique and
complicated in hemopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 24721355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Blood. 2014 May 15;123(20):3080-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-01-453167. Epub 2014
Mar 20.

Erythro-megakaryocytic transcription factors associated with hereditary anemia.

Crispino JD(1), Weiss MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; and.
(2)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA.

Most heritable anemias are caused by mutations in genes encoding globins, red
blood cell (RBC) membrane proteins, or enzymes in the glycolytic and hexose
monophosphate shunt pathways. A less common class of genetic anemia is caused by 
mutations that alter the functions of erythroid transcription factors (TFs). Many
TF mutations associated with heritable anemia cause truncations or amino acid
substitutions, resulting in the production of functionally altered proteins.
Characterization of these mutant proteins has provided insights into mechanisms
of gene expression, hematopoietic development, and human disease. Mutations
within promoter or enhancer regions that disrupt TF binding to essential
erythroid genes also cause anemia and heritable variations in RBC traits, such as
fetal hemoglobin content. Defining the latter may have important clinical
implications for de-repressing fetal hemoglobin synthesis to treat sickle cell
anemia and ß thalassemia. Functionally important alterations in genes encoding
TFs or their cognate cis elements are likely to occur more frequently than
currently appreciated, a hypothesis that will soon be tested through ongoing
genome-wide association studies and the rapidly expanding use of global genome
sequencing for human diagnostics. Findings obtained through such studies of RBCs 
and associated diseases are likely generalizable to many human diseases and
quantitative traits.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4023417
PMID: 24652993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS Genet. 2014 Feb 27;10(2):e1004167. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004167.
eCollection 2014.

Insertional mutagenesis and deep profiling reveals gene hierarchies and a
Myc/p53-dependent bottleneck in lymphomagenesis.

Huser CA(1), Gilroy KL(1), de Ridder J(2), Kilbey A(1), Borland G(1), Mackay
N(1), Jenkins A(1), Bell M(1), Herzyk P(3), van der Weyden L(4), Adams DJ(4),
Rust AG(4), Cameron E(1), Neil JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Virus Research, Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, 
College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. (2)Delft Bioinformatics Lab, Faculty of EEMCS, 
TU Delft, Delft, The Netherlands. (3)Glasgow Polyomics, Institute of Molecular,
Cell & Systems Biology, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. (4)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Retroviral insertional mutagenesis (RIM) is a powerful tool for cancer genomics
that was combined in this study with deep sequencing (RIM/DS) to facilitate a
comprehensive analysis of lymphoma progression. Transgenic mice expressing two
potent collaborating oncogenes in the germ line (CD2-MYC, -Runx2) develop rapid
onset tumours that can be accelerated and rendered polyclonal by neonatal Moloney
murine leukaemia virus (MoMLV) infection. RIM/DS analysis of 28 polyclonal
lymphomas identified 771 common insertion sites (CISs) defining a 'progression
network' that encompassed a remarkably large fraction of known MoMLV target
genes, with further strong indications of oncogenic selection above the
background of MoMLV integration preference. Progression driven by RIM was
characterised as a Darwinian process of clonal competition engaging proliferation
control networks downstream of cytokine and T-cell receptor signalling. Enhancer 
mode activation accounted for the most efficiently selected CIS target genes,
including Ccr7 as the most prominent of a set of chemokine receptors driving
paracrine growth stimulation and lymphoma dissemination. Another large target
gene subset including candidate tumour suppressors was disrupted by intragenic
insertions. A second RIM/DS screen comparing lymphomas of wild-type and parental 
transgenics showed that CD2-MYC tumours are virtually dependent on activation of 
Runx family genes in strong preference to other potent Myc collaborating genes
(Gfi1, Notch1). Ikzf1 was identified as a novel collaborating gene for Runx2 and 
illustrated the interface between integration preference and oncogenic selection.
Lymphoma target genes for MoMLV can be classified into (a) a small set of master 
regulators that confer self-renewal; overcoming p53 and other failsafe pathways
and (b) a large group of progression genes that control autonomous proliferation 
in transformed cells. These findings provide insights into retroviral biology,
human cancer genetics and the safety of vector-mediated gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC3937229
PMID: 24586197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Clin Epigenetics. 2014 Feb 3;6(1):4. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-6-4.

Differences in smoking associated DNA methylation patterns in South Asians and
Europeans.

Elliott HR(1), Tillin T, McArdle WL, Ho K, Duggirala A, Frayling TM, Davey Smith 
G, Hughes AD, Chaturvedi N, Relton CL.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, School of Social and Community Medicine,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. hannah.elliott@bristol.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is strongly associated with smoking status at
multiple sites across the genome. Studies have largely been restricted to
European origin individuals yet the greatest increase in smoking is occurring in 
low income countries, such as the Indian subcontinent. We determined whether
there are differences between South Asians and Europeans in smoking related loci,
and if a smoking score, combining all smoking related DNA methylation scores,
could differentiate smokers from non-smokers.
RESULTS: Illumina HM450k BeadChip arrays were performed on 192 samples from the
Southall And Brent REvisited (SABRE) cohort. Differential methylation in smokers 
was identified in 29 individual CpG sites at 18 unique loci. Interaction between 
smoking status and ethnic group was identified at the AHRR locus. Ethnic
differences in DNA methylation were identified in non-smokers at two further
loci, 6p21.33 and GNG12. With the exception of GFI1 and MYO1G these differences
were largely unaffected by adjustment for cell composition. A smoking score based
on methylation profile was constructed. Current smokers were identified with 100%
sensitivity and 97% specificity in Europeans and with 80% sensitivity and 95%
specificity in South Asians.
CONCLUSIONS: Differences in ethnic groups were identified in both single CpG
sites and combined smoking score. The smoking score is a valuable tool for
identification of true current smoking behaviour. Explanations for ethnic
differences in DNA methylation in association with smoking may provide valuable
clues to disease pathways.

PMCID: PMC3915234
PMID: 24485148  [PubMed]


47. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2013 Jul-Aug;47(4):656-66.

[Dose-response effect of steroid hormones on the Gfi1 and U2afil4 gene expression
in T lymphocytes at different stages of differentiation].

[Article in Russian]

Litvinova LS, Mazunin IO, Gutsol AA, Sokhonevich NA, Khaziakhmatova OG, Kofanova 
KA.

Alternative splicing of Ptprc gene is a key event in memory T cell
differentiation. This gene encodes transmembrane tyrosine phosphatase CD45. One
of potential mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation is based on
antagonistic effects of auxiliary splicing factor U2AF26 and transcription factor
Gfi1. These two proteins regulate antigen-dependent T cell activation. We have
shown that steroid hormones have different effects on U2af1l4 and Gfi1
transcription regulation in dissimilar differentiation stage cell culture,
subjected to antigen-independent stimulation. Low concentrations of
glucocorticoid (Dex) and female sex hormone (Est) can activate expression of
U2af1l4 in re-stimulated cells that probably induce terminal receptor CD45
isoforms formation mechanism, whereas high doses of hormones inhibit the process.
In the same conditions Dex in a wide range of concentrations (10(-5)-10(-7) M)
and Est (10(-6) and 10(-7) M) activate U2af1l4 gene expression that probably
leads to "surrogate memory T cells" formation. Dose dependent testosterone (Test)
effect is opposite to Est and Dex effect on priming (CD45RO+) and naive (CD45RA+)
lymphocytes. The role of steroid hormones in memory T cell differentiation in
antigen-independent stimulation conditions is of great interest for the
understanding of chronic hormonal and immune disbalance mechanisms.

PMID: 24466755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(1):81-6.

Regulation of histamine synthesis and tryptase expression through transcription
factors, growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1) and Gfi1b, in murine cultured mast
cells.

Taura A(1), Furuta K, Yamaguchi T, Kawabata K, Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Okayama University Graduated School of Medicine, 
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences.

Mast cells are involved in various immunological responses, although it remains
unknown how their terminal differentiation is regulated. We previously
established a culture model that mimics the process of mast cell maturation in
the cutaneous tissue and found that growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1) was
up-regulated whereas its paralogue Gfi1b down-regulated. Here we investigated the
roles of Gfi1 and Gfi1b in the process of mast cell maturation using a murine
mast cell line, MC9. Gfi1 and Gfi1b cDNAs were stably expressed in MC9 cells
using the recombinant lentivirus. Histamine synthesis was significantly induced
by stem cell factor (SCF) alone, whereas tryptase expression was significantly
augmented in the presence of both SCF and Swiss 3T3 cells. Since exogenously
expressed Gfi1 and Gfi1b might affect their expression levels in MC9 cells, we
investigated the relationship between the expression profiles of Gfi1/Gfi1b
proteins and maturation indices, such as histamine synthesis and tryptase
expression. The comparison suggested that histamine synthesis during the
co-culture period was positively regulated by Gfi1b while augmented expression of
tryptase was abolished by one-sided expression of Gfi1/Gfi1b. Our findings
indicated the involvement of Gfi1 and Gfi1b in the process of murine mast cell
maturation.

PMID: 24389484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jan;124(1):222-36. doi: 10.1172/JCI66005. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Therapeutic antagonists of microRNAs deplete leukemia-initiating cell activity.

Velu CS, Chaubey A, Phelan JD, Horman SR, Wunderlich M, Guzman ML, Jegga AG,
Zeleznik-Le NJ, Chen J, Mulloy JC, Cancelas JA, Jordan CT, Aronow BJ, Marcucci G,
Bhat B, Gebelein B, Grimes HL.

Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) subtypes that result from oncogenic activation
of homeobox (HOX) transcription factors are associated with poor prognosis. The
HOXA9 transcription activator and growth factor independent 1 (GFI1)
transcriptional repressor compete for occupancy at DNA-binding sites for the
regulation of common target genes. We exploited this HOXA9 versus GFI1 antagonism
to identify the genes encoding microRNA-21 and microRNA-196b as transcriptional
targets of HOX-based leukemia oncoproteins. Therapeutic inhibition of microRNA-21
and microRNA-196b inhibited in vitro leukemic colony forming activity and
depleted in vivo leukemia-initiating cell activity of HOX-based leukemias, which 
led to leukemia-free survival in a murine AML model and delayed disease onset in 
xenograft models. These data establish microRNA as functional effectors of
endogenous HOXA9 and HOX-based leukemia oncoproteins, provide a concise in vivo
platform to test RNA therapeutics, and suggest therapeutic value for microRNA
antagonists in AML.

PMCID: PMC3871218
PMID: 24334453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Clin Dev Immunol. 2013;2013:349067. doi: 10.1155/2013/349067. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Lymphoid progenitor cells from childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia are
functionally deficient and express high levels of the transcriptional repressor
Gfi-1.

Purizaca J(1), Contreras-Quiroz A, Dorantes-Acosta E, Vadillo E, Arriaga-Pizano
L, Fuentes-Figueroa S, Villagomez-Barragán H, Flores-Guzmán P, Alvarado-Moreno A,
Mayani H, Meza I, Hernandez R, Huerta-Yepez S, Pelayo R.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Unit, Oncology Hospital, Mexican Institute for Social
Security, Avenue Cuauhtemoc 330, Colonia Doctores, 06720 Mexico City, DF, Mexico 
; Molecular Biomedicine Program, CINVESTAV, 07360 Mexico City, DF, Mexico.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most frequent malignancy of childhood. 
Substantial progress on understanding the cell hierarchy within ALL bone marrow
(BM) has been recorded in the last few years, suggesting that both primitive cell
fractions and committed lymphoid blasts with immature stem cell-like properties
contain leukemia-initiating cells. Nevertheless, the biology of the early
progenitors that initiate the lymphoid program remains elusive. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the ability of lymphoid progenitors from B-cell 
precursor ALL BM to proliferate and undergo multilineage differentiation. By
phenotype analyses, in vitro proliferation assays, and controlled culture
systems, the lymphoid differentiation potentials were evaluated in BM primitive
populations from B-cell precursor ALL pediatric patients. When compared to their 
normal counterparts, functional stem and progenitor cell contents were
substantially reduced in ALL BM. Moreover, neither B nor NK or dendritic
lymphoid-cell populations developed recurrently from highly purified ALL-lymphoid
progenitors, and their proliferation and cell cycle status revealed limited
proliferative capacity. Interestingly, a number of quiescence-associated
transcription factors were elevated, including the transcriptional repressor
Gfi-1, which was highly expressed in primitive CD34<U+207A> cells. Together, our
findings reveal major functional defects in the primitive hematopoietic component
of ALL BM. A possible contribution of high levels of Gfi-1 expression in the
regulation of the stem/progenitor cell biology is suggested.

PMCID: PMC3808104
PMID: 24198842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Pediatr Res. 2014 Jan;75(1-2):189-95. doi: 10.1038/pr.2013.197. Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Cellular stress pathways in pediatric bone marrow failure syndromes: many roads
lead to neutropenia.

Glaubach T(1), Minella AC(2), Corey SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [2] Division of Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois [3] Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine and
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chicago, Illinois. (3)1] Department 
of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois [2] Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois [3] Department of Cell & Molecular Biology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.

The inherited bone marrow failure syndromes, like severe congenital neutropenia
(SCN) and Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), provide unique insights into normal
and impaired myelopoiesis. The inherited neutropenias are heterogeneous in both
clinical presentation and genetic associations, and their causative mechanisms
are not well established. SCN, for example, is a genetically heterogeneous
syndrome associated with mutations of ELANE, HAX1, GFI1, WAS, G6PC3, or CSF3R.
The genetic diversity in SCN, along with congenital neutropenias associated with 
other genetically defined bone marrow failure syndromes (e.g., SDS), suggests
that various pathways may be involved in their pathogenesis. Alternatively, all
may lead to a final common pathway of enhanced apoptosis. The pursuit for a more 
complete understanding of the molecular mechanisms that drive inherited
neutropenias remains at the forefront of pediatric translational and basic
science investigation. Advances in our understanding of these disorders have
greatly increased over the last 10 years concomitant with identification of their
genetic lesions. Emerging themes include induction of the unfolded protein
response (UPR), defective ribosome assembly, and p53-dependent apoptosis.
Additionally, defects in metabolism, disruption of mitochondrial membrane
potential, and mislocalization have been found. When perturbed, each of these
lead to an intracellular stress that triggers apoptosis in the vulnerable
granulocytic precursor.

PMID: 24192702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Immunology. 2014 Mar;141(3):362-76. doi: 10.1111/imm.12198.

Histone methylation mediates plasticity of human FOXP3(+) regulatory T cells by
modulating signature gene expressions.

He H(1), Ni B, Tian Y, Tian Z, Chen Y, Liu Z, Yang X, Lv Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical 
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China; Institute of Advanced 
Surgical Technology and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
China.

CD4(+) FOXP3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells constitute a heterogeneous and plastic 
T-cell lineage that plays a pivotal role in maintaining immune homeostasis and
immune tolerance. However, the fate of human Treg cells after loss of FOXP3
expression and the epigenetic mechanisms contributing to such a phenotype switch 
remain to be fully elucidated. In the current study, we demonstrate that human
CD4(+) CD25(high) CD127(low/-) Treg cells convert to two subpopulations with
distinctive FOXP3(+) and FOXP3(-) phenotypes following in vitro culture with
anti-CD3/CD28 and interleukin-2. Digital gene expression analysis showed that
upon in vitro expansion, human Treg cells down-regulated Treg cell signature
genes, such as FOXP3, CTLA4, ICOS, IKZF2 and LRRC32, but up-regulated a set of T 
helper lineage-associated genes, especially T helper type 2 (Th2)-associated,
such as GATA3, GFI1 and IL13. Subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing
of these subpopulations yielded genome-wide maps of their H3K4me3 and H3K27me3
profiles. Surprisingly, reprogramming of Treg cells was associated with
differential histone modifications, as evidenced by decreased abundance of
permissive H3K4me3 within the down-regulated Treg cell signature genes, such as
FOXP3, CTLA4 and LRRC32 loci, and increased abundance of H3K4me3 within the
Th2-associated genes, such as IL4 and IL5; however, the H3K27me3 modification
profile was not significantly different between the two subpopulations. In
conclusion, this study revealed that loss of FOXP3 expression from human Treg
cells during in vitro expansion can induce reprogramming to a T helper cell
phenotype with a gene expression signature dominated by Th2 lineage-associated
genes, and that this cell type conversion may be mediated by histone methylation 
events.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3930375
PMID: 24152290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Dec;13(6):596-606. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0000000000000014.

Pathogenic mechanisms and clinical implications of congenital neutropenia
syndromes.

Hauck F(1), Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to summarize pathogenic
mechanisms and clinical implications of the most illustrative genetic entities of
congenital neutropenia syndromes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Congenital neutropenia comprise monogenetic entities with or
without additional immunologic and extrahaematopoietic syndromatic features.
Continuous careful explorations of known entities such as ELANE, GFI1, HAX1,
G6PC3 deficiency and XLN help to define principles controlling differentiation
and function of neutrophil granulocytes. Furthermore, the identification of novel
genetic defects associated with congenital neutropenia, such as VPS45 deficiency,
broadens our understanding of neutrophil biology. Pathogenic mechanisms imply
protein and vesicle mistrafficking, endoplasmic reticulum stress, the unfolded
protein response, destabilization of the mitochondrial membrane potential,
disturbed energy metabolism, dysglycosylation and deregulated actin
polymerization.
SUMMARY: Advanced genetic and biochemical techniques have helped to expand our
knowledge of congenital neutropenia syndromes. Known and novel genetic entities
shed light on fundamental biological processes important for the homeostatis and 
functioning not only of the neutrophil granulocyte but as well of the entire
haematopoietic system. Furthermore, treatment decisions become more tailored and 
might pave the road towards personalized molecular medicine.

PMID: 24145314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Immunol. 2013 Dec;14(12):1229-36. doi: 10.1038/ni.2743. Epub 2013 Oct 20.

Specification of type 2 innate lymphocytes by the transcriptional determinant
Gfi1.

Spooner CJ(1), Lesch J, Yan D, Khan AA, Abbas A, Ramirez-Carrozzi V, Zhou M,
Soriano R, Eastham-Anderson J, Diehl L, Lee WP, Modrusan Z, Pappu R, Xu M, DeVoss
J, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Immunology, Genentech, South San Francisco,
California, USA.

Type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2 cells) participate in host defense against
helminth parasites and in allergic inflammation. Given their functional
relatedness to type 2 helper T cells (T(H)2 cells), we explored whether Gfi1 acts
as a shared transcriptional determinant in ILC2 cells. Gfi1 promoted the
development of ILC2 cells and controlled their responsiveness during infection
with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and protease allergen-induced lung
inflammation. Gfi1 'preferentially' regulated the responsiveness of ILC2 cells to
interleukin 33 (IL-33) by directly activating Il1rl1, which encodes the IL-33
receptor (ST2). Loss of Gfi1 in activated ILC2 cells resulted in impaired
expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 and a dysregulated genome-wide
effector state characterized by coexpression of IL-13 and IL-17. Our findings
establish Gfi1 as a shared determinant that reciprocally regulates the type 2 and
IL-17 effector states in cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems.

PMID: 24141388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell Cycle. 2013 Dec 1;12(23):3581-2. doi: 10.4161/cc.26824. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Gfi1: a unique controller of T(reg) cells.

Shi LZ(1), Chi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology; St. Jude Children's Research Hospital; Memphis, TN
USA.

PMCID: PMC3903705
PMID: 24131921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncogene. 2014 Aug 28;33(35):4442-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.419. Epub 2013 Oct 14.

The MYB proto-oncogene suppresses monocytic differentiation of acute myeloid
leukemia cells via transcriptional activation of its target gene GFI1.

Zhao L(1), Ye P(2), Gonda TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia. (2)1] The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia [2] School of Pharmacy, The University of Queensland,
Pharmacy Australia Centre of Excellence, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

The MYB gene is a master regulator of hematopoiesis and contributes to
leukemogenesis in several species including humans. Although it is clear that MYB
can promote proliferation, suppress apoptosis and block differentiation, the
identities of the MYB target genes that mediate these effects have only been
partially elucidated. Several studies, including our own, have collectively
identified substantial numbers of MYB target genes, including candidates for each
of these activities; however, functional validation, particularly in the case of 
differentiation suppression, has lagged well behind. Here we show that GFI1,
which encodes an important regulator of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) function
and granulocytic differentiation, is a direct target of MYB in myeloid leukemia
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter studies identified a functional
MYB-binding site in the promoter region of GFI, whereas ectopic expression and
small hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of MYB resulted in concomitant increases and
decreases, respectively, in GFI1 expression. We also demonstrate that GFI1, like 
MYB, can block the induced monocytic differentiation of a human acute myeloid
leukemia cell line, and most importantly, that GFI1 is essential for MYB's
ability to block monocytic differentiation. Thus, we have identified a target of 
MYB that is a likely mediator of its myeloid differentiation-blocking activity,
and which may also be involved in MYB's activities in regulating normal HSC
function and myeloid differentiation.

PMID: 24121275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 24;8(9):e75891. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075891. eCollection
2013.

Gfi1 and gfi1b repress rag transcription in plasmacytoid dendritic cells in
vitro.

Chow KT(1), Schulz D, McWhirter SM, Schlissel MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
California, United States of America.

Growth factor independence genes (Gfi1 and Gfi1b) repress recombination
activating genes (Rag) transcription in developing B lymphocytes. Because all
blood lineages originate from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and different
lineage progenitors have been shown to share transcription factor networks prior 
to cell fate commitment, we hypothesized that GFI family proteins may also play a
role in repressing Rag transcription or a global lymphoid transcriptional program
in other blood lineages. We tested the level of Rag transcription in various
blood cells when Gfi1 and Gfi1b were deleted, and observed an upregulation of Rag
expression in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). Using microarray analysis, we 
observed that Gfi1 and Gfi1b do not regulate a lymphoid or pDC-specific
transcriptional program. This study establishes a role for Gfi1 and Gfi1b in Rag 
regulation in a non-B lineage cell type.

PMCID: PMC3782466
PMID: 24086657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003713. Epub 2013 Sep 
12.

Growth factor independent-1 maintains Notch1-dependent transcriptional
programming of lymphoid precursors.

Phelan JD(1), Saba I, Zeng H, Kosan C, Messer MS, Olsson HA, Fraszczak J,
Hildeman DA, Aronow BJ, Möröy T, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Immunology; Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

Growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1) is a transcriptional repressor originally
identified as a gene activated in T-cell leukemias induced by
Moloney-murine-leukemia virus infection. Notch1 is a transmembrane receptor that 
is frequently mutated in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Gfi1 
is an important factor in the initiation and maintenance of lymphoid leukemias
and its deficiency significantly impedes Notch dependent initiation of T-ALL in
animal models. Here, we show that immature hematopoietic cells require Gfi1 to
competently integrate Notch-activated signaling. Notch1 activation coupled with
Gfi1 deficiency early in T-lineage specification leads to a dramatic loss of
T-cells, whereas activation in later stages leaves development unaffected. In
Gfi1 deficient multipotent precursors, Notch activation induces lethality and is 
cell autonomous. Further, without Gfi1, multipotent progenitors do not maintain
Notch1-activated global expression profiles typical for T-lineage precursors. In 
agreement with this, we find that both lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitors
(LMPP) and early T lineage progenitors (ETP) do not properly form or function in 
Gfi1(-/-) mice. These defects correlate with an inability of Gfi1(-/-)
progenitors to activate lymphoid genes, including IL7R, Rag1, Flt3 and Notch1.
Our data indicate that Gfi1 is required for hematopoietic precursors to withstand
Notch1 activation and to maintain Notch1 dependent transcriptional programming to
determine early T-lymphoid lineage identity.

PMCID: PMC3772063
PMID: 24068942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e73542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073542. eCollection 
2013.

GFI1 is repressed by p53 and inhibits DNA damage-induced apoptosis.

Du P(1), Tang F, Qiu Y, Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, United 
States of America.

GFI1 is a transcriptional repressor that plays a critical role in hematopoiesis
and has also been implicated in lymphomagenesis. It is still poorly understood
how GFI1 expression is regulated in the hematopoietic system. We show here that
GFI1 transcription was repressed by the tumor suppressor p53 in hematopoietic
cells. Knockdown of p53 resulted in increased GFI1 expression and abolished DNA
damage-induced GFI1 downregulation. In contrast, GFI1 expression was reduced and 
its downregulation in response to DNA damage was rescued upon restoration of p53 
function in p53-deficient cells. In luciferase reporter assays, wild type p53,
but not a DNA binding-defective p53 mutant, repressed the GFI1 promoter.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated that p53 bound to the
proximal region of the GFI1 promoter. Detailed mapping of the GFI1 promoter
indicated that GFI1 core promoter region spanning from -33 to +6 bp is sufficient
for p53-mediated repression. This core promoter region contains a putative p53
repressive response element, mutation of which abolished p53 binding to and
repression of GFI1 promoter. Significantly, apoptosis induced by DNA damage was
inhibited upon Gfi1 overexpression, but augmented following GFI1 knockdown. Our
data establish for the first time that GFI1 is repressed by p53 and add to our
understanding of the roles of GFI1 in normal hematopoiesis and lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC3762790
PMID: 24023884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jan;95(1):105-15. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0912475. Epub 2013 Sep 9.

Gfi-1 is the transcriptional repressor of SOCS1 in acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Lee MC(1), Kuo YY, Chou WC, Hou HA, Hsiao M, Tien HF.

Author information: 
(1)1.National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7, Chung-Shan South Rd., Taipei,
Taiwan. hftien@ntu.edu.tw.

Silencing of SOCS1, a TSG, has been detected in various malignancies, including
AML. However, the underlying mechanism of SOCS1 inactivation remains elusive. In 
this study, we explored the role of histone methylation in SOCS1 expression in
AML cells. By ChIP assay, we demonstrated that G9a and SUV39H1, two enzymes
catalyzing H3K9 methylation, were physically associated with the SOCS1 promoter, 
and treatment with chaetocin, a histone methyltransferase inhibitor, suppressed
H3K9 methylation on the SOCS1 promoter and enhanced SOCS1 expression.
Furthermore, knockdown of G9a and SUV39H1 by siRNA could also induce SOCS1
expression. On the other hand, SOCS1 knockdown by shRNA eliminated
chaetocin-induced cell apoptosis. To investigate further whether any
transcription factor was involved in H3K9 methylation-related SOCS1 repression,
we scanned the sequences of the SOCS1 gene promoter and found two binding sites
for Gfi-1, a transcription repressor. By DNA pull-down and ChIP assays, we showed
that Gfi-1 directly bound the SOCS1 promoter, and ectopic Gfi-1 expression
suppressed STAT5-induced SOCS1 promoter activation. In contrast, Gfi-1 knockdown 
by shRNA enhanced SOCS1 expression and inhibited STAT5 expression. Moreover, the 
knockdown of G9a completely rescued the repressive effect of Gfi-1 on
STAT5A-induced SOCS1 promoter activation. Collectively, our study indicates that 
the expression of Gfi-1 contributes to SOCS1 silencing in AML cells through
epigenetic modification, and suppression of histone methyltransferase can provide
new insight in AML therapy.

PMID: 24018353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2812-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-489641. Epub 2013 
Sep 6.

The control of hematopoietic stem cell maintenance, self-renewal, and
differentiation by Mysm1-mediated epigenetic regulation.

Wang T(1), Nandakumar V, Jiang XX, Jones L, Yang AG, Huang XF, Chen SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA; and.

Epigenetic histone modifications play critical roles in the control of
self-renewal and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Mysm1 is a
recently identified histone H2A deubiquitinase with essential and intrinsic roles
for maintaining functional HSCs. In this study, in addition to confirming this
function of Mysm1, by using Mysm1-deficient (Mysm1(-/-)) mice, we provide more
evidence for how Mysm1 controls HSC homeostasis. Mysm1 deletion drives HSCs from 
quiescence into rapid cycling and increases their apoptotic rate, resulting in an
exhaustion of the stem cell pool, which leads to an impaired self-renewal and
lineage reconstituting abilities in the Mysm1-deficient mice. Our study
identified Gfi1 as one of the candidate genes responsible for the HSC defect in
Mysm1-deficient mice. Mechanistic studies revealed that Mysm1 modulates histone
modifications and directs the recruitment of key transcriptional factors such as 
Gata2 and Runx1 to the Gfi1 locus in HSCs. We found that Mysm1 directly
associates with the Gfi1 enhancer element and promotes its transcription through 
Gata2 and Runx1 transactivation. Thus, our study not only elaborates on the
initial reports of Mysm1 association with HSC homeostasis but also delineates a
possible epigenetic mechanism through which Mysm1 carries out this function in
the HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3798996
PMID: 24014243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2013 Dec;14(6):813-28. doi: 10.1007/s10162-013-0414-z.
Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Hair cell generation by notch inhibition in the adult mammalian cristae.

Slowik AD(1), Bermingham-McDonogh O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
98195, USA, slowia@uw.edu.

Balance disorders caused by hair cell loss in the sensory organs of the
vestibular system pose a significant health problem worldwide, particularly in
the elderly. Currently, this hair cell loss is permanent as there is no effective
treatment. This is in stark contrast to nonmammalian vertebrates who robustly
regenerate hair cells after damage. This disparity in regenerative potential
highlights the need for further manipulation in order to stimulate more robust
hair cell regeneration in mammals. In the utricle, Notch signaling is required
for maintaining the striolar support cell phenotype into the second postnatal
week. Notch signaling has further been implicated in hair cell regeneration after
damage in the mature utricle. Here, we investigate the role of Notch signaling in
the mature mammalian cristae in order to characterize the Notch-mediated
regenerative potential of these sensory organs. For these studies, we used the
<U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor, N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine
t-butyl ester (DAPT), in conjunction with a method we developed to culture
cristae in vitro. In postnatal and adult cristae, we found that 5 days of DAPT
treatment resulted in a downregulation of the Notch effectors Hes1 and Hes5 and
also an increase in the total number of Gfi1(+) hair cells. Hes5, as reported by 
Hes5-GFP, was downregulated specifically in peripheral support cells. Using
lineage tracing with proteolipid protein (PLP)/CreER;mTmG mice, we found that
these hair cells arose through transdifferentiation of support cells in cristae
explanted from mice up to 10 weeks of age. These transdifferentiated cells arose 
without proliferation and were capable of taking on a hair cell morphology,
migrating to the correct cell layer, and assembling what appears to be a
stereocilia bundle with a long kinocilium. Overall, these data show that Notch
signaling is active in the mature cristae and suggest that it may be important in
maintaining the support cell fate in a subset of peripheral support cells.

PMCID: PMC3825023
PMID: 23989618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 1;191(7):3694-704. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300408. Epub 2013
Aug 28.

Differential response of regulatory and conventional CD4<U+207A> lymphocytes to CD3
engagement: clues to a possible mechanism of anti-CD3 action?

Li L(1), Nishio J, van Maurik A, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Several clinical trials have shown anti-CD3 treatment to be a promising therapy
for autoimmune diabetes, but its mechanism of action remains unclear. Foxp3(+)
regulatory T cells (Tregs) are likely to be involved, but through unknown
mechanistic pathways. We profiled the transcriptional consequences in CD4(+)
Tregs and conventional T cells (Tconvs) in the first hours and days after
anti-CD3 treatment of NOD mice. Anti-CD3 treatment led to a transient
transcriptional response, terminating faster than most Ag-induced responses. Most
transcripts were similarly induced in Tregs and Tconvs, but several were
differential, in particular, those encoding the IL-7R and transcription factors
Id2/3 and Gfi1, upregulated in Tregs but repressed in Tconvs. Because IL-7R was a
plausible candidate for driving the homeostatic response of Tregs to anti-CD3, we
tested its relevance by supplementation of anti-CD3 treatment with IL-7/anti-IL-7
complexes. Although ineffective alone, IL-7 significantly improved the rate of
remission induced by anti-CD3. Four anti-human CD3 mAbs exhibited the same
differential effect on IL-7R expression in human as in mouse cells, suggesting
that the mechanism also underlies therapeutic effect in human cells, and perhaps 
a rationale for testing a combination of anti-CD3 and IL-7 for the treatment of
recent-onset human type 1 diabetes. Thus, systems-level analysis of the response 
to anti-CD3 in the early phase of the treatment demonstrates different responses 
in Tregs and Tconvs, and provides new leads to a mechanistic understanding of its
mechanism of action in reverting recent-onset diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3932531
PMID: 23986534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Immunity. 2013 Aug 22;39(2):335-46. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.07.016. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

TGF-ß cytokine signaling promotes CD8+ T cell development and low-affinity CD4+ T
cell homeostasis by regulation of interleukin-7 receptor a expression.

Ouyang W(1), Oh SA, Ma Q, Bivona MR, Zhu J, Li MO.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.

Interleukin-7 receptor a chain (IL-7Ra) is induced upon T cell positive selection
and controls thymic CD8-lineage specification and peripheral naive T cell
homeostasis. How IL-7Ra expression is regulated in developing thymocytes is
unclear. Here, we show that transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) signaling
promoted IL-7Ra expression and CD8+ T cell differentiation. In addition, TGF-ß
signaling was required for high IL-7Ra expression in CD4+ T cells bearing
low-affinity T cell receptors, and the abrogation of TGF-ß receptor expression
led to failed maintenance of peripheral CD4+ T cells. Compromised IL-7Ra
expression in TGF-ß-receptor-deficient T cells was associated with increased
expression of the Il7ra transcriptional repressor, Gfi-1. IL-7Ra transgenesis or 
T-cell-specific ablation of Gfi-1 restored IL-7Ra expression and largely
ameliorated the development and homeostasis defects of TGF-ß-receptor-deficient T
cells. These findings reveal functions for TGF-ß signaling in controlling IL-7Ra 
expression and in promoting T cell repertoire diversification.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3801187
PMID: 23932572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20;110(34):E3198-205. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300950110. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Inhibitory role of the transcription repressor Gfi1 in the generation of
thymus-derived regulatory T cells.

Shi LZ(1), Kalupahana NS, Turnis ME, Neale G, Hock H, Vignali DA, Chi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics and
Biotechnology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Foxp3(+) regulatory T (T(reg)) cells are essential for the maintenance of
self-tolerance and immune homeostasis. The majority of T(reg) cells is generated 
in the thymus as a specific subset of CD4(+) T cells, known as thymus-derived or 
natural T(reg) (nT(reg)) cells, in response to signals from T-cell receptors,
costimulatory molecules, and cytokines. Recent studies have identified
intracellular signaling and transcriptional pathways that link these signals to
Foxp3 induction, but how the production of these extrinsic factors is controlled 
remains poorly understood. Here, we report that the transcription repressor
growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1) has a key inhibitory role in the generation of
nT(reg) cells by a noncell-autonomous mechanism. T cell-specific deletion of Gfi1
results in aberrant expansion of thymic nT(reg) cells and increased production of
cytokines. In particular, IL-2 overproduction plays an important role in driving 
the expansion of nT(reg) cells. In contrast, although Gfi1 deficiency elevated
thymocyte apoptosis, Gfi1 repressed nT(reg) generation independently of its
prosurvival effect. Consistent with an inhibitory role of Gfi1 in this process,
loss of Gfi1 dampens antitumor immunity. These data point to a previously
unrecognized extrinsic control mechanism that negatively shapes thymic generation
of nT(reg) cells.

PMCID: PMC3752244
PMID: 23918371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Dev Biol. 2013 Sep 15;381(2):401-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.06.022. Epub 2013 
Jun 21.

Atoh1 directs hair cell differentiation and survival in the late embryonic mouse 
inner ear.

Chonko KT(1), Jahan I, Stone J, Wright MC, Fujiyama T, Hoshino M, Fritzsch B,
Maricich SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15090, USA.

Atoh1 function is required for the earliest stages of inner ear hair cell
development, which begins during the second week of gestation. Atoh1 expression
in developing hair cells continues until early postnatal ages, but the function
of this late expression is unknown. To test the role of continued Atoh1
expression in hair cell maturation we conditionally deleted the gene in the inner
ear at various embryonic and postnatal ages. In the organ of Corti, deletion of
Atoh1 at E15.5 led to the death of all hair cells. In contrast, deletion at E16.5
caused death only in apical regions, but abnormalities of stereocilia formation
were present throughout the cochlea. In the utricle, deletion at E14.5 or E16.5
did not cause cell death but led to decreased expression of myosin VIIa and
failure of stereocilia formation. Furthermore, we show that maintained expression
of Barhl1 and Gfi1, two transcription factors implicated in cochlear hair cell
survival, depends upon continued Atoh1 expression. However, maintained expression
of Pou4f3 and several hair cell-specific markers is independent of Atoh1
expression. These data reveal novel late roles for Atoh1 that are separable from 
its initial role in hair cell development.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3772529
PMID: 23796904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e61785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061785. Print 2013.

A novel small compound SH-2251 suppresses Th2 cell-dependent airway inflammation 
through selective modulation of chromatin status at the Il5 gene locus.

Suzuki J(1), Kuwahara M, Tofukuji S, Imamura M, Kato F, Nakayama T, Ohara O,
Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacogenomics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science,
Chiba University, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

IL-5 is a key cytokine that plays an important role in the development of
pathological conditions in allergic inflammation. Identifying strategies to
inhibit IL-5 production is important in order to establish new therapies for
treating allergic inflammation. We found that SH-2251, a novel thioamide-related 
small compound, selectively inhibits the differentiation of IL-5-producing Th2
cells. SH-2251 inhibited the induction of active histone marks at the Il5 gene
locus during Th2 cell differentiation. The recruitment of RNA polymerase II, and 
following expression of the Th2 cell-specific intergenic transcripts around the
Il5 gene locus was also inhibited. Furthermore, Th2 cell-dependent airway
inflammation in mice was suppressed by the oral administration of SH-2251. Gfi1, 
a transcriptional repressor, was identified as a downstream target molecule of
SH-2251 using a DNA microarray analysis. The Gfi1 expression dramatically
decreased in SH-2251-treated Th2 cells, and the SH-2251-mediated inhibition of
IL-5-producing Th2 cell differentiation was restored by transduction of Gfi1.
Therefore, our study unearthed SH-2251 as a novel therapeutic candidate for
allergic inflammation that selectively inhibits active histone marks at the Il5
gene locus.

PMCID: PMC3628909
PMID: 23613936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Oncotarget. 2013 Mar;4(3):374-5.

Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) as a regulator of p53 activity and a new
therapeutical target for ALL.

Khandanpour C(1), Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.
Cyrus.Khandanpour@uk-essen.de

The transcriptional repressor Gfi1 can be a so-called "oncorequisite" factor that
is required for the development and maintenance of lymphoid neoplasia, such as
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL), but does not have a direct role in the
ontogeny of the disease. The study supporting this role of Gfi1 (Khandanpour C,
Phelan J, et al., Cancer Cell, 2013, 23:200-214) shows that inhibition of Gfi1
cannot only cure mice from ALL but also blocks the expansion of human primary ALL
cells. The study concludes that this feature of Gfi1 can be exploited to improve 
current ALL therapies.

PMCID: PMC3717300
PMID: 23528269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;15(4):363-72. doi: 10.1038/ncb2709. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

Characterization of transcriptional networks in blood stem and progenitor cells
using high-throughput single-cell gene expression analysis.

Moignard V(1), Macaulay IC, Swiers G, Buettner F, Schütte J, Calero-Nieto FJ,
Kinston S, Joshi A, Hannah R, Theis FJ, Jacobsen SE, de Bruijn MF, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell
Institute and Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 May;15(5):544.

Cellular decision-making is mediated by a complex interplay of external stimuli
with the intracellular environment, in particular transcription factor regulatory
networks. Here we have determined the expression of a network of 18 key
haematopoietic transcription factors in 597 single primary blood stem and
progenitor cells isolated from mouse bone marrow. We demonstrate that different
stem/progenitor populations are characterized by distinctive transcription factor
expression states, and through comprehensive bioinformatic analysis reveal
positively and negatively correlated transcription factor pairings, including
previously unrecognized relationships between Gata2, Gfi1 and Gfi1b. Validation
using transcriptional and transgenic assays confirmed direct regulatory
interactions consistent with a regulatory triad in immature blood stem cells,
where Gata2 may function to modulate cross-inhibition between Gfi1 and Gfi1b.
Single-cell expression profiling therefore identifies network states and allows
reconstruction of network hierarchies involved in controlling stem cell fate
choices, and provides a blueprint for studying both normal development and human 
disease.

PMCID: PMC3796878
PMID: 23524953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Genome Res. 2013 May;23(5):800-11. doi: 10.1101/gr.144899.112. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Systematic dissection of regulatory motifs in 2000 predicted human enhancers
using a massively parallel reporter assay.

Kheradpour P(1), Ernst J, Melnikov A, Rogov P, Wang L, Zhang X, Alston J,
Mikkelsen TS, Kellis M.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Genome-wide chromatin annotations have permitted the mapping of putative
regulatory elements across multiple human cell types. However, their experimental
dissection by directed regulatory motif disruption has remained unfeasible at the
genome scale. Here, we use a massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA) to measure 
the transcriptional levels induced by 145-bp DNA segments centered on
evolutionarily conserved regulatory motif instances within enhancer chromatin
states. We select five predicted activators (HNF1, HNF4, FOXA, GATA, NFE2L2) and 
two predicted repressors (GFI1, ZFP161) and measure reporter expression in
erythroleukemia (K562) and liver carcinoma (HepG2) cell lines. We test 2104
wild-type sequences and 3314 engineered enhancer variants containing targeted
motif disruptions, each using 10 barcode tags and two replicates. The resulting
data strongly confirm the enhancer activity and cell-type specificity of enhancer
chromatin states, the ability of 145-bp segments to recapitulate both, the
necessary role of regulatory motifs in enhancer function, and the complementary
roles of activator and repressor motifs. We find statistically robust evidence
that (1) disrupting the predicted activator motifs abolishes enhancer function,
while silent or motif-improving changes maintain enhancer activity; (2)
evolutionary conservation, nucleosome exclusion, binding of other factors, and
strength of the motif match are predictive of enhancer activity; (3) scrambling
repressor motifs leads to aberrant reporter expression in cell lines where the
enhancers are usually inactive. Our results suggest a general strategy for
deciphering cis-regulatory elements by systematic large-scale manipulation and
provide quantitative enhancer activity measurements across thousands of
constructs that can be mined to develop predictive models of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3638136
PMID: 23512712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Med Hypotheses. 2013 May;80(5):629-32. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.02.007. Epub 2013
Mar 5.

Potential roles for Gfi1 in the pathogenesis and proliferation of glioma.

Huang H(1), Xiang Y, Su B, Xiong W, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xijing Institute of Clinical Neuroscience, Fourth 
Military Medical University, 17 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, PR China.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a major form of adult brain tumour with
relatively poor prognosis and high mortality. Temozolomide (TMZ)-based
chemotherapy following neurosurgery and radiotherapy has been suggested as the
first line of treatment and is proven to effectively prolong overall survival and
enhance patient quality of life. However, not all patients benefit from this
treatment because of drug resistance. Even patients with TMZ-sensitive GBM may
become resistant, which is partly due to the restoration of activity of the DNA
repair enzyme O(6)-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT); thus, patients
cannot evade eventual tumour recurrence. The cellular activity of MGMT is the
most important determinant of TMZ-resistance. However, some patients with a low
level of activated MGMT are also TMZ-resistant. The aberrant expression of HOXA9,
one of the 39 class I homeobox genes, is a marker of poor prognosis, and its
level gradually increases with histologic malignant progression, shorter time to 
overall survival (OS) and free progression survival (FPS) in glioma patients,
which further supports an oncogenic role for HOXA9 in gliomas. The HOXA9-PI3K
signalling pathway is an important mechanism in GBM that is independent of MGMT
promoter methylation status. The DNA binding sites of growth factor independent-1
(Gfi1) can overlap with the HOXA9 promoter through the "AATC" versus "GATT" core 
sequence. The competition for this binding site inhibits the expression of HOXA9 
and induces different transcriptional outcomes, which suggests a new direction
for investigation of the mechanism underlying targeted therapy of malignant
gliomas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2013 Mar;12(1):86-92. doi: 012.01/ijaai.8692.

Different pattern of gene mutations in Iranian patients with severe congenital
neutropenia (including 2 new mutations).

Alizadeh Z(1), Fazlollahi MR, Houshmand M, Maddah M, Chavoshzadeh Z, Hamidieh AA,
Shamsian BS, Eshghi P, Bolandghamat Pour S, Sadaaie Jahromi H, Mansouri M,
Movahedi M, Nayebpour M, Pourpak Z, Moin M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology, Asthma and Allergy Research Institute, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. pourpakz@tums.ac.ir.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a rare primary immunodeficiency disease.
Different genes are found to be associated with SCN, including ELA2, HAX1, WAS,
GFI1, G-CSFR and G6PC3. The aim of this study was to find different gene
mutations responsible for SCN in Iranian patients. Twenty-seven patients with SCN
referred to Immunology, Asthma and Allergy Research Institute during a five year 
priod 5 years (May 2007 and May 2012), were included in this study. Neutropenia
related exons and flanking regions of ELA2, HAX1, WAS, GFI1, G-CSFR and G6PC3
were amplified by PCR and the sequences were analyzed. The results showed
different mutations including 4 ELANE mutations, 11 HAX1 mutations and 2 G6PC3
mutations. None of the patients had GFI1 mutation and also one mutation was found
in G-CSFR in a patient with ELANE mutation. Ten patients had unknown genetic
diagnosis which was compatible with other studies. According to these results,
most of the patients showed HAX1 mutations and this finding which significantly
differed from other reports, might be related to differences in Iranian ethnicity
and also in high rate of consanguineous marriages in Iran.

PMID: 23454784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1427-30. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.47. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Low GFI1 expression in white blood cells of CP-CML patients at diagnosis is
strongly associated with subsequent blastic transformation.

Kok CH, Watkins DB, Leclercq T, D'Andrea RJ, Hughes TP, White DL.

Comment on
    Leukemia. 2012 Jul;26(7):1555-63.

PMID: 23411466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cancer Cell. 2013 Feb 11;23(2):200-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.01.011.

Growth factor independence 1 antagonizes a p53-induced DNA damage response
pathway in lymphoblastic leukemia.

Khandanpour C(1), Phelan JD, Vassen L, Schütte J, Chen R, Horman SR, Gaudreau MC,
Krongold J, Zhu J, Paul WE, Dührsen U, Göttgens B, Grimes HL, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), 110 Avenue des Pins
Ouest, Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Most patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) fail current treatments
highlighting the need for better therapies. Because oncogenic signaling activates
a p53-dependent DNA damage response and apoptosis, leukemic cells must devise
appropriate countermeasures. We show here that growth factor independence 1
(Gfi1) can serve such a function because Gfi1 ablation exacerbates p53 responses 
and lowers the threshold for p53-induced cell death. Specifically, Gfi1 restricts
p53 activity and expression of proapoptotic p53 targets such as Bax, Noxa
(Pmaip1), and Puma (Bbc3). Subsequently, Gfi1 ablation cures mice from leukemia
and limits the expansion of primary human T-ALL xenografts in mice. This suggests
that targeting Gfi1 could improve the prognosis of patients with T-ALL or other
lymphoid leukemias.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3597385
PMID: 23410974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2013 Feb;27(1):43-60, vii. doi:
10.1016/j.hoc.2012.11.004. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Genetics and pathophysiology of severe congenital neutropenia syndromes unrelated
to neutrophil elastase.

Boztug K(1), Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, CeMM Research Center for
Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Medical University of
Vienna, Lazarettgasse 14 AKH BT 25.3, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Considerable progress has been made in recent years in understanding of the
genetic basis for congenital neutropenia syndromes. With the advent of
high-throughput genomic analyzing technologies, the underlying genetic causes of 
other congenital neutropenia syndromes are expected to be resolved in the near
future. This knowledge will provide the foundation for genotype-phenotype
correlations for infection susceptibility, response to therapy, and risk of
malignant transformation, enabling optimal care for individual patients depending
on their molecular pathophysiology. It is hoped that these investigations will
enable the development of tailored molecular therapies to specifically correct
the aberrant signaling cascades.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23351987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cureus. 2013 Jan 18;5(1):82.

GRANULOCYTE INFILTRATION AND EXPRESSION OF THE PRO-ANGIOGENIC BV8 PROTEIN IN
EXPERIMENTAL EL4 AND LEWIS LUNG CARCINOMA TUMORS.

Jiang K(1), Kwak H(1), Tosato G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD 20892, USA.

Although Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF)-targeted therapies have shown 
efficacy in the treatment of certain advanced cancers, benefits to patients have 
been modest, which is attributed to tumor resistance to VEGF neutralization.
Recent efforts to identify new targets to inhibit tumor angiogenesis have
identified Bv8 (prokineticin 2), a myeloid cell-derived protein that promotes
endothelial cell growth and tumor angiogenesis, but many mechanistic aspects of
the pro-tumorigenic function of Bv8 are unclear. Here we demonstrate that CD11b+,
Ly6C+, Ly6G+ granulocytes are the predominant cell source of Bv8 expression in
bone marrow, spleen and in tumor tissues. Using granulocyte-deficient Growth
factor independence-1 (Gfi1)-null mutant mice and normal littermates, we found
that EL4 lymphoma tumors grow significantly larger in the granulocyte and
Bv8-deficient mutant mice in comparison to the normal mice that display abundant 
tumor-associated granulocytes and Bv8 expression. Conversely, Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC-1) tumors grew to a significantly greater size in the normal mice 
in comparison to the Gfi1-null mice, but normal granulocyte tumor infiltration
was modest. Quantitative analysis of tissue vascularization showed that EL4 and
LLC-1 tumors from normal and Gfi1-mutant mice are similarly vascularized. These
results confirm the critical contribution of the tumor microenvironment in
determining the rate of tumor progression independently of tumor angiogenesis,
and reveal some of the complexities of granulocyte and Bv8 functions in
modulating tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC4258413
PMID: 25493215  [PubMed]


77. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53666. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053666. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Differential transcriptional regulation of meis1 by Gfi1b and its co-factors LSD1
and CoREST.

Chowdhury AH(1), Ramroop JR, Upadhyay G, Sengupta A, Andrzejczyk A, Saleque S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The City College of New York, New York, New York,
United States of America.

Gfi1b (growth factor independence 1b) is a zinc finger transcription factor
essential for development of the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. To
elucidate the mechanism underlying Gfi1b function, potential downstream
transcriptional targets were identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation and
expression profiling approaches. The combination of these approaches revealed the
oncogene meis1, which encodes a homeobox protein, as a direct and prominent
target of Gfi1b. Examination of the meis1 promoter sequence revealed multiple
Gfi1/1b consensus binding motifs. Distinct regions of the promoter were occupied 
by Gfi1b and its cofactors LSD1 and CoREST/Rcor1, in erythroid cells but not in
the closely related megakaryocyte lineage. Accordingly, Meis1 was significantly
upregulated in LSD1 inhibited erythroid cells, but not in megakaryocytes. This
lineage specific upregulation in Meis1 expression was accompanied by a parallel
increase in di-methyl histone3 lysine4 levels in the Meis1 promoter in LSD1
inhibited, erythroid cells. Meis1 was also substantially upregulated in gfi1b-/- 
fetal liver cells along with its transcriptional partners Pbx1 and several Hox
messages. Elevated Meis1 message levels persisted in gfi1b mutant fetal liver
cells differentiated along the erythroid lineage, relative to wild type. However,
cells differentiated along the megakaryocytic lineage, exhibited no difference in
Meis1 levels between controls and mutants. Transfection experiments further
demonstrated specific repression of meis1 promoter driven reporters by wild type 
Gfi1b but neither by a SNAG domain mutant nor by a DNA binding deficient one,
thus confirming direct functional regulation of this promoter by the Gfi1b
transcriptional complex. Overall, our results demonstrate direct yet differential
regulation of meis1 transcription by Gfi1b in distinct hematopoietic lineages
thus revealing it to be a common, albeit lineage specific, target of both Gfi1b
and its paralog Gfi1.

PMCID: PMC3538684
PMID: 23308270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;50(11):868-71.

[Research progress of pathogenic mechanism of congenital neutropenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei W, Zhu XF.

PMID: 23302623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2012 Dec;34(6):563-6. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.06.005.

[Regulatory effects of cyclosporin A and tacrolimus on the immunological gene
expressions in renal transplant recipients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wen J(1), Ji ZG, Niu JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, PUMC Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the change of Th immunological gene in renal transplant
recipients after the treatment of cyclosporine (CsA) and tacrolimus (FK506).
METHODS: The peripheral blood lymphacytes just before and 24 hours after CsA and 
FK506 treatment were isolated. The total RNA of them were reverse-transcripted
and examined by real-time quantity PCR array. The results were analyzed by
bioinformatic methods.
RESULTS: The TLR4, CEBPB, IL4R, IL1R1,IL18R1,and IL1R2 genes were remarkably
upregulated, whereas IL-2, CCL5, CD27, CCR5, CCR4, CD4, RPL13A, TGFB3, CD86,
CCR3, STAT1, NFATC2IP, IL23A, IL15, IRF4, and TFCP2 were downregulated 24 hours
after CsA treatment. The IL18, IL7, PTPRC, TNFSF4, SPP1, GFI1, TLR4, IL13RA1,
TNF, INHBA, LAG3, IL13, IL1R1, SOCS5, IL10, YY1, TBX21, FASLG, IL18R1, and IL1R2 
genes were remarkably upregulated, whereas IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-6,CCR5, CD4,
CD27, CD40LG, IL15, CCR3, CD86, CCR4, and IRF4 were obviously downregulated 24
hours after FK506 treatment.
CONCLUSION: CsA and FK506 exert their therapeutic effectiveness by regulating the
expressions of a series of target genes.

PMID: 23286399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Blood Res. 2012;2(4):228-42. Epub 2012 Nov 25.

Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) regulates cell-fate decision of a bipotential
granulocytic-monocytic precursor defined by expression of Gfi1 and CD48.

Vassen L(1), Dührsen U, Kosan C, Zeng H, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal IRCM Montreal, QC, Canada.

The transcriptional repressor Gfi1 regulates the expression of genes important
for survival, proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Gfi1
deficient mice are severely neutropenic and accumulate ill-defined
CD11b(+)GR1(int) myeloid cells. Here we show that Gfi1 expression levels
determine mono- or granulocytic lineage choice in precursor cells. In addition,
we identify CD48 as a cell surface marker which enables a better definition of
monocytes and granulocytes in mouse bone marrow. Using the CD48/Gr1/Gfi1 marker
combination we can show that the CD11b(+)GR1(int) cells accumulating in Gfi1
deficient mice are monocytes and not granulocyte precursors. Expression of CD48, 
Gr1 and Gfi1 define different bone marrow subpopulations that are either
committed to the granulocytic lineage, or bipotential precursors of granulocytes 
or monocytes. Finally, a comparison of genes differentially expressed between
murine Gfi1 high granulocytic precursors and mature granulocytes with gene
expression changes from human myeloblasts versus neutrophils show a strong
resemblance of human and mouse differentiation pathways. This underlines the
value of the markers CD48 and Gfi1 identified here to study human and murine
granulo-monocytic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3512177
PMID: 23226623  [PubMed]


81. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;20(5):1221-4.

[Diagnosis and treatment procedures of congenital neutropenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiao M(1), Xue SL, Zou JY, Dai L, Liu HW, Chen Y, Sun AN, Wu DP.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province,
China.

To explore the reasonable procedures and strategies of diagnosis and treatment of
congenital neutropenia (CN), clinical data and laboratory examination results of 
a boy suspected of CN were collected; gene ELA2, GFI1, HAX1, and WASp of whom
were sequenced, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR)
expression on neutrophil was analyzed, and cytoplasmic domain of G-CSFR was
sequenced. The results showed that the diagnosis of non-syndromic variants of CN 
(NSVCN) was made on this patient according to the criteria; sequencing results
revealed no mutation occurred in ELA2, GFI1, HAX1 and WASp; a normal expression
level of G-CSFR on neutrophil from this patient was detected and no truncated
mutation was found in the intracellular domain of G-CSFR. It is concluded that
reasonable procedure of diagnosis and treatment of CN is established, and a
sporadic NSVCN with no recognized pathogenic mutation is confirmed in this
patient.

PMID: 23114152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2013 Apr;24(2):123-31. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2012.09.002. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Snail/Gfi-1 (SNAG) family zinc finger proteins in transcription regulation,
chromatin dynamics, cell signaling, development, and disease.

Chiang C(1), Ayyanathan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades
Road, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA.

The Snail/Gfi-1 (SNAG) family of zinc finger proteins is a group of
transcriptional repressors that have been intensively studied in mammals. SNAG
family members are similarly structured with an N-terminal SNAG repression domain
and a C-terminal zinc finger DNA binding domain, however, the spectrum of target 
genes they regulate and the ranges of biological functions they govern vary
widely between them. They play active roles in transcriptional regulation,
formation of repressive chromatin structure, cellular signaling and developmental
processes. They can also result in disease states due to deregulation. We have
performed a thorough investigation of the relevant literature and present a
comprehensive mini-review. Based on the available information, we also propose a 
mechanism by which SNAG family members may function.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3561489
PMID: 23102646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Brain Res. 2012 Nov 12;1484:1-14. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.09.027. Epub 2012 
Sep 25.

N-Myc and L-Myc are essential for hair cell formation but not maintenance.

Kopecky BJ(1), Decook R, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Department of Biology, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
benjamin-kopecky@uiowa.edu

Sensorineural hearing loss results from damage to the hair cells of the organ of 
Corti and is irreversible in mammals. While hair cell regeneration may prove to
be the ideal therapy after hearing loss, prevention of initial hair cell loss
could provide even more benefit at a lower cost. Previous studies have shown that
the deletion of Atoh1 results in embryonic loss of hair cells while the absence
of Barhl1, Gfi1, and Pou4f3 leads to the progressive loss of hair cells in
newborn mice. We recently reported that in the early embryonic absence of N-Myc
(using Pax2-Cre), hair cells in the organ of Corti develop and remain until at
least seven days after birth, with subsequent progressive loss. Thus, N-Myc plays
a role in hair cell viability; however, it is unclear if this is due to its early
expression in hair cell precursors and throughout the growing otocyst as it
functions through proliferation or its late expression exclusively in
differentiated hair cells. Furthermore, the related family member L-Myc is mostly
co-expressed in the ear, including in differentiated hair cells, but its function
has not been studied and could be partially redundant to N-Myc. To test for a
long-term function of the Mycs in differentiated hair cells, we generated nine
unique genotypes knocking out N-Myc and/or L-Myc after initial formation of hair 
cells using the well-characterized Atoh1-Cre. We tested functionality of the
auditory and vestibular systems at both P21 and four months of age and under the 
administration of the ototoxic drug cisplatin. We conclude that neither N-Myc nor
L-Myc is likely to play important roles in long-term hair cell maintenance.
Therefore, it is likely that the late-onset loss of hair cells resulting from
early deletion of the Mycs leads to an unsustainable developmental defect.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3482343
PMID: 23022312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 1;189(7):3777.

Retraction: Transcription factor Gfi1 restricts B cell-mediated autoimmunity.

Rathinam C(1), Lassmann H, Mengel M, Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

Retraction of
    Rathinam C, Lassmann H, Mengel M, Klein C. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 1;181(9):6222-9.

PMID: 22997232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 12;32(37):12876-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2250-12.2012.

Notch prosensory effects in the Mammalian cochlea are partially mediated by
Fgf20.

Munnamalai V(1), Hayashi T, Bermingham-McDonogh O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Hearing loss is becoming an increasingly prevalent problem affecting more than
250 million people worldwide. During development, fibroblast growth factors
(FGFs) are required for inner ear development as well as hair cell formation in
the mammalian cochlea and thus make attractive therapeutic candidates for the
regeneration of sensory cells. Previous findings showed that Fgfr1 conditional
knock out mice exhibited hair cell and support cell formation defects.
Immunoblocking with Fgf20 antibody in vitro produced a similar phenotype. While
hair cell differentiation in mice starts at embryonic day (E)14.5, beginning with
the inner hair cells, Fgf20 expression precedes hair cell differentiation at
E13.5 in the cochlea. This suggests a potential role for Fgf20 in priming the
sensory epithelium for hair cell formation. Treatment of explants with a
gamma-secretase inhibitor, DAPT, decreased Fgf20 mRNA, suggesting that Notch is
upstream of Fgf20. Notch signaling also plays an early role in prosensory
formation during cochlear development. In this report we show that during
development, Notch-mediated regulation of prosensory formation in the cochlea
occurs via Fgf20. Addition of exogenous FGF20 compensated for the block in Notch 
signaling and rescued Sox2, a prosensory marker, and Gfi1, an early hair cell
marker in explant cultures. We hypothesized that Fgf20 plays a role in
specification, amplification, or maintenance of Sox2 expression in prosensory
progenitors of the developing mammalian cochlea.

PMCID: PMC3525448
PMID: 22973011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):431-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.015. Epub 2012 
Aug 29.

Teleost growth factor independence (gfi) genes differentially regulate successive
waves of hematopoiesis.

Cooney JD(1), Hildick-Smith GJ, Shafizadeh E, McBride PF, Carroll KJ, Anderson H,
Shaw GC, Tamplin OJ, Branco DS, Dalton AJ, Shah DI, Wong C, Gallagher PG, Zon LI,
North TE, Paw BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Growth Factor Independence (Gfi) transcription factors play essential roles in
hematopoiesis, differentially activating and repressing transcriptional programs 
required for hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HSPC) development and lineage
specification. In mammals, Gfi1a regulates hematopoietic stem cells (HSC),
myeloid and lymphoid populations, while its paralog, Gfi1b, regulates HSC,
megakaryocyte and erythroid development. In zebrafish, gfi1aa is essential for
primitive hematopoiesis; however, little is known about the role of gfi1aa in
definitive hematopoiesis or about additional gfi factors in zebrafish. Here, we
report the isolation and characterization of an additional hematopoietic gfi
factor, gfi1b. We show that gfi1aa and gfi1b are expressed in the primitive and
definitive sites of hematopoiesis in zebrafish. Our functional analyses
demonstrate that gfi1aa and gfi1b have distinct roles in regulating primitive and
definitive hematopoietic progenitors, respectively. Loss of gfi1aa silences
markers of early primitive progenitors, scl and gata1. Conversely, loss of gfi1b 
silences runx-1, c-myb, ikaros and cd41, indicating that gfi1b is required for
definitive hematopoiesis. We determine the epistatic relationships between the
gfi factors and key hematopoietic transcription factors, demonstrating that
gfi1aa and gfi1b join lmo2, scl, runx-1 and c-myb as critical regulators of
teleost HSPC. Our studies establish a comparative paradigm for the regulation of 
hematopoietic lineages by gfi transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3532562
PMID: 22960038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Blood. 2012 Nov 8;120(19):4006-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-334722. Epub 2012
Aug 28.

The human GFI136N variant induces epigenetic changes at the Hoxa9 locus and
accelerates K-RAS driven myeloproliferative disorder in mice.

Khandanpour C(1), Krongold J, Schütte J, Bouwman F, Vassen L, Gaudreau MC, Chen
R, Calero-Nieto FJ, Diamanti E, Hannah R, Meyer SE, Grimes HL, van der Reijden
BA, Jansen JH, Patel CV, Peeters JK, Löwenberg B, Dührsen U, Göttgens B, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The coding single nucleotide polymorphism GFI136N in the human gene growth factor
independence 1 (GFI1) is present in 3%-7% of whites and increases the risk for
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by 60%. We show here that GFI136N, in contrast to
GFI136S, lacks the ability to bind to the Gfi1 target gene that encodes the
leukemia-associated transcription factor Hoxa9 and fails to initiate histone
modifications that regulate HoxA9 expression. Consistent with this, AML patients 
heterozygous for the GFI136N variant show increased HOXA9 expression compared
with normal controls. Using ChipSeq, we demonstrate that GFI136N specific
epigenetic changes are also present in other genes involved in the development of
AML. Moreover, granulomonocytic progenitors, a bone marrow subset from which AML 
can arise in humans and mice, show a proliferative expansion in the presence of
the GFI136N variant. In addition, granulomonocytic progenitors carrying the
GFI136N variant allele have altered gene expression patterns and differ in their 
ability to grow after transplantation. Finally, GFI136N can accelerate a K-RAS
driven fatal myeloproliferative disease in mice. Our data suggest that the
presence of a GFI136N variant allele induces a preleukemic state in myeloid
precursors by deregulating the expression of Hoxa9 and other AML-related genes.

PMID: 22932805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2012;7(7). doi:
10.1371/annotation/4f75f09f-a8f0-4cae-b75f-30498d6b44d4. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Retraction: Transcriptional repressor Gfi1 integrates cytokine-receptor signals
controlling B-cell differentiation.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Rathinam C, Klein C. PLoS One. 2007;2(3):e306.

PMCID: PMC3414525
PMID: 22911676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042216. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Nras overexpression results in granulocytosis, T-cell expansion and early
lethality in mice.

Lassen LB(1), Ballarín-González B, Schmitz A, Füchtbauer A, Pedersen FS,
Füchtbauer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.

NRAS is a proto-oncogene involved in numerous myeloid malignancies. Here, we
report on a mouse line bearing a single retroviral long terminal repeat inserted 
into Nras. This genetic modification resulted in an increased level of wild type 
Nras mRNA giving the possibility of studying the function and activation of wild 
type NRAS. Flow cytometry was used to show a variable but significant increase of
immature myeloid cells in spleen and thymus, and of T-cells in the spleen. At an 
age of one week, homozygous mice began to retard compared to their wild type and 
heterozygous littermates. Two weeks after birth, animals started to progressively
lose weight and die before weaning. Heterozygous mice showed a moderate increase 
of T-cells and granulocytes but survived to adulthood and were fertile. In
homozygous and heterozygous mice Gfi1 and Gcsf mRNA levels were upregulated,
possibly explaining the increment in immature myeloid cells detected in these
mice. The short latency period indicates that Nras overexpression alone is
sufficient to cause dose-dependent granulocytosis and T-cell expansion.

PMCID: PMC3410918
PMID: 22876308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34386-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378687. Epub 2012
Aug 3.

CD8 lineage-specific regulation of interleukin-7 receptor expression by the
transcriptional repressor Gfi1.

Ligons DL(1), Tuncer C, Linowes BA, Akcay IM, Kurtulus S, Deniz E, Atasever
Arslan B, Cevik SI, Keller HR, Luckey MA, Feigenbaum L, Möröy T, Ersahin T,
Atalay R, Erman B, Park JH.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

Interleukin-7 receptor a (IL-7Ra) is essential for T cell survival and
differentiation. Glucocorticoids are potent enhancers of IL-7Ra expression with
diverse roles in T cell biology. Here we identify the transcriptional repressor, 
growth factor independent-1 (Gfi1), as a novel intermediary in
glucocorticoid-induced IL-7Ra up-regulation. We found Gfi1 to be a major
inhibitory target of dexamethasone by microarray expression profiling of 3B4.15
T-hybridoma cells. Concordantly, retroviral transduction of Gfi1 significantly
blunted IL-7Ra up-regulation by dexamethasone. To further assess the role of Gfi1
in vivo, we generated bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic mice, in
which a modified Il7r locus expresses GFP to report Il7r gene transcription. By
introducing this BAC reporter transgene into either Gfi1-deficient or
Gfi1-transgenic mice, we document in vivo that IL-7Ra transcription is
up-regulated in the absence of Gfi1 and down-regulated when Gfi1 is
overexpressed. Strikingly, the in vivo regulatory role of Gfi1 was specific for
CD8(+), and not CD4(+) T cells or immature thymocytes. These results identify
Gfi1 as a specific transcriptional repressor of the Il7r gene in CD8 T
lymphocytes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3464544
PMID: 22865857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Environ Health Perspect. 2012 Oct;120(10):1425-31. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1205412. Epub
2012 Jul 31.

450K epigenome-wide scan identifies differential DNA methylation in newborns
related to maternal smoking during pregnancy.

Joubert BR(1), Håberg SE, Nilsen RM, Wang X, Vollset SE, Murphy SK, Huang Z, Hoyo
C, Midttun Ø, Cupul-Uicab LA, Ueland PM, Wu MC, Nystad W, Bell DA, Peddada SD,
London SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Erratum in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2012 Dec;120(12):A455.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2012 Oct;120(10):a402.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation, due to in utero
exposures may play a critical role in early programming for childhood and adult
illness. Maternal smoking is a major risk factor for multiple adverse health
outcomes in children, but the underlying mechanisms are unclear.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated epigenome-wide methylation in cord blood of newborns
in relation to maternal smoking during pregnancy.
METHODS: We examined maternal plasma cotinine (an objective biomarker of smoking)
measured during pregnancy in relation to DNA methylation at 473,844 CpG sites
(CpGs) in 1,062 newborn cord blood samples from the Norwegian Mother and Child
Cohort Study (MoBa) using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (450K).
RESULTS: We found differential DNA methylation at epigenome-wide statistical
significance (p-value < 1.06 × 10-7) for 26 CpGs mapped to 10 genes. We
replicated findings for CpGs in AHRR, CYP1A1, and GFI1 at strict
Bonferroni-corrected statistical significance in a U.S. birth cohort. AHRR and
CYP1A1 play a key role in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling pathway, which 
mediates the detoxification of the components of tobacco smoke. GFI1 is involved 
in diverse developmental processes but has not previously been implicated in
responses to tobacco smoke.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a set of genes with methylation changes present at
birth in children whose mothers smoked during pregnancy. This is the first study 
of differential methylation across the genome in relation to maternal smoking
during pregnancy using the 450K platform. Our findings implicate epigenetic
mechanisms in the pathogenesis of the adverse health outcomes associated with
this important in utero exposure.

PMCID: PMC3491949
PMID: 22851337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cell Rep. 2012 Apr 19;1(4):360-73. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.02.007. Epub 2012
Mar 29.

PI3K-Akt-mTORC1-S6K1/2 axis controls Th17 differentiation by regulating Gfi1
expression and nuclear translocation of ROR<U+03B3>.

Kurebayashi Y(1), Nagai S, Ikejiri A, Ohtani M, Ichiyama K, Baba Y, Yamada T,
Egami S, Hoshii T, Hirao A, Matsuda S, Koyasu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinanomachi, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

The PI3K-Akt-mTORC1 axis contributes to the activation, survival, and
proliferation of CD4(+) T cells upon stimulation through TCR and CD28. Here, we
demonstrate that the suppression of this axis by deletion of p85a or PI3K/mTORC1 
inhibitors as well as T cell-specific deletion of raptor, an essential component 
of mTORC1, impairs Th17 differentiation in vitro and in vivo in a
S6K1/2-dependent fashion. Inhibition of PI3K-Akt-mTORC1-S6K1 axis impairs the
downregulation of Gfi1, a negative regulator of Th17 differentiation.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that S6K2, a nuclear counterpart of S6K1, is induced 
by the PI3K-Akt-mTORC1 axis, binds ROR<U+03B3>, and carries ROR<U+03B3> to the nucleus. These
results point toward a pivotal role of PI3K-Akt-mTORC1-S6K1/2 axis in Th17
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22832227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nat Immunol. 2012 Jul 8;13(8):761-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2365.

The transcription factor Lyl-1 regulates lymphoid specification and the
maintenance of early T lineage progenitors.

Zohren F(1), Souroullas GP, Luo M, Gerdemann U, Imperato MR, Wilson NK, Göttgens 
B, Lukov GL, Goodell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Oncology and Clinical Immunology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Thymopoiesis depends on the recruitment and expansion of bone marrow-derived
progenitor populations; tight regulation of these processes is required for
maintenance of the homeostasis of the T lineage. Lyl-1, a transcription factor
that regulates hematopoietic progenitors, is expressed in thymocyte progenitors
until T cell commitment. Here we demonstrate a requirement for Lyl-1 in lymphoid 
specification and the maintenance of early T lineage progenitors (ETPs). Lyl-1
deficiency resulted in profound defects in the generation of lymphoid-primed
multipotent progenitors (LMPPs), common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) and ETPs.
Lyl-1-deficient ETPs and thymocyte progenitors at the CD4(-)CD8(-)
double-negative 2 (DN2) stage showed more apoptosis, blocked differentiation and 
impaired population expansion. We identified Gfi1 as a critical transcriptional
target of Lyl-1-mediated lymphopoiesis of T cells. Thus, Lyl-1 is a pivotal
component of a transcriptional program that controls the lymphoid specification
and maintenance of ETPs.

PMCID: PMC3411897
PMID: 22772404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Sep;42(9):2395-408. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242589.

A hypomorphic mutation in the Gfi1 transcriptional repressor results in a novel
form of neutropenia.

Ordoñez-Rueda D(1), Jönsson F, Mancardi DA, Zhao W, Malzac A, Liang Y, Bertosio
E, Grenot P, Blanquet V, Sabrautzki S, de Angelis MH, Méresse S, Duprez E, Bruhns
P, Malissen B, Malissen M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille Université, UM2,
Marseille, France.

Using N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced mutagenesis, we established a mouse model
with a novel form of neutropenia resulting from a point mutation in the
transcriptional repressor Growth Factor Independence 1 (Gfi1). These mice, called
Genista, had normal viability and no weight loss, in contrast to mice expressing 
null alleles of the Gfi1 gene. Furthermore, the Genista mutation had a very
limited impact on lymphopoiesis or on T- and B-cell function. Within the bone
marrow (BM), the Genista mutation resulted in a slight increase of monopoiesis
and in a block of terminal granulopoiesis. This block occurred just after the
metamyelocytic stage and resulted in the generation of small numbers of atypical 
CD11b(+) Ly-6G(int) neutrophils, the nuclear morphology of which resembled that
of mature WT neutrophils. Unexpectedly, once released from the BM, these atypical
neutrophils contributed to induce mild forms of autoantibody-induced arthritis
and of immune complex-mediated lung alveolitis. They additionally failed to
provide resistance to acute bacterial infection. Our study demonstrates that a
hypomorphic mutation in the Gfi1 transcriptional repressor results in a novel
form of neutropenia characterized by a split pattern of functional responses,
reflecting the distinct thresholds required for eliciting neutrophil-mediated
inflammatory and anti-infectious responses.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22684987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2012 Jul 12;120(2):314-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-386094. Epub 2012
Jun 5.

GFI1 and GFI1B control the loss of endothelial identity of hemogenic endothelium 
during hematopoietic commitment.

Lancrin C(1), Mazan M, Stefanska M, Patel R, Lichtinger M, Costa G, Vargel O,
Wilson NK, Möröy T, Bonifer C, Göttgens B, Kouskoff V, Lacaud G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Stem Cell Biology Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer
Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Recent studies have established that during embryonic development, hematopoietic 
progenitors and stem cells are generated from hemogenic endothelium precursors
through a process termed endothelial to hematopoietic transition (EHT). The
transcription factor RUNX1 is essential for this process, but its main downstream
effectors remain largely unknown. Here, we report the identification of Gfi1 and 
Gfi1b as direct targets of RUNX1 and critical regulators of EHT. GFI1 and GFI1B
are able to trigger, in the absence of RUNX1, the down-regulation of endothelial 
markers and the formation of round cells, a morphologic change characteristic of 
EHT. Conversely, blood progenitors in Gfi1- and Gfi1b-deficient embryos maintain 
the expression of endothelial genes. Moreover, those cells are not released from 
the yolk sac and disseminated into embryonic tissues. Taken together, our
findings demonstrate a critical and specific role of the GFI1 transcription
factors in the first steps of the process leading to the generation of
hematopoietic progenitors from hemogenic endothelium.

PMID: 22668850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Blood. 2012 Jul 5;120(1):155-65. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-357418. Epub 2012 May
24.

Sox4 cooperates with CREB in myeloid transformation.

Sandoval S(1), Kraus C, Cho EC, Cho M, Bies J, Manara E, Accordi B, Landaw EM,
Wolff L, Pigazzi M, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Gwynne Hazen,
Cherry Memorial Laboratories, Mattel Children's Hospital, University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) is a nuclear transcription
factor that is critical for normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis. Previous studies
have demonstrated that CREB is a proto-oncogene whose overexpression promotes
cellular proliferation in hematopoietic cells. Transgenic mice that overexpress
CREB in myeloid cells develop a myeloproliferative disease with splenomegaly and 
aberrant myelopoiesis. However, CREB overexpressing mice do not spontaneously
develop acute myeloid leukemia. In this study, we used retroviral insertional
mutagenesis to identify genes that accelerate leukemia in CREB transgenic mice.
Our mutagenesis screen identified several integration sites, including oncogenes 
Gfi1, Myb, and Ras. The Sox4 transcription factor was identified by our screen as
a gene that cooperates with CREB in myeloid leukemogenesis. We show that the
transduction of CREB transgenic mouse bone marrow cells with a Sox4 retrovirus
increases survival and self-renewal of cells in vitro. Furthermore, leukemic
blasts from the majority of acute myeloid leukemia patients have higher CREB,
phosphorylated CREB, and Sox 4 protein expression. Sox4 transduction of mouse
bone marrow cells results in increased expression of CREB target genes. We also
demonstrate that CREB is a direct target of Sox4 by chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays. These results indicate that Sox4 and CREB cooperate and contribute to
increased proliferation of hematopoietic progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3390953
PMID: 22627767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int J Hematol. 2012 Jun;95(6):640-7. doi: 10.1007/s12185-012-1078-x. Epub 2012
May 3.

Gfi-1 inhibits the expression of eosinophil major basic protein (MBP) during
G-CSF-induced neutrophilic differentiation.

Liu Q(1), Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, 2801 West Bancroft
Street, Toledo, OH 43606, USA.

The zinc finger transcriptional repressor Gfi-1 has been shown to play a critical
role in early granulopoiesis; however, its role in late neutrophilic development 
is poorly understood. We report here that forced expression of a dominant
negative Gfi-1 mutant, N382S, resulted in augmented mRNA levels of eosinophil
major basic protein (MBP) in myeloid cells induced with G-CSF to undergo terminal
neutrophilic differentiation. MBP is a cytotoxic protein that is abundantly
expressed in eosinophils, but not in neutrophils. Ectopic expression of MBP
inhibited the proliferation and survival of differentiating myeloid cells in
response to G-CSF. Significantly, while GFI-1 is upregulated during neutrophilic 
differentiation, it is rapidly downregulated upon induction of eosinophilic
differentiation, which was associated with increased MBP expression. Knockdown of
GFI-1 in eosinophilic cells also led to increased level of MBP mRNA. These
results indicate that Gfi-1 functions to inhibit the expression of MBP and
aberrant expression of MBP as a result of loss of Gfi-1 function may cause
premature apoptosis of differentiating neutrophils. In contrast, the rapid
downregulation of Gfi-1 during eosinophilic development may allow for abundant
expression of MBP, a hallmark of eosinophilic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3376173
PMID: 22552881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Pancreas. 2012 Aug;41(6):962-9. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31823d0160.

Synergizing genomic analysis with biological knowledge to identify and validate
novel genes in pancreatic development.

Sarkar SA(1), Lee CE, Tipney H, Karimpour-Fard A, Dinella JD, Juhl K, Walters JA,
Hutton JC, Hunter LE.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, School of Medicine, University of
Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. suparna.sarkar@ucdenver.edu

OBJECTIVE: This study investigated the utility of advanced computational
techniques to large-scale genome-based data to identify novel genes that govern
murine pancreatic development.
METHODS: An expression data set for mouse pancreatic development was complemented
with high-throughput data analyzer to identify and prioritize novel genes.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization, and
immunohistochemistry were used to validate selected genes.
RESULTS: Four new genes whose roles in the development of murine pancreas have
not previously been established were identified: cystathionine ß-synthase (Cbs), 
Meis homeobox 1, growth factor independent 1, and aldehyde dehydrogenase 18
family, member A1. Their temporal expression during development was documented.
Cbs was localized in the cytoplasm of the tip cells of the epithelial chords of
the undifferentiated progenitor cells at E12.5 and was coexpressed with the
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 and pancreas-specific transcription factor,
1a-positive cells. In the adult pancreas, Cbs was localized primarily within the 
acinar compartment.
CONCLUSIONS: In silico analysis of high-throughput microarray data in combination
with background knowledge about genes provides an additional reliable method of
identifying novel genes. To our knowledge, the expression and localization of Cbs
have not been previously documented during mouse pancreatic development.

PMCID: PMC3387325
PMID: 22450367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jan-Feb;205(1-2):25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.005.

Characterization of the colorectal cancer-associated enhancer MYC-335 at 8q24:
the role of rs67491583.

Tuupanen S(1), Yan J, Turunen M, Gylfe AE, Kaasinen E, Li L, Eng C, Culver DA,
Kalady MF, Pennison MJ, Pasche B, Manne U, de la Chapelle A, Hampel H, Henderson 
BE, Le Marchand L, Hautaniemi S, Askhtorab H, Smoot D, Sandler RS, Keku T, Kupfer
SS, Ellis NA, Haiman CA, Taipale J, Aaltonen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified multiple regions at 8q24
that confer susceptibility to many cancers. In our previous work, we showed that 
the colorectal cancer (CRC) risk variant rs6983267 at 8q24 resides within a TCF4 
binding site at the MYC-335 enhancer, with the risk allele G having a stronger
binding capacity and Wnt responsiveness. Here, we searched for other potential
functional variants within MYC-335. Genetic variation within MYC-335 was
determined in samples from individuals of European, African, and Asian descent,
with emphasis on variants in putative transcription factor binding sites. A 2-bp 
GA deletion rs67491583 was found to affect a growth factor independent (GFI)
binding site and was present only in individuals with African ancestry. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation performed in heterozygous cells showed that the GA deletion
had an ability to reduce binding of the transcriptional repressors GFI1 and
GFI1b. Screening of 1,027 African American colorectal cancer cases and 1,773
healthy controls did not reveal evidence for association (odds ratio: 1.17, 95%
confidence interval: 0.97-1.41, P = 0.095). In this study, rs67491583 was
identified as another functional variant in the CRC-associated enhancer MYC-335, 
but further studies are needed to establish the role of rs67491583 in the
colorectal cancer predisposition of African Americans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3770308
PMID: 22429595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Immunity. 2012 Mar 23;36(3):362-73. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.12.019. Epub 2012 
Mar 8.

Stat3 and Gfi-1 transcription factors control Th17 cell immunosuppressive
activity via the regulation of ectonucleotidase expression.

Chalmin F(1), Mignot G, Bruchard M, Chevriaux A, Végran F, Hichami A, Ladoire S, 
Derangère V, Vincent J, Masson D, Robson SC, Eberl G, Pallandre JR, Borg C,
Ryffel B, Apetoh L, Rébé C, Ghiringhelli F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U866, 21000 Dijon, France.

Although Th17 cells are known to promote tissue inflammation and autoimmunity,
their role during cancer progression remains elusive. Here, we showed that in
vitro Th17 cells generated with the cytokines IL-6 and TGF-ß expressed CD39 and
CD73 ectonucleotidases, leading to adenosine release and the subsequent
suppression of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell effector functions. The IL-6-mediated
activation of the transcription factor Stat3 and the TGF-ß-driven downregulation 
of Gfi-1 transcription factor were both essential for the expression of
ectonucleotidases during Th17 cell differentiation. Stat3 supported whereas Gfi-1
repressed CD39 and CD73 expression by binding to their promoters. Accordingly,
Th17 cells differentiated with IL-1ß, IL-6, and IL-23 but without TGF-ß did not
express ectonucleotidases and were not immunosuppressive. Finally, adoptive
transfer of Th17 cells induced by TGF-ß and IL-6 promoted tumor growth in a
CD39-dependent manner. Thus, ectonucleotidase expression supports the
immunosuppressive fate of Th17 cells in cancer.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22406269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Jul 31;167(2):537-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2012.01.068. Epub
2012 Feb 16.

Effect of autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells transplantation in diabetic
patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.

Sun D(1), Narsinh K, Wang H, Li C, Li W, Zhang Z, Li J, Cao F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710032, China.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the efficacy and proposed mechanism of bone marrow
mononuclear cells (BMMNCs) transplantation for diabetic and non-diabetic patients
with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).
METHODS: One hundred and sixteen patients with STEMI who had successfully
undergone percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) were divided into a diabetic
group (n=51) and non-diabetic group (n=65). All of the patients received
intracoronary injection of BMMNCs.
RESULTS: Diabetes down-regulated IGF-1, IGFBP-5, VEGF, SDF-1, IL-6, IL-1a and
TNF-a expression and affected the expression of Bmi-1, Gfi1, Tel and Hox-B4 which
could prevent premature senescence and maintain the self-renewal capacity of stem
cells. Event-free survival rates were not statistically different between the
diabetic and non-diabetic group (80% vs. 72.5%, p=0.382). LV ejection fraction
(LVEF) and wall motion score index (WMSI) were evaluated by echocardiography and 
found to be significantly improved in the non-diabetic group compared to the
diabetic group over the 4-year follow-up period. Improved myocardial perfusion
and reduced infarct size in the non-diabetic group compared to the diabetic group
was verified using single-photon emission computed tomographic (SPECT) imaging.
The non-diabetic group also had reduced anginal symptoms as assessed by changes
in their Seattle Angina Questionnaire scores and Canadian Cardiovascular Society 
(CCS) Functional Angina classification. An improvement of 6-minute walk distance 
(6MWD) was also noted to be higher in the non-diabetic group during the follow-up
period.
CONCLUSION: This study indicates that the beneficial effect of BMMNCs
transplantation for STEMI is less pronounced in diabetic patients. The mechanism 
is associated with decreased BMMNCs function in diabetic patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22341692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Nov;50(11):922-5.

[Genetic diagnosis of a patient with non-syndromic variants of congenital
neutropenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Xue SL(1), Chen Y, Qiu QC, Feng YF, Dai L, Qiao M, Wu DP.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215006, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the procedures and methods for genetic diagnosis in one
non-syndromic variants of congenital neutropenia (NSVCN) patient and its
pathogenic mutation.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was prepared from one NSVCN patient who had progressed to
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and ELA2, HAX1, WASp and GFI1 genes were
amplified and sequenced.
RESULTS: A novel compound heterogeneous mutation consisting of two frame-shift
mutations (c. 430-1insG and c. 655-9del5bp) was found in HAX1 gene.
CONCLUSION: A practically genetic diagnosis procedure for NSVCN has been
established, and the novel HAX1 gene mutation may contribute to the etiology of
NSVCN.

PMID: 22333123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Leukemia. 2012 Jul;26(7):1555-63. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.19. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Gfi-1 inhibits proliferation and colony formation of p210BCR/ABL-expressing cells
via transcriptional repression of STAT 5 and Mcl-1.

Soliera AR(1), Mariani SA, Audia A, Lidonnici MR, Addya S, Ferrari-Amorotti G,
Cattelani S, Manzotti G, Fragliasso V, Peterson L, Perini G, Holyoake TL,
Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1427-30.

Expression of the transcription repressor Gfi-1 is required for the maintenance
of murine hematopoietic stem cells. In human cells, ectopic expression of Gfi-1
inhibits and RNA interference-mediated Gfi-1 downregulation enhances
proliferation and colony formation of p210BCR/ABL expressing cells. To
investigate the molecular mechanisms that may explain the effects of perturbing
Gfi-1 expression in human cells, Gfi-1-regulated genes were identified by
microarray analysis in K562 cells expressing the tamoxifen-regulated Gfi-1-ER
protein. STAT 5B and Mcl-1, two genes important for the proliferation and
survival of hematopoietic stem cells, were identified as direct and functionally 
relevant Gfi-1 targets in p210BCR/ABL-transformed cells because: (i) their
expression and promoter activity was repressed by Gfi-1 and (ii) when
constitutively expressed blocked the proliferation and colony formation
inhibitory effects of Gfi-1. Consistent with these findings, genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of STAT 5 and/or Mcl-1 markedly suppressed
proliferation and colony formation of K562 and CD34+ chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML) cells. Together, these studies suggest that the Gfi-1STAT 5B/Mcl-1
regulatory pathway identified here can be modulated to suppress the proliferation
and survival of p210BCR/ABL-transformed cells including CD34+ CML cells.

PMID: 22285998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Exp Med. 2012 Jan 16;209(1):187-99. doi: 10.1084/jem.20110645. Epub 2011 Dec
26.

Gfi1b negatively regulates Rag expression directly and via the repression of
FoxO1.

Schulz D(1), Vassen L, Chow KT, McWhirter SM, Amin RH, Möröy T, Schlissel MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Precise regulation of Rag (recombination-activating gene) expression is crucial
to prevent genomic instability caused by the generation of Rag-mediated DNA
breaks. Although mechanisms of Rag activation have been well characterized, the
mechanism by which Rag expression is down-regulated in early B cell development
has not been fully elucidated. Using a complementary DNA library screen, we
identified the transcriptional repressor Gfi1b as negative regulator of the Rag
locus. Expression of Gfi1b causes repression of Rag1 and Rag2 in cell lines and
primary mouse cells. Conversely, Gfi1b-deficient cell lines exhibit increased Rag
expression, double-strand breaks and recombination, and cell cycle defects. In
primary cells, transcription of Gfi1b inversely correlates with Rag
transcription, and simultaneous inactivation of Gfi1 and Gfi1b leads to an
increase in Rag transcription early in B cell development. In addition, deletion 
of Gfi1 and Gfi1b in vivo results in a severe block in B cell development. Gfi1b 
orchestrates Rag repression via a dual mechanism. Direct binding of Gfi1b to a
site 5' of the B cell-specific Erag enhancer results in epigenetic changes in the
Rag locus, whereas indirect inhibition is achieved through repression of the
trans-activator Foxo1. Together, our experiments show that Gfi family members are
essential for normal B cell development and play an important role in modulating 
expression of the V(D)J recombinase.

PMCID: PMC3260878
PMID: 22201127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Pediatr Rep. 2011 Jun 22;3 Suppl 2:e9. doi: 10.4081/pr.2011.s2.e9.

Severe congenital neutropenia, a genetically heterogeneous disease group with an 
increased risk of AML/MDS.

Vandenberghe P(1), Beel K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Universitaire Ziekenhuizen Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;

OVER THE PAST DECADE, ENORMOUS PROGRESS HAS BEEN MADE IN THE UNDERSTANDING OF
SEVERE CONGENITAL NEUTROPENIA (SCN), BY IDENTIFICATION OF SEVERAL CAUSAL GENE
MUTATIONS: in ELANE, GFI1, HAX1, WAS and G3PC3. SCN is a preleukemic condition,
independent of the genetic subtype. Acquired CSF3R mutations are specific for SCN
and are strongly associated with malignant progression. In this review, we
describe the known genetic subtypes of SCN, their molecular basis and clinical
presentation and summarize the available evidence on CSF3R mutations and monosomy
7 in malignant conversion.

PMCID: PMC3206537
PMID: 22053285  [PubMed]


106. Blood. 2011 Dec 22;118(26):6871-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-346775. Epub 2011 
Oct 31.

Gfi1 expressed in bone marrow stromal cells is a novel osteoblast suppressor in
patients with multiple myeloma bone disease.

D'Souza S(1), del Prete D, Jin S, Sun Q, Huston AJ, Kostov FE, Sammut B, Hong CS,
Anderson JL, Patrene KD, Yu S, Velu CS, Xiao G, Grimes HL, Roodman GD, Galson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Protracted inhibition of osteoblast (OB) differentiation characterizes multiple
myeloma (MM) bone disease and persists even when patients are in long-term
remission. However, the underlying pathophysiology for this prolonged OB
suppression is unknown. Therefore, we developed a mouse MM model in which the
bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) remained unresponsive to OB differentiation
signals after removal of MM cells. We found that BMSCs from both MM-bearing mice 
and MM patients had increased levels of the transcriptional repressor Gfi1
compared with controls and that Gfi1 was a novel transcriptional repressor of the
critical OB transcription factor Runx2. Trichostatin-A blocked the effects of
Gfi1, suggesting that it induces epigenetic changes in the Runx2 promoter.
MM-BMSC cell-cell contact was not required for MM cells to increase Gfi1 and
repress Runx2 levels in MC-4 before OBs or naive primary BMSCs, and Gfi1
induction was blocked by anti-TNF-a and anti-IL-7 antibodies. Importantly, BMSCs 
isolated from Gfi1(-/-) mice were significantly resistant to MM-induced OB
suppression. Strikingly, siRNA knockdown of Gfi1 in BMSCs from MM patients
significantly restored expression of Runx2 and OB differentiation markers. Thus, 
Gfi1 may have an important role in prolonged MM-induced OB suppression and
provide a new therapeutic target for MM bone disease.

PMCID: PMC3245209
PMID: 22042697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Semin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):368-78. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2011.08.006. Epub 2011 
Sep 14.

Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) as a regulator of lymphocyte development and 
activation.

Möröy T(1), Khandanpour C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal - IRCM, 110 Avenue des Pins
Ouest, Montréal, QC, H2W 1R7, Canada. Tarik.Moroy@ircm.qc.ca

T- and B-lymphocytes are important elements in the immune defense repertoire of
higher organisms. The development and function of lymphoid cells is regulated at 
many levels one being the control of gene expression by transcription factors.
The zinc finger transcriptional repressor Gfi1 has emerged as a factor that is
critically implicated in the commitment of precursor cells for the lymphoid
lineage. In addition, Gfi1 controls distinct stages of early T- or B-lymphoid
development and is also critical for their maturation, activation and effector
function. From many years of work, a picture emerges in which Gfi1 is part of a
complicated, but well orchestrated network of interdependent regulators, most of 
which impinge on lymphoid development and activation by transcriptional
regulation. Biochemical studies show that Gfi1 is part of a large DNA binding
multi-protein complex that enables histone modifications, but may also control
alternative pre mRNA splicing. Many insights into the biological role of Gfi1
have been gained through the study of gene deficient mice that have defects in B-
and T-cell differentiation, in T-cell selection and polarization processes and in
the response of mature B- and T-cells towards antigen. Most importantly, the
defects seen in Gfi1 deficient mice also point to roles of Gfi1 in diseases of
the immune system that involve auto-immune responses and acute lymphoid leukemia 
and lymphoma.

2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21920773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024484. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Delta1 expression, cell cycle exit, and commitment to a specific secretory fate
coincide within a few hours in the mouse intestinal stem cell system.

Stamataki D(1), Holder M, Hodgetts C, Jeffery R, Nye E, Spencer-Dene B, Winton
DJ, Lewis J.

Author information: 
(1)Vertebrate Development Laboratory, Cancer Research United Kingdom London
Research Institute, London, United Kingdom.

The stem cells of the small intestine are multipotent: they give rise, via
transit-amplifying cell divisions, to large numbers of columnar absorptive cells 
mixed with much smaller numbers of three different classes of secretory
cells--mucus-secreting goblet cells, hormone-secreting enteroendocrine cells, and
bactericide-secreting Paneth cells. Notch signaling is known to control
commitment to a secretory fate, but why are the secretory cells such a small
fraction of the population, and how does the diversity of secretory cell types
arise? Using the mouse as our model organism, we find that secretory cells, and
only secretory cells, pass through a phase of strong expression of the Notch
ligand Delta1 (Dll1). Onset of this Dll1 expression coincides with a block to
further cell division and is followed in much less than a cell cycle time by
expression of Neurog3--a marker of enteroendocrine fate--or Gfi1--a marker of
goblet or Paneth cell fate. By conditional knock-out of Dll1, we confirm that
Delta-Notch signaling controls secretory commitment through lateral inhibition.
We infer that cells stop dividing as they become committed to a secretory fate,
while their neighbors continue dividing, explaining the final excess of
absorptive over secretory cells. Our data rule out schemes in which cells first
become committed to be secretory, and then diversify through subsequent cell
divisions. A simple mathematical model shows how, instead, Notch signaling may
simultaneously govern the commitment to be secretory and the choice between
alternative modes of secretory differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3168508
PMID: 21915337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Iran J Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2011 Sep;10(3):227-30. doi: 010.03/ijaai.227230.

Two cases of syndromic neutropenia with a report of novel mutation in G6PC3.

Alizadeh Z(1), Fazlollahi MR, Eshghi P, Hamidieh AA, Ghadami M, Pourpak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology, Asthma and Allergy Research Institute, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a rare primary immunodeficiency. Different
genes are found to be associated with SCN, including ELA2, HAX1, WAS, GFI1,
G-CSFR. Also, recently G6PC3 as a rare gene in SCN has been reported. Patients
with G6PC3 often have cardiac and/or urogenital malformations. Two patients with 
persistent severe neutropenia, recurrent infections and maturation arrest at
promyelocyte-myelocyte stage in their bone marrow were assessed in this study.
Both patients showed structural heart disease and one of them also showed
urogenital anomaly. Sequence analyses of G6PC3 in 2 patients revealed two
different homozygous mutations, one in exon 6 (Asn 313 fs), and the other in exon
3 (Ser 139 Met), the latter is a new mutation which has not been reported in
previous studies. It can be concluded that G6PC3 is one of the responsible gene
for SCN in Iranian patients. Based on the results, a new mutation in G6PC3
observed in one patient.

PMID: 21891829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Stem Cells. 2011 Feb;29(2):376-85. doi: 10.1002/stem.575.

Growth factor independence 1 protects hematopoietic stem cells against apoptosis 
but also prevents the development of a myeloproliferative-like disease.

Khandanpour C(1), Kosan C, Gaudreau MC, Dührsen U, Hébert J, Zeng H, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

The regulation of gene transcription is elementary for the function of
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The transcriptional repressor growth factor
independence 1 (Gfi1) restricts HSC proliferation and is essential to maintain
their self-renewal capacity and multipotency after transplantation. In addition, 
Gfi1(-/-) HSCs are severely compromised in their ability to compete with
wild-type (wt) HSCs after transplantation. We now report that Gfi1 protects HSCs 
against stress-induced apoptosis, probably, by repressing the proapoptotic target
gene Bax, since irradiated Gfi1(-/-) HSCs display higher expression of Bax and
show a higher rate of apoptosis than wt HSCs. This protective function of Gfi1
appears to be functionally relevant since Gfi1(-/-) HSCs that express Bcl-2,
which antagonizes the effects of Bax, regain their ability to self renew and to
initiate multilineage differentiation after transplantation. Surprisingly,
Gfi1(-/-) xBcl-2 transgenic mice also show a strong, systemic expansion of
Mac-1(+) Gr-1(-) myeloid cells in bone marrow and peripheral lymphoid organs.
These cells express high levels of the proleukemogenic transcription factor Hoxa9
and, in older mice, appear as atypical monocytoid-blastoid cells in the
peripheral blood. As a result of this massive expansion of myeloid cells, all
Gfi1(-/-) xBcl-2 mice eventually succumb to a myeloproliferative-like disease
resembling a preleukemic state. In summary, our data demonstrate that Gfi1's
ability to protect against apoptosis is essential for HSC function. In addition, 
our finding show that Gfi1 prevents the development of myeloproliferative
diseases and provides evidence how Gfi1 deficiency could be linked to myeloid
leukemia.

Copyright © 2010 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21732494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2011 Aug 25;118(8):2243-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-298802. Epub 2011
Jun 24.

GABP transcription factor is required for myeloid differentiation, in part,
through its control of Gfi-1 expression.

Yang ZF(1), Drumea K, Cormier J, Wang J, Zhu X, Rosmarin AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

GABP is an ets transcription factor that regulates genes that are required for
myeloid differentiation. The tetrameric GABP complex includes GABPa, which binds 
DNA via its ets domain, and GABPß, which contains the transcription activation
domain. To examine the role of GABP in myeloid differentiation, we generated mice
in which Gabpa can be conditionally deleted in hematopoietic tissues. Gabpa
knockout mice rapidly lost myeloid cells, and residual myeloid cells were
dysplastic and immunophenotypically abnormal. Bone marrow transplantation
demonstrated that Gabpa null cells could not contribute to the myeloid
compartment because of cell intrinsic defects. Disruption of Gabpa was associated
with a marked reduction in myeloid progenitor cells, and Gabpa null myeloid cells
express reduced levels of the transcriptional repressor, Gfi-1. Gabp bound and
activated the Gfi1 promoter, and transduction of Gabpa knockout bone marrow with 
Gfi1 partially rescued defects in myeloid colony formation and myeloid
differentiation. We conclude that Gabp is required for myeloid differentiation
due, in part, to its regulation of the tran-scriptional repressor Gfi-1.

PMCID: PMC3162354
PMID: 21705494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;18(6):708-14. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2059. Epub 2011 May
22.

Genome-wide CTCF distribution in vertebrates defines equivalent sites that aid
the identification of disease-associated genes.

Martin D(1), Pantoja C, Fernández Miñán A, Valdes-Quezada C, Moltó E, Matesanz F,
Bogdanovic O, de la Calle-Mustienes E, Domínguez O, Taher L, Furlan-Magaril M,
Alcina A, Cañón S, Fedetz M, Blasco MA, Pereira PS, Ovcharenko I, Recillas-Targa 
F, Montoliu L, Manzanares M, Guigó R, Serrano M, Casares F, Gómez-Skarmeta JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Sep;18(9):1084.

Many genomic alterations associated with human diseases localize in noncoding
regulatory elements located far from the promoters they regulate, making it
challenging to link noncoding mutations or risk-associated variants with target
genes. The range of action of a given set of enhancers is thought to be defined
by insulator elements bound by the 11 zinc-finger nuclear factor CCCTC-binding
protein (CTCF). Here we analyzed the genomic distribution of CTCF in various
human, mouse and chicken cell types, demonstrating the existence of
evolutionarily conserved CTCF-bound sites beyond mammals. These sites
preferentially flank transcription factor-encoding genes, often associated with
human diseases, and function as enhancer blockers in vivo, suggesting that they
act as evolutionarily invariant gene boundaries. We then applied this concept to 
predict and functionally demonstrate that the polymorphic variants associated
with multiple sclerosis located within the EVI5 gene impinge on the adjacent gene
GFI1.

PMCID: PMC3196567
PMID: 21602820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Apr-Jun;1809(4-6):255-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.04.009. Epub 2011 May 1.

The p150 subunit of the histone chaperone Caf-1 interacts with the
transcriptional repressor Gfi1.

Heyd F(1), Chen R, Afshar K, Saba I, Lazure C, Fiolka K, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), H2W 1R7, Montréal, QC,
Canada.

Modification of histones is critically involved in regulating chromatin structure
and gene expression. The zinc finger protein Gfi1 silences transcription by
recruiting a complex of histone modifying enzymes such as LSD-1/CoRest and HDAC-1
to target gene promoters. Here we present evidence that Gfi1 forms a complex with
the p150 subunit of the histone chaperone chromatin assembly factor-1 (Caf-1).
Gfi1 and p150 interact at endogenous expression levels and co-localize in
distinct sub-nuclear structures. We show that p150 enhances Gfi1-mediated
transcriptional repression and that it occupies Gfi1 target gene promoters in
transfected cells and primary murine T cells only in the presence of Gfi1.
Finally, size exclusion chromatography shows a fraction of p150 to coelute with
Gfi1, LSD-1 and HDAC-1 and thus provides evidence that p150 is part of the Gfi1
repression complex. Since p150 binds directly to histones H3 and H4, our findings
suggest that p150 may link the DNA-bound Gfi1 repressor complex to histones
enabling modifications required for transcriptional silencing.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21570500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Anat Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;44(1):69-78. doi: 10.5115/acb.2011.44.1.69. Epub 2011
Mar 31.

Identification of genes concordantly expressed with Atoh1 during inner ear
development.

Yoon H(1), Lee DJ, Kim MH, Bok J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, College of 
Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.

The inner ear is composed of a cochlear duct and five vestibular organs in which 
mechanosensory hair cells play critical roles in receiving and relaying sound and
balance signals to the brain. To identify novel genes associated with hair cell
differentiation or function, we analyzed an archived gene expression dataset from
embryonic mouse inner ear tissues. Since atonal homolog 1a (Atoh1) is a well
known factor required for hair cell differentiation, we searched for genes
expressed in a similar pattern with Atoh1 during inner ear development. The list 
from our analysis includes many genes previously reported to be involved in hair 
cell differentiation such as Myo6, Tecta, Myo7a, Cdh23, Atp6v1b1, and Gfi1. In
addition, we identified many other genes that have not been associated with hair 
cell differentiation, including Tekt2, Spag6, Smpx, Lmod1, Myh7b, Kif9, Ttyh1,
Scn11a and Cnga2. We examined expression patterns of some of the newly identified
genes using real-time polymerase chain reaction and in situ hybridization. For
example, Smpx and Tekt2, which are regulators for cytoskeletal dynamics, were
shown specifically expressed in the hair cells, suggesting a possible role in
hair cell differentiation or function. Here, by reanalyzing archived genetic
profiling data, we identified a list of novel genes possibly involved in hair
cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3080010
PMID: 21519551  [PubMed]


115. J Cell Biol. 2011 Mar 7;192(5):767-80. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201010127.

Distinct ATOH1 and Neurog3 requirements define tuft cells as a new secretory cell
type in the intestinal epithelium.

Gerbe F(1), van Es JH, Makrini L, Brulin B, Mellitzer G, Robine S, Romagnolo B,
Shroyer NF, Bourgaux JF, Pignodel C, Clevers H, Jay P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR5203, Montpellier F-34094, France.

The unique morphology of tuft cells was first revealed by electron microscopy
analyses in several endoderm-derived epithelia. Here, we explore the relationship
of these cells with the other cell types of the intestinal epithelium and
describe the first marker signature allowing their unambiguous identification. We
demonstrate that although mature tuft cells express DCLK1, a putative marker of
quiescent stem cells, they are post-mitotic, short lived, derive from
Lgr5-expressing epithelial stem cells, and are found in mouse and human tumors.
We show that whereas the ATOH1/MATH1 transcription factor is essential for their 
differentiation, Neurog3, SOX9, GFI1, and SPDEF are dispensable, which
distinguishes these cells from enteroendocrine, Paneth, and goblet cells, and
raises from three to four the number of secretory cell types in the intestinal
epithelium. Moreover, we show that tuft cells are the main source of endogenous
intestinal opioids and are the only epithelial cells that express cyclooxygenase 
enzymes, suggesting important roles for these cells in the intestinal epithelium 
physiopathology.

PMCID: PMC3051826
PMID: 21383077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2011 Feb 10;2(1):6. doi: 10.1186/scrt47.

Transcriptional regulation of haematopoietic transcription factors.

Wilson NK(1), Calero-Nieto FJ, Ferreira R, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK. bg200@cam.ac.uk

The control of differential gene expression is central to all metazoan biology.
Haematopoiesis represents one of the best understood developmental systems where 
multipotent blood stem cells give rise to a range of phenotypically distinct
mature cell types, all characterised by their own distinctive gene expression
profiles. Small combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors drive
the development of specific mature lineages from multipotent precursors. Given
their powerful regulatory nature, it is imperative that the expression of these
lineage-determining transcription factors is under tight control, a fact
underlined by the observation that their misexpression commonly leads to the
development of leukaemia. Here we review recent studies on the transcriptional
control of key haematopoietic transcription factors, which demonstrate that gene 
loci contain multiple modular regulatory regions within which specific regulatory
codes can be identified, that some modular elements cooperate to mediate
appropriate tissue-specific expression, and that long-range approaches will be
necessary to capture all relevant regulatory elements. We also explore how
changes in technology will impact on this area of research in the future.

PMCID: PMC3092146
PMID: 21345252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Blood. 2011 Apr 14;117(15):e142-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-323212. Epub 2011 
Feb 22.

Genome-wide analysis of target genes regulated by HoxB4 in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells developing from embryonic stem cells.

Oshima M(1), Endoh M, Endo TA, Toyoda T, Nakajima-Takagi Y, Sugiyama F, Koseki H,
Kyba M, Iwama A, Osawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

Forced expression of the transcription factor HoxB4 has been shown to enhance the
self-renewal capacity of mouse bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
confer a long-term repopulating capacity to yolk sac and embryonic stem (ES)
cell-derived hematopoietic precursors. The fact that ES cell-derived precursors
do not repopulate bone marrow without HoxB4 underscores an important role for
HoxB4 in the maturation of ES-derived hematopoietic precursors into long-term
repopulating HSCs. However, the precise molecular mechanism underlying this
process is barely understood. In this study, we performed a genome-wide analysis 
of HoxB4 using ES cell-derived hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. The results
revealed many of the genes essential for HSC development to be direct targets of 
HoxB4, such as Runx1, Scl/Tal1, Gata2, and Gfi1. The expression profiling also
showed that HoxB4 indirectly affects the expression of several important genes,
such as Lmo2, Erg, Meis1, Pbx1, Nov, AhR, and Hemgn. HoxB4 tended to activate the
transcription, but the down-regulation of a significant portion of direct targets
suggested its function to be context-dependent. These findings indicate that
HoxB4 reprograms a set of key regulator genes to facilitate the maturation of
developing HSCs into repopulating cells. Our list of HoxB4 targets also provides 
novel candidate regulators for HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3296623
PMID: 21343615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):1961-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1065. Epub 2011 Feb
22.

Expression of insulinoma-associated 2 (INSM2) in pancreatic islet cells is
regulated by the transcription factors Ngn3 and NeuroD1.

Cai T(1), Chen X, Wang R, Xu H, You Y, Zhang T, Lan MS, Notkins AL.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research/National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. tcai@mail.nih.gov

The insulinoma-associated 2 (Insm2) gene is a member of the Snail/Gfi1/Insm1
transcriptional repressor superfamily. However, little is known about how the
expression of human INSM2 or mouse Insm2 in neuroendocrine tissues is regulated. 
Here we report the expression of INSM2/Insm2 in human fetal pancreas and mouse
embryos, as well as adult pancreatic islets, and its regulation by two major
islet transcription factors. Mutagenesis and chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis demonstrated that the proximal E-boxes of the mouse Insm2 promoter are
direct targets of neurogenin 3 and neurogenic differentiation 1 (NeuroD1).
Furthermore, we found that endogenous Insm2 expression was activated in
Ngn3/NeuroD1-transduced pancreatic epithelial duct cells. Our results suggest
that Insm2 plays an important role in the differentiation cascade of Ngn3/NeuroD1
signaling in pancreatic islets.

PMCID: PMC3075939
PMID: 21343251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jun;39(11):4664-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr024. Epub 2011
Feb 11.

Integrated genome-wide chromatin occupancy and expression analyses identify key
myeloid pro-differentiation transcription factors repressed by Myb.

Zhao L(1), Glazov EA, Pattabiraman DR, Al-Owaidi F, Zhang P, Brown MA, Leo PJ,
Gonda TJ.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Queensland 4102, 
Australia.

To gain insight into the mechanisms by which the Myb transcription factor
controls normal hematopoiesis and particularly, how it contributes to
leukemogenesis, we mapped the genome-wide occupancy of Myb by chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq) in ERMYB
myeloid progenitor cells. By integrating the genome occupancy data with whole
genome expression profiling data, we identified a Myb-regulated transcriptional
program. Gene signatures for leukemia stem cells, normal hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells and myeloid development were overrepresented in 2368 Myb
regulated genes. Of these, Myb bound directly near or within 793 genes. Myb
directly activates some genes known critical in maintaining hematopoietic stem
cells, such as Gfi1 and Cited2. Importantly, we also show that, despite being
usually considered as a transactivator, Myb also functions to repress
approximately half of its direct targets, including several key regulators of
myeloid differentiation, such as Sfpi1 (also known as Pu.1), Runx1, Junb and
Cebpb. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that interaction with p300, an
established coactivator for Myb, is unexpectedly required for Myb-mediated
transcriptional repression. We propose that the repression of the above mentioned
key pro-differentiation factors may contribute essentially to Myb's ability to
suppress differentiation and promote self-renewal, thus maintaining progenitor
cells in an undifferentiated state and promoting leukemic transformation.

PMCID: PMC3113568
PMID: 21317192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 28;6(1):e16330. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016330.

Genome-wide analysis of transcriptional reprogramming in mouse models of acute
myeloid leukaemia.

Bonadies N(1), Foster SD, Chan WI, Kvinlaug BT, Spensberger D, Dawson MA,
Spooncer E, Whetton AD, Bannister AJ, Huntly BJ, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Acute leukaemias are commonly caused by mutations that corrupt the
transcriptional circuitry of haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. However, the
mechanisms underlying large-scale transcriptional reprogramming remain largely
unknown. Here we investigated transcriptional reprogramming at genome-scale in
mouse retroviral transplant models of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) using both
gene-expression profiling and ChIP-sequencing. We identified several thousand
candidate regulatory regions with altered levels of histone acetylation that were
characterised by differential distribution of consensus motifs for key
haematopoietic transcription factors including Gata2, Gfi1 and Sfpi1/Pu.1. In
particular, downregulation of Gata2 expression was mirrored by abundant GATA
motifs in regions of reduced histone acetylation suggesting an important role in 
leukaemogenic transcriptional reprogramming. Forced re-expression of Gata2 was
not compatible with sustained growth of leukaemic cells thus suggesting a
previously unrecognised role for Gata2 in downregulation during the development
of AML. Additionally, large scale human AML datasets revealed significantly
higher expression of GATA2 in CD34+ cells from healthy controls compared with AML
blast cells. The integrated genome-scale analysis applied in this study
represents a valuable and widely applicable approach to study the transcriptional
control of both normal and aberrant haematopoiesis and to identify critical
factors responsible for transcriptional reprogramming in human cancer.

PMCID: PMC3030562
PMID: 21297973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Mar 30;335(2):135-47. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.01.005.
Epub 2011 Jan 14.

Human growth hormone receptor gene expression is regulated by Gfi-1/1b and GAGA
cis-elements.

Kenth G(1), Puzhko S, Goodyer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada.

Human growth hormone receptor (hGHR) gene regulation is complex: mRNAs are
transcribed from multiple variant (V) 5'UTR exons, several ubiquitously while
others only in the postnatal hepatocyte. The liver-specific V1 exon promoter
contains Gfi-1/1b repressor sites adjacent to a GAGA box, a GH response element
(GHRE) in several mammalian genes. GAGA boxes are also present in the
ubiquitously expressing V3 exon promoter. Heterologous sites in bovine, ovine and
murine GHR genes suggest conserved roles. GAGA factor stimulated V1 and V3
promoters while Gfi-1/1b repressed basal and GAF-stimulated V1 transcription. HGH
treatment of HepG2 cells resulted in a new complex forming with V3 GAGA elements,
suggesting a functional GHRE. Data suggest liver-specific V1 transcription is
regulated by inhibitory Gfi-1/1b and stimulatory GAGA cis-elements and Gfi-1/1b
may control the lack of V1 expression in fetal liver, hepatic tumours and
non-hepatic tissues. In addition, hGH may regulate hGHR expression through V3
GAGA boxes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21238539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Annu Rev Immunol. 2011;29:399-413. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-030409-101259.

Genetic defects in severe congenital neutropenia: emerging insights into life and
death of human neutrophil granulocytes.

Klein C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.
klein.christoph@mh-hannover.de

The discovery of genetic defects causing congenital neutropenia has illuminated
mechanisms controlling differentiation, circulation, and decay of neutrophil
granulocytes. Deficiency of the mitochondrial proteins HAX1 and AK2 cause
premature apoptosis of myeloid progenitor cells associated with dissipation of
the mitochondrial membrane potential, whereas mutations in ELA2/ELANE and G6PC3
are associated with signs of increased endoplasmic reticulum stress. Mutations in
the transcriptional repressor GFI1 and the cytoskeletal regulator WASP also lead 
to defective neutrophil production. This unexpected diversity of factors suggests
that multiple pathways are involved in the pathogenesis of congenital
neutropenia.

PMID: 21219176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2011 Feb;23(1):21-6. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32834262f8.

Genetic etiologies of severe congenital neutropenia.

Boztug K(1), Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review recent advances in severe congenital neutropenia
(SCN) syndromes.
RECENT FINDINGS: The majority of patients with SCN bear monoallelic mutations in 
the neutrophil elastase (ELANE) gene. Biallelic mutations in the antiapoptotic
gene HAX1 were identified in patients with autosomal recessive SCN. G6PC3
deficiency is a syndromic variant of SCN associating congenital neutropenia with 
various developmental defects including cardiac or urogenital malformations. The 
pathophysiology of these distinct genetic variants of SCN is complex. Increased
apoptosis of neutrophil granulocytes may be caused by various molecular
mechanisms including destabilization of the mitochondrial membrane potential
and/or activation of the so-called 'unfolded protein response'.
SUMMARY: SCN represents a heterogenous group of disorders that may be caused by
genetic defects in ELANE, GFI1, HAX1, G6PC3 or activating mutations in the
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) gene. Ongoing research will uncover additional
genetic defects in SCN patients.

PMID: 21206270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18505-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1010249107. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

Coordination of IL-7 receptor and T-cell receptor signaling by cell-division
cycle 42 in T-cell homeostasis.

Guo F(1), Hildeman D, Tripathi P, Velu CS, Grimes HL, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Children's Hospital
Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. fukun.guo@cchmc.org

T-cell homeostasis is essential for normal functioning of the immune system. IL-7
receptor (IL-7R) and T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling are pivotal for T-cell
homeostatic regulation. The detailed mechanisms regulating T-cell homeostasis and
how IL-7R and TCR signaling are coordinated are largely unknown. Here we
demonstrate that T cell-specific deletion of cell-division cycle 42 (Cdc42)
GTPase causes a profound loss of mature T cells. Deletion of Cdc42 leads to a
markedly increased expression of growth factor independence-1 (Gfi-1) and
represses expression of IL-7Ra. In the absence of Cdc42, aberrant ERK1/2 MAP
kinase activity results in enhanced, TCR-mediated T-cell proliferation. In vivo
reconstitution of effector-binding-defective Cdc42 mutants and the effector p21
protein-activated kinase 1 (PAK1) into Cdc42-deficient T cells showed that PAK1
is both necessary and sufficient for Cdc42-regulated T-cell homeostasis. Thus,
T-cell homeostasis is maintained through a concerted regulation of
Gfi-1-IL-7R-controlled cytokine responsiveness and ERK-mediated TCR signaling
strength by the Cdc42-PAK1 signaling axis.

PMCID: PMC2972959
PMID: 20937872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Res. 2010 Oct 15;70(20):7949-59. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1667. Epub 
2010 Oct 5.

Expression of the transcriptional repressor Gfi-1 is regulated by C/EBP{alpha}
and is involved in its proliferation and colony formation-inhibitory effects in
p210BCR/ABL-expressing cells.

Lidonnici MR(1), Audia A, Soliera AR, Prisco M, Ferrari-Amorotti G, Waldron T,
Donato N, Zhang Y, Martinez RV, Holyoake TL, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Ectopic expression of CAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa) in
p210BCR/ABL-expressing cells induces granulocytic differentiation, inhibits
proliferation, and suppresses leukemogenesis. To dissect the molecular mechanisms
underlying these biological effects, C/EBPa-regulated genes were identified by
microarray analysis in 32D-p210BCR/ABL cells. One of the genes whose expression
was activated by C/EBPa in a DNA binding-dependent manner in BCR/ABL-expressing
cells is the transcriptional repressor Gfi-1. We show here that C/EBPa interacts 
with a functional C/EBP binding site in the Gfi-1 5'-flanking region and enhances
the promoter activity of Gfi-1. Moreover, in K562 cells, RNA
interference-mediated downregulation of Gfi-1 expression partially rescued the
proliferation-inhibitory but not the differentiation-inducing effect of C/EBPa.
Ectopic expression of wild-type Gfi-1, but not of a transcriptional repressor
mutant (Gfi-1P2A), inhibited proliferation and markedly suppressed colony
formation but did not induce granulocytic differentiation of BCR/ABL-expressing
cells. By contrast, Gfi-1 short hairpin RNA-tranduced CD34(+) chronic myeloid
leukemia cells were markedly more clonogenic than the scramble-transduced
counterpart. Together, these studies indicate that Gfi-1 is a direct target of
C/EBPa required for its proliferation and survival-inhibitory effects in
BCR/ABL-expressing cells.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2955805
PMID: 20924107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Leukemia. 2010 Nov;24(11):1834-43. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.195. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Gfi1 and Gfi1b: key regulators of hematopoiesis.

van der Meer LT(1), Jansen JH, van der Reijden BA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nijmegen Centre
for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Transcription factor Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) is required for
multilineage blood cell development, from stem and progenitor cells to
differentiated lymphoid and myeloid cells. Gfi1 expression is rapidly induced by 
cytokines that control both the adaptive and innate immune systems. Gfi1 itself
represses the expression of genes implicated in cell survival, proliferation and 
differentiation. Changes in Gfi1 expression and function have not only been
implicated in neutropenia, allergy, autoimmunity and hyperinflammatory responses,
but also in lymphoma and more recently in the development of leukemia. In this
study, we review how Gfi1 and its paralogue Gfi1b control the development of
blood cells, discuss how changes in Gfi1 and Gfi1b function contribute to
hematological disease and report on the molecular function of these proteins.

PMID: 20861919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Blood. 2010 Dec 9;116(24):5149-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-280305. Epub 2010
Sep 8.

Evidence that growth factor independence 1b regulates dormancy and peripheral
blood mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells.

Khandanpour C(1), Sharif-Askari E, Vassen L, Gaudreau MC, Zhu J, Paul WE, Okayama
T, Kosan C, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Canada.

Donor-matched transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is widely used
to treat hematologic malignancies but is associated with high mortality. The
expansion of HSC numbers and their mobilization into the bloodstream could
significantly improve therapy. We report here that adult mice conditionally
deficient for the transcription Growth factor independence 1b (Gfi1b) show a
significant expansion of functional HSCs in the bone marrow and blood. Despite
this expansion, Gfi1b(ko/ko) HSCs retain their ability to self-renew and to
initiate multilineage differentiation but are no longer quiescent and contain
elevated levels of reactive oxygen species. Treatment of Gfi1b(ko/ko) mice with
N-acetyl-cystein significantly reduced HSC numbers indicating that increased
reactive oxygen species levels are at least partially responsible for the
expansion of Gfi1b-deficient HSCs. Moreover, Gfi1b(-/-) HSCs show decreased
expression of CXCR4 and Vascular cell adhesion protein-1, which are required to
retain dormant HSCs in the endosteal niche, suggesting that Gfi1b regulates HSC
dormancy and pool size without affecting their function. Finally, the additional 
deletion of the related Gfi1 gene in Gfi1b(ko/ko) HSCs is incompatible with the
maintenance of HSCs, suggesting that Gfi1b and Gfi1 have partially overlapping
functions but that at least one Gfi gene is essential for the generation of HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3321835
PMID: 20826720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Ann Hematol. 2011 Feb;90(2):151-8. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-1056-4. Epub 2010 Aug 
28.

Severe congenital neutropenia in a multigenerational family with a novel
neutrophil elastase (ELANE) mutation.

van de Vosse E(1), Verhard EM, Tool AJ, de Visser AW, Kuijpers TW, Hiemstra PS,
van Dissel JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, C5-P, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands. E.van_de_Vosse@LUMC.nl

We have analysed a family with nine congenital neutropenia patients in four
generations, several of which we have studied in a long-term follow-up of over
25 years. The patients were mild to severe neutropenic and suffered from various 
recurrent bacterial infections. Mutations in the genes ELANE, CSF3R and GFI1 have
been reported in patients with autosomal dominant congenital neutropenias. Using 
a small-scale linkage analysis with markers around the ELANE, CSF3R, CSF3 and
GFI1 genes, we were able to determine that the disease segregated with markers
around the ELANE gene. We identified a novel mutation in the ELANE gene in all of
the affected family members that was not present in any of the healthy family
members. The mutation leads to an A28S missense mutation in the mature protein.
None of these patients developed leukaemia. This is the first truly
multigenerational family with mutations in ELANE as unambiguous cause of severe
congenital neutropenia SCN.

PMCID: PMC3018258
PMID: 20803142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;18(4):849-54.

[Gfi-1 expression in leukemia patients and inhibitory effects of lentiviral
vector mediated silence of Gfi-1 gene on proliferation in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhan R(1), Wu SQ, Huang HB, Huang SL, Lin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematoloy, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou
350001, Fujian Province, China. deanzhanrong@yahoo.com.cn

This study was aimed to quantitatively detect the expression levels of gfi-1 gene
in leukemia patients, and to investigate the effect of gfi-1 gene silenced by
short hairpin RNA (shRNA) on proliferation of leukemia cell line K562.
Quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot were used to detect the mRNA and
protein expression levels of GFI-1 in newly diagnosed patients with leukemia. One
pair of oligonucleotide sequences targeted at human gfi-1 mRNA were designed and 
synthesized. The annealed oligonucleotide fragments were subcloned into pLVTHM
vector. Virus particles were collected when the control and shRNA vectors had
been co-transfected with the psPAX2 packaging plasmid and the envelope plasmid
pMD2 G into HEK-293T cells using Lipofectamine 2000. The K562 cells were
transfused with 1 x 106 recombinant lentivirus-transfusing units plus 6 microg/ml
of polybrene. Rea-time PCR and Western blot were used to detect the expressions
of gfi-1 and bax mRNA after lentivirus transfusion. CCK-8 assays was used to
evaluate the proliferation potential of cells. The results showed that the gfi-1 
expression level in all leukemia patients was significantly higher than that in
normal group (p < 0.05); the gfi-1 mRNA expression in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL) patients 
was significantly higher than that in normal group (p < 0.05); but the difference
of gfi-1 mRNA expression between AL and CML or ALL and AML was not significant.
Notably, the gfi-1 mRNA expression level had a positive correlation with high
white blood cell count of > 20.0 x 10<U+2079>/L (p < 0.05). As was expected, the mRNA
and protein level of gfi-1 was reduced significantly in K562 cells after
lentivirus transfusion, whereas the mRNA and protein level of bax was
upregulated. And CCK-8 assay showed that gfi-1 gene silencing can inhibit K562
proliferation. It is concluded that gfi-1 expression is upregulated in leukemia
patients and may contribute to leukemogenesis. The gfi-1 specific shRNA mediated 
by lentivirus can effectively down-regulate the expression of gfi-1 and inhibit
the proliferation of K562 cells, which lay a basis for further research on gene
therapy in leukemia.

PMID: 20723286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;18(4):834-7.

[Expression of growth-factor independence 1 in patients with leukemia and its
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang TT(1), Chen ZX, Cen JN, He J, Sheng HJ, Yao L.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis subordinated to Ministry of
Health, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Suzhou University First Hospital, Suzhou
215006, Jiangsu Province, China.

This study was purposed to investigate the expression of the growth-factor
independence 1 (GFI1) in patients with leukemia and its clinical significance.
Bone marrow mononuclear cells were obtained from 65 newly diagnosed leukemia
patients including 24 acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 18 chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML), 6 acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 17 blast crisis of chronic 
myelogenous leukemia and 13 patients with iron deficiency anemia (IDA) were used 
as controls. The relative expression of gene gfi1 was detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and taqman quantitative
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR). The results 
showed that gene expression of gene gfi1 in leukemia patients was obviously
higher than that in controls and the difference was statistically significant (p 
< 0.01), in which the expression of gene gfi1 in newly diagnosed CML patients was
higher than that in newly diagnosed AML, newly diagnosed ALL, CML-BCP patients
and the difference was significant (p < 0.01). Expression of gene gfi1 in
lymphocytic blast crisis of CML was higher than that in nonlymphocytic blast
crisis of CML, and the difference was significant. It is concluded that gene gfi1
may play an important role in leukemia, especially in CML incidence and
progression. The high level expression of gene gfi1 may be participate in the
development of lymphoma.

PMID: 20723283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Dev Biol. 2010 Sep 1;345(1):49-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.06.021. Epub 2010
Jun 20.

Cell Lineage metastability in Gfi1-deficient mouse intestinal epithelium.

Bjerknes M(1), Cheng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Science Division, Medical Sciences Building, 
Room 6334, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5S 1A8. matthew.bjerknes@utoronto.ca

Elucidating the mechanisms determining multipotent progenitor cell fate remains a
fundamental project of contemporary biology. Various tissues of mice and men with
defects in the zinc-finger transcriptional repressor Gfi1 have dramatic
perturbations in the proportions of their differentiated cell types. In
Gfi1-deficient intestinal epithelium there is a shift from mucous and Paneth
towards enteroendocrine cells, leading to the proposal that Gfi1 functions in the
allocation of the progeny derived from a hypothetical common granulocytic
progenitor. However, studies of clones have yielded no evidence of such a common 
progenitor prompting us to investigate alternate mechanisms explaining the
Gfi1-deficient phenotype. We report that mucous and Paneth but not
enteroendocrine lineage cells normally express Gfi1. Sporadic mucous and Paneth
lineage cells in the crypts of Gfi1-deficient mice aberrantly express the
pro-enteroendocrine transcription factor Neurog3, indicating that stable
repression of Neurog3 in these lineages requires Gfi1. Importantly, we also find 
mucous and Paneth lineage cells in various stages of cellular reprogramming into 
the enteroendocrine lineage in Gfi1-deficient mice. We propose that mucous and
Paneth cell lineage metastability, rather than reallocation at the level of a
hypothetical common granulocytic progenitor, is responsible for the shifts in
cell type proportions observed in Gfi1-deficient intestinal epithelium.

Crown Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Curr Opin Hematol. 2010 Jul;17(4):300-7. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e32833a06f8.

Gfi1-cells and circuits: unraveling transcriptional networks of development and
disease.

Phelan JD(1), Shroyer NF, Cook T, Gebelein B, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Graduate Program, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The review will integrate current knowledge of transcriptional
circuits whose dysregulation leads to autoimmunity, neutropenia and leukemia.
RECENT FINDINGS: Growth factor independent-1 (Gfi1) is a transcriptional
repressor with essential roles in controlling hematopoietic stem cell biology,
myeloid and lymphoid differentiation and lymphocyte effector functions. Recent
work has suggested that Gfi1 competes or collaborates with other transcription
factors to modulate transcription programs and lineage decisions.
SUMMARY: Gfi1 is central to several transcriptional circuits whose dysregulation 
leads to abnormal or malignant hematopoiesis. These functional relationships are 
conserved from Drosophila development. Such conserved pathways represent central 
oncogenic or 'gatekeeper' pathways that are pivotal to understanding the process 
of cellular transformation, and illustrate key targets for clinical intervention.

PMCID: PMC2910316
PMID: 20571393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Br J Haematol. 2010 Sep;150(6):716-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08274.x.

Cyclic neutropenia associated with T cell immunity to granulocyte proteases and a
double de novo mutation in GFI1, a transcriptional regulator of ELANE.

Armistead PM, Wieder E, Akande O, Alatrash G, Quintanilla K, Liang S, Molldrem J.

PMCID: PMC4112579
PMID: 20560965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Aug;30(16):3929-42. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00087-10. Epub 2010 Jun 
14.

Zinc finger protein Gfi1 controls the endotoxin-mediated Toll-like receptor
inflammatory response by antagonizing NF-kappaB p65.

Sharif-Askari E(1), Vassen L, Kosan C, Khandanpour C, Gaudreau MC, Heyd F,
Okayama T, Jin J, Rojas ME, Grimes HL, Zeng H, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montreal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest,
Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Endotoxin (bacterial lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) causes fatal septic shock via the 
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) protein present on innate immunity effector cells,
which activates nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), inducing proinflammatory
cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). An early step in
this process involves nuclear sequestration of the p65-RelA NF-kappaB subunit,
enabling transcriptional activation of target inflammatory cytokine genes. Here, 
we analyzed the role of the nuclear zinc finger protein Gfi1 in the TLR response 
using primary bone marrow-derived macrophages. We show that upon LPS stimulation,
expression of Gfi1 is induced with kinetics similar to those of nuclear
translocation of p65 and that Gfi1 interacts with p65 and inhibits p65-mediated
transcriptional transactivation by interfering with p65 binding to target gene
promoter DNA. Gfi1-deficient macrophages show abnormally high mRNA levels of the 
TNF-alpha gene and many other p65 target genes and a higher rate of TNF promoter 
occupancy by p65 than wild-type cells after LPS stimulation, suggesting that Gfi1
functions as an antagonist of NF-kappaB activity at the level of promoter
binding. Our findings identify a new function of Gfi1 as a general negative
regulator of the endotoxin-initiated innate immune responses, including septic
shock and possibly other severe inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC2916436
PMID: 20547752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genesis. 2010 Jun;48(6):400-6. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20632.

Gfi1-Cre knock-in mouse line: A tool for inner ear hair cell-specific gene
deletion.

Yang H(1), Gan J, Xie X, Deng M, Feng L, Chen X, Gao Z, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Gfi1 encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor essential for the development and
maintenance of haematopoiesis and the inner ear. In mouse inner ear, Gfi1
expression is confined to hair cells during development and in adulthood. To
construct a genetic tool for inner ear hair cell-specific gene deletion, we
generated a Gfi1-Cre mouse line by knocking-in Cre coding sequences into the Gfi1
locus and inactivating the endogenous Gfi1. The specificity and efficiency of
Gfi1-Cre recombinase-mediated recombination in the developing inner ear was
revealed through the expression of the conditional R26R-lacZ reporter gene. The
onset of lacZ expression in the Gfi1(Cre/+) inner ear was first detected at E13.5
in the vestibule and at E15.5 in the cochlea, coinciding with the generation of
hair cells. Throughout inner ear development, lacZ expression was detected only
in hair cells. Thus, Gfi1-Cre knock-in mouse line provides a useful tool for gene
manipulations specifically in inner ear hair cells.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2885521
PMID: 20533399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Aug;30(15):3853-63. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00032-10. Epub 2010 Jun 
1.

Gfi1 expression is controlled by five distinct regulatory regions spread over 100
kilobases, with Scl/Tal1, Gata2, PU.1, Erg, Meis1, and Runx1 acting as upstream
regulators in early hematopoietic cells.

Wilson NK(1), Timms RT, Kinston SJ, Cheng YH, Oram SH, Landry JR, Mullender J,
Ottersbach K, Gottgens B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) gene was originally discovered in the
hematopoietic system, where it functions as a key regulator of stem cell
homeostasis, as well as neutrophil and T-cell development. Outside the blood
system, Gfi1 is essential for inner-ear hair and intestinal secretory cell
differentiation. To understand the regulatory hierarchies within which Gfi1
operates to control these diverse biological functions, we used a combination of 
comparative genomics, locus-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, functional
validation in cell lines, and extensive transgenic mouse assays to identify and
characterize the complete ensemble of Gfi1 regulatory elements. This concerted
effort identified five distinct regulatory elements spread over 100kb each
driving expression in transgenic mice to a subdomain of endogenous Gfi1. Detailed
characterization of an enhancer 35 kb upstream of Gfi1 demonstrated activity in
the dorsal aorta region and fetal liver in transgenic mice, which was bound by
key stem cell transcription factors Scl/Tal1, PU.1/Sfpi1, Runx1, Erg, Meis1, and 
Gata2. Taken together, our results reveal the regulatory regions responsible for 
Gfi1 expression and importantly establish that Gfi1 expression at the sites of
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) emergence is controlled by key HSC regulators, thus
integrating Gfi1 into the wider HSC regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC2916401
PMID: 20516218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Blood. 2010 Aug 19;116(7):1060-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-11-255075. Epub 2010
May 7.

Repression of Id2 expression by Gfi-1 is required for B-cell and myeloid
development.

Li H(1), Ji M, Klarmann KD, Keller JR.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick Inc, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute at Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

The development of mature blood cells from hematopoietic stem cells requires
coordinated activities of transcriptional networks. Transcriptional repressor
growth factor independence 1 (Gfi-1) is required for the development of B cells, 
T cells, neutrophils, and for the maintenance of hematopoietic stem cell
function. However, the mechanisms by which Gfi-1 regulates hematopoiesis and how 
Gfi-1 integrates into transcriptional networks remain unclear. Here, we provide
evidence that Id2 is a transcriptional target of Gfi-1, and repression of Id2 by 
Gfi-1 is required for B-cell and myeloid development. Gfi-1 binds to 3 conserved 
regions in the Id2 promoter and represses Id2 promoter activity in transient
reporter assays. Increased Id2 expression was observed in multipotent
progenitors, myeloid progenitors, T-cell progenitors, and B-cell progenitors in
Gfi-1(-/-) mice. Knockdown of Id2 expression or heterozygosity at the Id2 locus
partially rescues the B-cell and myeloid development but not the T-cell
development in Gfi-1(-/-) mice. These studies demonstrate a role of Id2 in
mediating Gfi-1 functions in B-cell and myeloid development and provide a direct 
link between Gfi-1 and the B-cell transcriptional network by its ability to
repress Id2 expression.

PMCID: PMC2938128
PMID: 20453161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Inflamm Res. 2010 Oct;59(10):855-60. doi: 10.1007/s00011-010-0197-1. Epub 2010
Apr 17.

Up-regulation of growth factor independence 1 in endotoxin tolerant macrophages
with low secretion of TNF-alpha and IL-6.

Zhu MF(1), Zhang J, Qu JM, Zhang HJ, Zhou SC, Dong SF, Jiang HN, Summah H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Endotoxin tolerance refers to a low response to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). We hypothesized that growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) involves in the
endotoxin tolerance in macrophages.
METHODS: Endotoxin tolerance was induced in the RAW264.7 cell line and
thioglycolate-elicited murine peritoneal macrophages by incubation with 100 ng/ml
LPS for 20 h. Macrophages without the pretreatment were set as control. Both
endotoxin tolerant and control cells were then stimulated with 1,000 ng/ml LPS
for indicated period of incubation. Gfi1 mRNA expression and protein production
were investigated by real-time PCR and Western blotting, respectively. ELISA was 
performed to quantify the secretion of TNF-alpha and IL-6.
RESULT: Compared with non-endotoxin tolerant macrophages, endotoxin tolerant
cells secreted a lower amount of TNF-alpha and IL-6. The mRNA expression of Gfi1 
in endotoxin tolerant macrophages was higher than that of control in both
RAW264.7 cells and thioglycolate-elicited murine peritoneal macrophages. The
protein production was accordingly up-regulated in endotoxin tolerant RAW264.7
cells.
CONCLUSION: In in vitro endotoxin tolerant macrophages, the expression of Gfi1
mRNA and protein were up-regulated after high dose LPS stimulation, accompanied
with a blunted TNF-alpha and IL-6 secretion. Gfi1 might participate in the
mechanism of endotoxin tolerance.

PMID: 20401626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Curr Opin Immunol. 2010 Apr;22(2):177-84. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.02.003. Epub
2010 Mar 6.

From hematopoietic progenitors to B cells: mechanisms of lineage restriction and 
commitment.

Ramírez J(1), Lukin K, Hagman J.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206,
USA.

The generation of B lymphocytes from hematopoietic progenitors requires
lineage-specific transcription factors that progressively direct cell fate
choices. Differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells to lymphoid progenitors
requires Ikaros-dependent lineage priming and graded levels of PU.1, which are
controlled by Ikaros and Gfi1. E2A drives expression of EBF1, which initiates B
lineage specification. EBF1, in addition to Pax5, is necessary for commitment to 
the B cell lineage. As a model of gene activation in early B lymphopoiesis, mb-1 
genes are activated sequentially by factors (e.g. EBF1) that initiate chromatin
modifications before transcription. This review highlights the requisite
interplay between transcription factors and epigenetic mechanisms in the context 
of B cell development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854230
PMID: 20207529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Blood. 2010 May 13;115(19):3970-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-246967. Epub 2010
Mar 4.

The transcription factor Gfi1 regulates G-CSF signaling and neutrophil
development through the Ras activator RasGRP1.

de la Luz Sierra M(1), Sakakibara S, Gasperini P, Salvucci O, Jiang K, McCormick 
PJ, Segarra M, Stone J, Maric D, Zhu J, Qian X, Lowy DR, Tosato G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD, USA.

The transcription factor growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) and the growth
factor granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) are individually essential
for neutrophil differentiation from myeloid progenitors. Here, we provide
evidence that the functions of Gfi1 and G-CSF are linked in the regulation of
granulopoiesis. We report that Gfi1 promotes the expression of Ras guanine
nucleotide releasing protein 1 (RasGRP1), an exchange factor that activates Ras, 
and that RasGRP1 is required for G-CSF signaling through the
Ras/mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK/Erk)
pathway. Gfi1-null mice have reduced levels of RasGRP1 mRNA and protein in
thymus, spleen, and bone marrow, and Gfi1 transduction in myeloid cells promotes 
RasGRP1 expression. When stimulated with G-CSF, Gfi1-null myeloid cells are
selectively defective at activating Erk1/2, but not signal transducer and
activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) or STAT3, and fail to differentiate into
neutrophils. Expression of RasGRP1 in Gfi1-deficient cells rescues Erk1/2
activation by G-CSF and allows neutrophil maturation by G-CSF. These results
uncover a previously unknown function of Gfi1 as a regulator of RasGRP1 and link 
Gfi1 transcriptional control to G-CSF signaling and regulation of granulopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2869559
PMID: 20203268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Oncogene. 2010 May 13;29(19):2843-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.48. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

A role of Miz-1 in Gfi-1-mediated transcriptional repression of CDKN1A.

Liu Q(1), Basu S, Qiu Y, Tang F, Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA.

Zinc-finger (ZF) transcriptional repressor growth factor independence 1 (Gfi-1)
has an important role in hematopoiesis and inner ear development, and also
functions as an oncoprotein that cooperates with c-Myc in lymphomagenesis. Gfi-1 
represses transcription by directly binding to conserved sequences in the
promoters of its target genes. CDKN1A encoding p21(Cip1) has been identified as a
Gfi-1 target gene and has been shown to contain Gfi-1 binding sites in the
upstream promoter region. We show here that Gfi-1 represses CDKN1A in a manner
that is independent of its DNA binding activity. Gfi-1 interacts with POZ-ZF
transcription factor Miz-1, originally shown to be a c-Myc-interacting partner,
and through Miz-1 binds to the CDKN1A core promoter. Interestingly, Gfi-1 and
c-Myc, through Miz-1, form a ternary complex on the CDKN1A promoter, and function
in collaboration to repress CDKN1A. Gfi-1 knockdown results in enhanced levels of
p21(Cip1) and attenuated cell proliferation. Notably, similar to c-Myc, the
expression of Gfi-1 is downregulated by transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta)
and the level of Gfi-1 influences the response of cells to the cytostatic effect 
of TGFbeta. Our data reveal an important mechanism by which Gfi-1 regulates cell 
proliferation and may also have implications for understanding the role of Gfi-1 
in lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2869400
PMID: 20190815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Mol Biol. 2010 Apr 9;397(4):1055-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.02.006. Epub 2010 
Feb 11.

Solution structure of Gfi-1 zinc domain bound to consensus DNA.

Lee S(1), Doddapaneni K, Hogue A, McGhee L, Meyers S, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Gfi-1 is a crucial transcriptional repressor for the precise regulation of cell
proliferation and differentiation in hematopoiesis. Recently, this protein has
also been demonstrated to be capable of restricting the proliferation of
hematopoietic stem cells, a process that appears to be vital for the long-term
competency of hematopoietic stem cells. These two seemingly opposite outcomes of 
regulation are likely to arise from its interactions with a variety of cellular
partners. Such interactions can directly affect the genes that Gfi-1 recognizes
through its DNA binding zinc-finger domain. In this work, we report the
determination of the solution structure of Gfi-1 zinc fingers 3-5 in complex with
a 16-mer consensus DNA using multidimensional NMR method. Unlike a proposed
minor-groove binding model based on methylation interference experiments, our
structure clearly shows that Gfi-1 zinc fingers 3-5 bind into the major groove of
the target DNA reminiscent of canonical C(2)H(2) zinc-finger domains. The fourth 
and fifth zinc fingers recognize the AATC core sequence by forming base-specific 
hydrogen bonds between the side chains of Asn382, Gln379, and Asp354 and the
bases of the invariant adenines and cytosine. Overall, the current work provides 
valuable insight into the structural determinants for DNA binding specificity, in
particular for the TCA triplet that has not been observed in any other structures
of zinc finger-DNA complexes, as well as molecular rationales for a naturally
occurring mutation that causes acute myeloid leukemia.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Jul;18(7):827-31. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.240. Epub 2010 Jan
20.

Tag-SNP analysis of the GFI1-EVI5-RPL5-FAM69 risk locus for multiple sclerosis.

Alcina A(1), Fernández O, Gonzalez JR, Catalá-Rabasa A, Fedetz M, Ndagire D,
Leyva L, Guerrero M, Arnal C, Delgado C, Lucas M, Izquierdo G, Matesanz F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López Neyra, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Granada, Spain.

A recent genome-wide association study conducted by the International Multiple
Sclerosis Genetic Consortium (IMSGC) identified, among others, a number of
putative multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility variants at position 1p22.
Twenty-one SNPs positively associated with MS were located at the
GFI-EVI5-RPL5-FAM69A locus. In this study, we performed an analysis and fine
mapping of this locus, genotyping eight Tag-SNPs in 732 MS patients and 974
controls from Spain. We observed an association with MS in three of eight
Tag-SNPs: rs11804321 (P=0.008, OR=1.29; 95% CI=1.08-1.54), rs11808092 (P=0.048,
OR=1.19; 95% CI=1.03-1.39) and rs6680578 (P=0.0082, OR=1.23; 95% CI=1.07-1.41).
After correcting for multiple comparisons and using logistic regression analysis 
to test the addition of each SNP to the most associated SNPs, we observed that
rs11804321 alone was sufficient to model the association. This Tag-SNP captures
two SNPs in complete linkage disequilibrium (r(2)=1), both located within the
17th intron of the EVI5 gene. Our findings agree with the corresponding data of
the recent IMSGC study and present new genetic evidence that points to EVI5 as a 
factor of susceptibility to MS.

PMCID: PMC2987353
PMID: 20087403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Blood. 2010 Mar 25;115(12):2462-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-08-239822. Epub 2010 
Jan 14.

A variant allele of Growth Factor Independence 1 (GFI1) is associated with acute 
myeloid leukemia.

Khandanpour C(1), Thiede C, Valk PJ, Sharif-Askari E, Nückel H, Lohmann D,
Horsthemke B, Siffert W, Neubauer A, Grzeschik KH, Bloomfield CD, Marcucci G,
Maharry K, Slovak ML, van der Reijden BA, Jansen JH, Schackert HK, Afshar K,
Schnittger S, Peeters JK, Kroschinsky F, Ehninger G, Lowenberg B, Dührsen U,
Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM) and Département de
Microbiologie et Immunologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7,
Canada.

The GFI1 gene encodes a transcriptional repressor, which regulates myeloid
differentiation. In the mouse, Gfi1 deficiency causes neutropenia and an
accumulation of granulomonocytic precursor cells that is reminiscent of a
myelodysplastic syndrome. We report here that a variant allele of GFI1
(GFI1(36N)) is associated with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in white subjects
with an odds ratio of 1.6 (P < 8 x 10(-5)). The GFI1(36N) variant occurred in
1806 AML patients with an allele frequency of 0.055 compared with 0.035 in 1691
healthy control patients in 2 independent cohorts. We observed that both GFI1
variants maintain the same activity as transcriptional repressors but differ in
their regulation by the AML1/ETO (RUNX1/RUNX1T1) fusion protein produced in AML
patients with a t(8;21) translocation. AML1/ETO interacts and colocalizes with
the more common GFI1(36S) form in the nucleus and inhibits its repressor
activity. However, the variant GFI1(36N) protein has a different subnuclear
localization than GFI1(36S). As a consequence, AML1/ETO does not colocalize with 
GFI1(36N) and is unable to inhibit its repressor activity. We conclude that both 
variants of GFI1 differ in their ability to be regulated by interacting proteins 
and that the GFI1(36N) variant form exhibits distinct biochemical features that
may confer a predisposition to AML.

PMCID: PMC2919174
PMID: 20075157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):505-13. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22200.

Role of bone morphogenetic proteins on cochlear hair cell formation: analyses of 
Noggin and Bmp2 mutant mice.

Hwang CH(1), Guo D, Harris MA, Howard O, Mishina Y, Gan L, Harris SE, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, Rockville, Maryland, USA.

The mammalian organ of Corti of the inner ear is a highly sophisticated sensory
end organ responsible for detecting sound. Noggin is a secreted glycoprotein,
which antagonizes bone morphogenetic proteins 2 and 4 (Bmp2 and Bmp4). The lack
of this antagonist causes increased rows of inner and outer hair cells in the
organ of Corti. In mice, Bmp2 is expressed transiently in nascent cochlear hair
cells. To investigate whether Noggin normally modulates the levels of Bmp2 for
hair cell formation, we deleted Bmp2 in the cochlear hair cells using two cre
strains, Foxg1(cre/+) and Gfi1(cre/+). Bmp2 conditional knockout cochleae
generated using these two cre strains show normal hair cells. Furthermore,
Gfi1(cre/+);Bmp2(lox/-) mice are viable and have largely normal hearing. The
combined results of Noggin and Bmp2 mutants suggest that Noggin is likely to
regulate other Bmps in the cochlea such as Bmp4.

PMID: 20063299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 1;29(13):1963-75. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.475. Epub 2010 Jan 11.

Identification of Zfp521/ZNF521 as a cooperative gene for E2A-HLF to develop
acute B-lineage leukemia.

Yamasaki N(1), Miyazaki K, Nagamachi A, Koller R, Oda H, Miyazaki M, Sasaki T,
Honda ZI, Wolff L, Inaba T, Honda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology 
and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

E2A-hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) is a chimeric protein found in B-lineage acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with t(17;19). To analyze the leukemogenic process
and to create model mice for t(17;19)-positive leukemia, we generated inducible
knock-in (iKI) mice for E2A-HLF. Despite the induced expression of E2A-HLF in the
hematopoietic tissues, no disease was developed during the long observation
period, indicating that additional gene alterations are required to develop
leukemia. To elucidate this process, E2A-HLF iKI and control littermates were
subjected to retroviral insertional mutagenesis. Virus infection induced acute
leukemias in E2A-HLF iKI mice with higher morbidity and mortality than in control
mice. Inverse PCR detected three common integration sites specific for E2A-HLF
iKI leukemic mice, which induced overexpression of zinc-finger transcription
factors: growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1), zinc-finger protein subfamily 1A1
isoform a (Zfp1a1, also known as Ikaros) and zinc-finger protein 521 (Zfp521).
Interestingly, tumors with Zfp521 integration exclusively showed B-lineage ALL,
which corresponds to the phenotype of human t(17;19)-positive leukemia. In
addition, ZNF521 (human counterpart of Zfp521) was found to be overexpressed in
human leukemic cell lines harboring t(17;19). Moreover, both iKI for E2A-HLF and 
transgenic for Zfp521 mice frequently developed B-lineage ALL. These results
indicate that a set of transcription factors promote leukemic transformation of
E2A-HLF-expressing hematopoietic progenitors and suggest that aberrant expression
of Zfp521/ZNF521 may be clinically relevant to t(17;19)-positive B-lineage ALL.

PMID: 20062079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Oncol. 2010 Feb;36(2):415-20.

Integrative genomic analyses of CXCR4: transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 based 
on TGFbeta, Nodal, Activin signaling and POU5F1, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXH1, SOX17, and 
GFI1 transcription factors.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

CXCR4, CD133, CD44 and ABCG2 are representative transmembrane proteins expressed 
on the surfaces of normal and/or cancer stem cells. CXCR4 is co-expressed with
POU5F1 in endodermal precursors and adult-tissue stem cells. CXCR4 is expressed
in a variety of human tumors, such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, pancreatic 
cancer, and gastric cancer. CXCR4 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for
CXCL12 (SDF1) chemokine, and the CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling axis is involved in
proliferation, survival, migration, and homing of cancer cells. Integrative
genomic analyses of CXCR4 gene were carried out to elucidate the mechanisms of
CXCR4 expression in stem cells, because CXCR4 is a key molecule occupying the
crossroads of oncology, immunology, gerontology and regenerative medicine. Human 
CXCR4 promoter region with binding sites for HIF1alpha, ETS1, NF-kappaB and GLI
was not conserved in mouse and rat Cxcr4 orthologs. Proximal enhancer region with
palindromic Smad-binding sites, FOX-binding site, POU-binding site, triple
SOX17-binding sites, bHLH-binding site, TCF/LEF-binding site, and double
GFI1-binding sites was almost completely conserved among human, chimpanzee,
mouse, and rat CXCR4 orthologs. TGFbeta, Nodal, and Activin signals induce CXCR4 
upregulation based on Smad2/3 and FOX family members, such as FOXA2, FOXC2, and
FOXH1. CXCR4 is expressed in endodermal precursors due to the existence of triple
SOX17-binding sites around the POU-binding site instead of the POU5F1-SOX2 joint 
motif. Because CXCR4 is downregulated by p53-GFI1 signaling axis, p53 mutation in
cancer stem cells leads to CXCR4 upregulation. CXCR4 is also upregulated by
TGFbeta and Hedgehog signals in tumor cells at the invasion front. Small molecule
compound or human antibody targeted to CXCR4 will be applied for cancer
therapeutics focusing on cancer stem cells at the primary lesion as well as
metastasis or recurrence niches, such as bone marrow and peritoneal cavity.

PMID: 20043076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2009:344-50. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2009.1.344.

Congenital neutropenia.

Klein C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Medical School of Hannover,
Hannover, Germany. klein.christoph@mhhannover.de

Congenital neutropenia comprises a variety of genetically heterogeneous
phenotypic traits. Molecular elucidation of the underlying genetic defects has
yielded important insights into the physiology of neutrophil differentiation and 
function. Non-syndromic variants of congenital neutropenia are caused by
mutations in ELA2, HAX1, GFI1, or WAS. Syndromic variants of congenital
neutropenia may be due to mutations in genes controlling glucose metabolism
(SLC37A4, G6PC3) or lysosomal function (LYST, RAB27A, ROBLD3/p14, AP3B1, VPS13B).
Furthermore, defects in genes encoding ribosomal proteins (SBDS, RMRP) and
mitochondrial proteins (AK2, TAZ) are associated with congenital neutropenia
syndromes. Despite remarkable progress in the field, many patients with
congenital neutropenia cannot yet definitively be classified by genetic terms.
This review addresses diagnostic and therapeutic aspects of congenital
neutropenia and covers recent molecular and pathophysiological insights of
selected congenital neutropenia syndromes.

PMID: 20008220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Med Hypotheses. 2010 Mar;74(3):445-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2009.09.053. Epub 2009 
Nov 6.

Altered functional balance of Gfi-1 and Gfi-1b as an alternative cause of
reticular dysgenesis?

Barjaktarevic I(1), Maletkovic-Barjaktarevic J, Kamani NR, Vukmanovic S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York University Langone Medical Center, 530 First 
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Reticular dysgenesis (RD) is a rare form of severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID). The underlying genetic defect for most cases of RD was recently
identified in the gene encoding adenylate kinase 2 (AK2). However, rare patients 
with RD and no mutations in AK2 exist, suggesting that mutations in other genes
may also cause RD. Although rare, RD has a devastating presentation involving
severe neutropenia and T cell lymphopenia, in addition to life non-threatening,
but still disabling sensori-neural deafness. An identical phenotype is observed
in mice deficient for growth factor independence-1 (Gfi-1) or transgenic for
Gfi-1b, related nucleoproteins with opposing, antagonizing roles in development. 
We hypothesize that a genetically based, altered functional balance between these
two factors may be an alternative cause of RD.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19896777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Acta Haematol. 2010;123(1):1-5. doi: 10.1159/000253856. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

The growth factor independence-1 (Gfi1) is overexpressed in chronic myelogenous
leukemia.

Huang M(1), Hu Z, Chang W, Ou D, Zhou J, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, China.

The activation of ABL tyrosine kinase in BCR/ABL-positive chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML) leads to a diversity of biological changes related to the
pathogenesis of the disease. In CML patients, we determined the expression of
growth factor independence-1 (Gfi1), a transcription repressor with weak
oncogenic activity. Our data demonstrated that the Gfi1 mRNA level in both the
mononuclear cells and purified CD34(+) cells from CML were significantly higher
as measured by quantitative real-time PCR. Using flow cytometry and Western blot,
we also showed that the Gfi1 protein content was increased in CML CD34(+) cells. 
The expression of Gfi1 was correlated with BCR/ABL significantly. Gfi1 may be
implicated in the pathogenesis of CML and can serve as a potential target for the
management of the disease.

Copyright (c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19887785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Immunity. 2009 Oct 16;31(4):576-86. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.07.011. Epub 2009 
Oct 8.

A recurrent network involving the transcription factors PU.1 and Gfi1
orchestrates innate and adaptive immune cell fates.

Spooner CJ(1), Cheng JX, Pujadas E, Laslo P, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, GCIS W522,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The transcription factor PU.1, encoded by the Sfpi1 gene, functions in a graded
manner to regulate macrophage versus B cell generation; its higher concentration 
favors the macrophage fate. We demonstrated that Gfi1 reciprocally promoted B
cell fate choice at the expense of myeloid progeny. Gfi1(-/-) multipotential
progenitors (MPPs) were unable to constrain the expression of PU.1 because Gfi1
functioned to repress the Sfpi1 gene by displacing PU.1 from positive
autoregulatory elements. Attenuating a transcriptional module composed of PU.1
and Egr suppressed the B lineage developmental defects of Gfi1(-/-) MPPs. Finally
Ikaros, a transcription factor required for B cell development, promoted Gfi1 and
antagonized PU.1 expression in MPPs. Our results reveal that a core
transcriptional regulatory network used for directing cell fate choice in the
innate immune system has been co-opted by Ikaros to orchestrate B lymphocyte
generation. These findings have important implications for the evolution of the
adaptive immune system.

PMCID: PMC4373467
PMID: 19818654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Feb 1;316(3):452-65. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.09.020. Epub
2009 Sep 26.

SAM pointed domain ETS factor (SPDEF) regulates terminal differentiation and
maturation of intestinal goblet cells.

Noah TK(1), Kazanjian A, Whitsett J, Shroyer NF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: SPDEF (also termed PDEF or PSE) is an ETS family
transcription factor that regulates gene expression in the prostate and goblet
cell hyperplasia in the lung. Spdef has been reported to be expressed in the
intestine. In this paper, we identify an important role for Spdef in regulating
intestinal epithelial cell homeostasis and differentiation.
METHODS: SPDEF expression was inhibited in colon cancer cells to determine its
ability to control goblet cell gene activation. The effects of transgenic
expression of Spdef on intestinal differentiation and homeostasis were
determined.
RESULTS: In LS174T colon cancer cells treated with Notch/gamma-secretase
inhibitor to activate goblet cell gene expression, shRNAs that inhibited SPDEF
also repressed expression of goblet cell genes AGR2, MUC2, RETLNB, and SPINK4.
Transgenic expression of Spdef caused the expansion of intestinal goblet cells
and corresponding reduction in Paneth, enteroendocrine, and absorptive
enterocytes. Spdef inhibited proliferation of intestinal crypt cells without
induction of apoptosis. Prolonged expression of the Spdef transgene caused a
progressive reduction in the number of crypts that expressed Spdef, consistent
with its inhibitory effects on cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Spdef was sufficient to inhibit proliferation of intestinal
progenitors and induce differentiation into goblet cells; SPDEF was required for 
activation of goblet cell associated genes in vitro. These data support a model
in which Spdef promotes terminal differentiation into goblet cells of a common
goblet/Paneth progenitor.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3004755
PMID: 19786015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Curr Opin Immunol. 2009 Oct;21(5):472-80. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2009.09.003. Epub
2009 Sep 24.

Novel genetic etiologies of severe congenital neutropenia.

Boztug K(1), Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) comprises a heterogenous group of primary
immunodeficiency disorders collectively characterized by paucity of mature
neutrophils. In recent years, progress has been made with respect to the
elucidation of genetic causes underlying syndromic and non-syndromic variants of 
SCN. Most cases of autosomal dominant SCN are associated with mutations in the
neutrophil elastase (ELA-2/ELANE) gene, autosomal recessive forms of this
disorder can be caused by mutations in the gene encoding the mitochondrial
protein HAX-1. Rarely, SCN can be caused by mutations in the gene encoding the
transcription factor GFI1 or activating mutations in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
(WAS) gene, respectively. More recently, a complex disorder associating SCN and
developmental aberrations was identified, caused by mutations in the
glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit 3 (G6PC3) gene. Despite our increasing
knowledge of the genetic etiologies of SCN, the molecular pathophysiology
underlying these disorders remains only partially understood.

PMID: 19782549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Br J Haematol. 2009 Nov;147(4):535-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07888.x.
Epub 2009 Sep 22.

Prevalence of mutations in ELANE, GFI1, HAX1, SBDS, WAS and G6PC3 in patients
with severe congenital neutropenia.

Xia J(1), Bolyard AA, Rodger E, Stein S, Aprikyan AA, Dale DC, Link DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a genetically heterogeneous syndrome
associated with mutations of ELANE (ELA2), HAX1, GFI1, WAS, CSF3R or G6PC3. We
investigated the prevalence of mutations of ELANE in a cohort of 162 SCN patients
for whom blood or bone marrow samples were submitted to the North American Severe
Chronic Neutropenia Tissue Repository. Mutations of ELANE were found in 90 of 162
patients (55.6%). Subsequently, we conducted an analysis of a subset of 73 of
these cases utilising a high throughput sequencing approach to determine the
prevalence of other mutations associated with SCN. Among the 73 patients,
mutations of ELANE were detected in 28. In the remaining 45 patients with wild
type ELANE alleles, five patients had mutations: GFI1 (1), SBDS (1), WAS (1) and 
G6PC3 (2); no mutations of HAX1 were detected. In approximately 40% of our cases,
the genetic basis of SCN remains unknown. These data suggest that for genetic
diagnosis of SCN, ELANE genotyping should first be performed. In patients without
ELANE mutations, other known SCN-associated gene mutations will be found rarely
and genotyping can be guided by the clinical features of each patient.

PMCID: PMC2783282
PMID: 19775295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Aug;17(4):949-52.

[Establishment of a stable transfectant 32D/Gfi1 cell line by recombinant
lentiviral expression vector].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang M(1), Ou DM, Wu J, Zhao X, Xu JH, Zhang XM, Zhang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei Province, China.

The aim of study was to establish the packaging system of the recombinant
lentiviral vector encoding Gfi1 gene for eukaryotic expression and to realize the
efficient, stable expression of Gfi1 32D cells so as to provide effective
platform for further studying the development of Gfi1 gene in hematologic
malignancies. The three-plasmid recombinant lentiviral vector consisting of
transfer plasmid (pLOX-Gfi1/pLOX), the packaging plasmid (pCMVDeltaR8.2) and the 
envelop plasmid (pMD.G) was prepared and purified. Human embryonic kidney 293T
cells were cotransfected with the three plasmids by lipofectamine 2000. After
transfection for 48 hours, the viral supernatant was collected and the target
cell 32D was transfected with the recombinant lentivirus; the Gfi1 integration
and expression in 293T and 32D cells were detected by Western-blot. The results
showed that the three plasmids of lentivirus could be transfected into 293T with 
high efficiency and packaged successfully, and the Gfi1 protein could be detected
by fluorescent microscopy. The recombinant lentiviruses carrying Gfi1 could
transfer and deliver Gfi1 gene to 32D cells, and the Gfi1 expression in 293T and 
32D cell could be detected by Western blot. It is concluded that the recombinant 
lentivirus carrying Gfi1 can deliver target gene to 32D cells with high
efficiency, and the expression of Gfi1 protein is stable in 32D.

PMID: 19698235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Genome Biol. 2009;10(7):R81. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-7-r81. Epub 2009 Jul 31.

Zebrafish reward mutants reveal novel transcripts mediating the behavioral
effects of amphetamine.

Webb KJ(1), Norton WH, Trümbach D, Meijer AH, Ninkovic J, Topp S, Heck D, Marr C,
Wurst W, Theis FJ, Spaink HP, Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Department Zebrafish Neurogenetics, Institute of Developmental Genetics,
Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Ingolstaedter Landstrasse, Neuherberg, 85764 Germany.
katharine.webb@helmholtz-muenchen.de

Comment in
    Genome Biol. 2009;10(7):231.

BACKGROUND: Addiction is a pathological dysregulation of the brain's reward
systems, determined by several complex genetic pathways. The conditioned place
preference test provides an evaluation of the effects of drugs in animal models, 
allowing the investigation of substances at a biologically relevant level with
respect to reward. Our lab has previously reported the development of a reliable 
conditioned place preference paradigm for zebrafish. Here, this test was used to 
isolate a dominant N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced mutant, no addiction
(nad(dne3256)), which fails to respond to amphetamine, and which we used as an
entry point towards identifying the behaviorally relevant transcriptional
response to amphetamine.
RESULTS: Through the combination of microarray experiments comparing the adult
brain transcriptome of mutant and wild-type siblings under normal conditions, as 
well as their response to amphetamine, we identified genes that correlate with
the mutants' altered conditioned place preference behavior. In addition to
pathways classically involved in reward, this gene set shows a striking
enrichment in transcription factor-encoding genes classically involved in brain
development, which later appear to be re-used within the adult brain. We selected
a subset of them for validation by quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization,
revealing that specific brain areas responding to the drug through these
transcription factors include domains of ongoing adult neurogenesis. Finally,
network construction revealed functional connections between several of these
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results identify a new network of coordinated gene
regulation that influences or accompanies amphetamine-triggered conditioned place
preference behavior and that may underlie the susceptibility to addiction.

PMCID: PMC2728535
PMID: 19646228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;29(16):4394-405. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00596-09. Epub 2009 Jun
8.

Contributions to neutropenia from PFAAP5 (N4BP2L2), a novel protein mediating
transcriptional repressor cooperation between Gfi1 and neutrophil elastase.

Salipante SJ(1), Rojas ME, Korkmaz B, Duan Z, Wechsler J, Benson KF, Person RE,
Grimes HL, Horwitz MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Box 355065, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.

"Neutropenia" refers to deficient numbers of neutrophils, the most abundant type 
of white blood cell. Two main forms of inherited neutropenia are cyclic
neutropenia, in which neutrophil counts oscillate with a 21-day frequency, and
severe congenital neutropenia, in which static neutropenia may evolve at times
into leukemia. Mutations of ELA2, encoding the protease neutrophil elastase, can 
cause both disorders. Among other genes, severe congenital neutropenia can also
result from mutations affecting the transcriptional repressor Gfi1, one of whose 
genetic targets is ELA2, suggesting that the two act through similar mechanisms. 
In order to identify components of a common pathway regulating neutrophil
production, we conducted yeast two-hybrid screens with Gfi1 and neutrophil
elastase and detected a novel protein, PFAAP5 (also known as N4BP2L2),
interacting with both. Expression of PFAAP5 allows neutrophil elastase to
potentiate the repression of Gfi1 target genes, as determined by reporter assays,
RNA interference, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and impairment of neutrophil
differentiation in HSCs with PFAAP5 depletion, thus delineating a mechanism
through which neutrophil elastase could regulate its own synthesis. Our findings 
are consistent with theoretical models of cyclic neutropenia proposing that its
periodicity can be explained through disturbance of a feedback circuit in which
mature neutrophils inhibit cell proliferation, thereby homeostatically regulating
progenitor populations.

PMCID: PMC2725743
PMID: 19506020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int Immunol. 2009 Jul;21(7):881-9. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp054. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Gfi1 negatively regulates T(h)17 differentiation by inhibiting RORgammat
activity.

Ichiyama K(1), Hashimoto M, Sekiya T, Nakagawa R, Wakabayashi Y, Sugiyama Y,
Komai K, Saba I, Möröy T, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

T(h) cells have long been divided into two subsets, T(h)1 and T(h)2; however,
recently, T(h)17 and inducible regulatory T (iTreg) cells were identified as new 
T(h) cell subsets. Although T(h)1- and T(h)2-polarizing cytokines have been shown
to suppress T(h)17 and iTreg development, transcriptional regulation of T(h)17
and iTreg differentiation by cytokines remains to be clarified. In this study, we
found that expression of the growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1) gene, which has
been implicated in T(h)2 development, was repressed in T(h)17 and iTreg cells
compared with T(h)1 and T(h)2 lineages. Gfi1 expression was enhanced by the
IFN-gamma/STAT1 and IL-4/STAT6 pathways, whereas it was repressed by the
transforming growth factor-beta1 stimulation at the promoter level.
Over-expression of Gfi1 strongly reduced IL-17A transcription in the EL4 T cell
line, as well as in primary T cells. This was due to the blockade of recruitment 
of retinoid-related orphan receptor gammat to the IL-17A promoter. In contrast,
IL-17A expression was significantly enhanced in Gfi1-deficient T cells under
T(h)17-promoting differentiation conditions as compared with wild-type T cells.
In contrast, the impacts of Gfi1 in iTregs were not as strong as in T(h)17 cells.
Taken together, these data strongly suggest that Gfi1 is a negative regulator of 
T(h)17 differentiation, which represents a novel mechanism for the regulation of 
T(h)17 development by cytokines.

PMID: 19505891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Virol. 2009 Aug;83(16):8051-61. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00427-09. Epub 2009 May 27.

Loss of MicroRNA targets in the 3' untranslated region as a mechanism of
retroviral insertional activation of growth factor independence 1.

Dabrowska MJ(1), Dybkaer K, Johnsen HE, Wang B, Wabl M, Pedersen FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University Hospital,
Denmark.

The non-oncogene-bearing retrovirus SL3-3 murine leukemia virus induces strictly 
T-cell lymphomas with a mean latency of 2 to 4 months in mice of the NMRI-inbred 
(NMRI-i) strain. By high-throughput sequencing of retroviral tags, we have
identified the genomic region carrying the transcriptional repressor and oncogene
growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) as a frequent target for SL3-3 in the NMRI-i 
mouse genome. Twenty-four SL3-3 insertions were identified within a 1-kb window
of the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of the Gfi1 gene, a clustering pattern
unique for this lymphoma model. Expression analysis determined that the Gfi1 gene
was transcriptionally activated by SL3-3 insertions, and an upregulation of Gfi1 
protein expression was detected for tumors harboring insertions in the Gfi1
3'UTR. Here we provide data in support of a mechanism by which retroviral
insertions in the Gfi1 3'UTR decouple microRNA-mediated posttranscriptional
regulation.

PMCID: PMC2715787
PMID: 19474094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2010 Feb;38(1):68-74. doi: 10.1007/s12016-009-8130-5.

Genetic insights into congenital neutropenia.

Klein C(1), Welte K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany. klein.christoph@mh-hannover.de

Congenital neutropenia syndromes comprise a heterogeneous group of disorders
leading to increased susceptibility to bacterial infections. Recent work has
elucidated the molecular basis of several congenital neutropenia syndromes such
as mutations in ELA2, HAX1, GF11, and WAS. In addition, a number of complex
clinical syndromes associating congenital neutropenia have been recognized and
elucidated on a genetic level, e.g. p14-deficiency or G6PC3-deficiency. The
clinical and genetic findings of various neutropenia syndromes are being
discussed.

PMID: 19440858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nat Genet. 2009 May;41(5):614-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.369. Epub 2009 Apr 12.

An ENU-induced mutation of miR-96 associated with progressive hearing loss in
mice.

Lewis MA(1), Quint E, Glazier AM, Fuchs H, De Angelis MH, Langford C, van Dongen 
S, Abreu-Goodger C, Piipari M, Redshaw N, Dalmay T, Moreno-Pelayo MA, Enright AJ,
Steel KP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2009 Oct;76(4):343-5.

Progressive hearing loss is common in the human population, but little is known
about the molecular basis. We report a new N-ethyl-N-nitrosurea (ENU)-induced
mouse mutant, diminuendo, with a single base change in the seed region of Mirn96.
Heterozygotes show progressive loss of hearing and hair cell anomalies, whereas
homozygotes have no cochlear responses. Most microRNAs are believed to
downregulate target genes by binding to specific sites on their mRNAs, so
mutation of the seed should lead to target gene upregulation. Microarray analysis
revealed 96 transcripts with significantly altered expression in homozygotes;
notably, Slc26a5, Ocm, Gfi1, Ptprq and Pitpnm1 were downregulated. Hypergeometric
P-value analysis showed that hundreds of genes were upregulated in mutants.
Different genes, with target sites complementary to the mutant seed, were
downregulated. This is the first microRNA found associated with deafness, and
diminuendo represents a model for understanding and potentially moderating
progressive hair cell degeneration in hearing loss more generally.

PMCID: PMC2705913
PMID: 19363478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Int J Hematol. 2009 May;89(4):422-30. doi: 10.1007/s12185-009-0286-5. Epub 2009
Apr 10.

Growth factor independent 1b (Gfi1b) and a new splice variant of Gfi1b are highly
expressed in patients with acute and chronic leukemia.

Vassen L(1), Khandanpour C, Ebeling P, van der Reijden BA, Jansen JH, Mahlmann S,
Dührsen U, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, 45122 Essen, Germany.

Gfi1b is a transcriptional repressor that is essential for erythroid cells and
megakaryocytes, but is also expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and early
myeloid progenitors. The chromosomal localization of the Gfi1b gene at 9q34 and
its functional homology with the proto-oncogene Gfi1 were suggestive for a role
of Gfi1b in malignant transformation and myeloid leukemia. We show here that the 
expression of Gfi1b is strongly elevated in CML and AML patients compared to
normal healthy controls and that imatinib, a drug widely used to treat CML,
further enhances Gfi1b expression in patients even after remission. Our data
suggest that Gfi1b may be an important factor to establish or maintain myeloid
leukemia and myeloproliferative diseases and that, high expression levels of
Gfi1b might be associated with the emergence of Philadelphia chromosome negative 
myeloid malignancies after imatinib withdrawal or after the development of
imatinib resistance.

PMID: 19360458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5466-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-09-179747. Epub 2009 
Apr 3.

Gfi1 integrates progenitor versus granulocytic transcriptional programming.

Horman SR(1), Velu CS, Chaubey A, Bourdeau T, Zhu J, Paul WE, Gebelein B, Grimes 
HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH
45229, USA.

In patients with severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) and mice with growth factor 
independent-1 (Gfi1) loss of function, arrested myeloid progenitors accumulate,
whereas terminal granulopoiesis is blocked. One might assume that Gfi-null
progenitors accumulate because they lack the ability to differentiate. Instead,
our data indicate that Gfi1 loss of function deregulates 2 separable
transcriptional programs, one of which controls the accumulation and lineage
specification of myeloid progenitors, but not terminal granulopoiesis. We
demonstrate that Gfi1 directly represses HoxA9, Pbx1, and Meis1 during normal
myelopoiesis. Gfi1-/- progenitors exhibit elevated levels of HoxA9, Pbx1 and
Meis1, exaggerated HoxA9-Pbx1-Meis1 activity, and progenitor transformation in
collaboration with oncogenic K-Ras. Limiting HoxA9 alleles corrects, in a
dose-dependent manner, in vivo and in vitro phenotypes observed with loss of Gfi1
in myeloid progenitor cells but did not rescue Gfi1-/- blocked granulopoiesis.
Thus, Gfi1 integrates 2 events during normal myeloid differentiation; the
suppression of a HoxA9-Pbx1-Meis1 progenitor program and the induction of a
granulopoietic transcription program.

PMCID: PMC2689047
PMID: 19346496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):4720-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-190215. Epub 2009
Mar 10.

Gfi1 regulates miR-21 and miR-196b to control myelopoiesis.

Velu CS(1), Baktula AM, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH
45244, USA.

The zinc finger protein growth factor independent-1 (Gfi1) is a transcriptional
repressor that is critically required for normal granulocytic differentiation.
GFI1 loss-of-function mutations are found in some patients with severe congenital
neutropenia (SCN). The SCN-associated GFI1-mutant proteins act as dominant
negatives to block granulopoiesis through selective deregulation of a subset of
GFI1 target genes. Here we show that Gfi1 is a master regulator of microRNAs, and
that deregulated expression of these microRNAs recapitulates a Gfi1
loss-of-function block to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF)-stimulated granulopoiesis. Specifically, bone marrow cells from a
GFI1-mutant SCN patient and Gfi1(-/-) mice display deregulated expression of
miR-21 and miR-196B expression. Flow cytometric analysis and colony assays reveal
that the overexpression or depletion of either miR induces changes in myeloid
development. However, coexpression of miR-21 and miR-196b (as seen in Gfi1(-/-)
mice and a GFI1N382S SCN patient) completely blocks G-CSF-induced granulopoiesis.
Thus, our results not only identify microRNAs whose regulation is required during
myelopoiesis, but also provide an example of synergy in microRNA biologic
activity and illustrate potential mechanisms underlying SCN disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2680372
PMID: 19278956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):e1-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-162958. Epub 2009 Feb 
19.

A HaemAtlas: characterizing gene expression in differentiated human blood cells.

Watkins NA(1), Gusnanto A, de Bono B, De S, Miranda-Saavedra D, Hardie DL,
Angenent WG, Attwood AP, Ellis PD, Erber W, Foad NS, Garner SF, Isacke CM, Jolley
J, Koch K, Macaulay IC, Morley SL, Rendon A, Rice KM, Taylor N, Thijssen-Timmer
DC, Tijssen MR, van der Schoot CE, Wernisch L, Winzer T, Dudbridge F, Buckley CD,
Langford CF, Teichmann S, Göttgens B, Ouwehand WH; Bloodomics Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, National Health Service
Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, United Kingdom. naw23@cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 May 7;113(19):4479-80.

Hematopoiesis is a carefully controlled process that is regulated by complex
networks of transcription factors that are, in part, controlled by signals
resulting from ligand binding to cell-surface receptors. To further understand
hematopoiesis, we have compared gene expression profiles of human erythroblasts, 
megakaryocytes, B cells, cytotoxic and helper T cells, natural killer cells,
granulocytes, and monocytes using whole genome microarrays. A bioinformatics
analysis of these data was performed focusing on transcription factors,
immunoglobulin superfamily members, and lineage-specific transcripts. We observed
that the numbers of lineage-specific genes varies by 2 orders of magnitude,
ranging from 5 for cytotoxic T cells to 878 for granulocytes. In addition, we
have identified novel coexpression patterns for key transcription factors
involved in hematopoiesis (eg, GATA3-GFI1 and GATA2-KLF1). This study represents 
the most comprehensive analysis of gene expression in hematopoietic cells to date
and has identified genes that play key roles in lineage commitment and cell
function. The data, which are freely accessible, will be invaluable for future
studies on hematopoiesis and the role of specific genes and will also aid the
understanding of the recent genome-wide association studies.

PMCID: PMC2680378
PMID: 19228925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Exp Med. 2009 Feb 16;206(2):329-41. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081666. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Down-regulation of Gfi-1 expression by TGF-beta is important for differentiation 
of Th17 and CD103+ inducible regulatory T cells.

Zhu J(1), Davidson TS, Wei G, Jankovic D, Cui K, Schones DE, Guo L, Zhao K,
Shevach EM, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Growth factor independent 1 (Gfi-1), a transcriptional repressor, is transiently 
induced during T cell activation. Interleukin (IL) 4 further induces Gfi-1,
resulting in optimal Th2 cell expansion. We report a second important function of
Gfi-1 in CD4 T cells: prevention of alternative differentiation by Th2 cells, and
inhibition of differentiation of naive CD4 T cells to either Th17 or inducible
regulatory T (iTreg) cells. In Gfi1(-/-) Th2 cells, the Rorc, Il23r, and Cd103
loci showed histone 3 lysine 4 trimethylation modifications that were lacking in 
wild-type Th2 cells, implying that Gfi-1 is critical for epigenetic regulation of
Th17 and iTreg cell-related genes in Th2 cells. Enforced Gfi-1 expression
inhibited IL-17 production and iTreg cell differentiation. Furthermore, a key
inducer of both Th17 and iTreg cell differentiation, transforming growth factor
beta, repressed Gfi-1 expression, implying a reciprocal negative regulation of
CD4 T cell fate determination. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed direct
binding of the Gfi-1-lysine-specific demethylase 1 repressive complex to the
intergenic region of Il17a/Il17f loci and to intron 1 of Cd103. T cell-specific
Gfi1 conditional knockout mice displayed a striking delay in the onset of
experimental allergic encephalitis correlated with a dramatic increase of
Foxp3(+)CD103(+) CD4 T cells. Thus, Gfi-1 plays a critical role both in enhancing
Th2 cell expansion and in repressing induction of Th17 and CD103(+) iTreg cells.

PMCID: PMC2646571
PMID: 19188499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3323-32. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-162248. Epub 2009
Jan 28.

Runx2 induces acute myeloid leukemia in cooperation with Cbfbeta-SMMHC in mice.

Kuo YH(1), Zaidi SK, Gornostaeva S, Komori T, Stein GS, Castilla LH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The core-binding factor (CBF) is a master regulator of developmental and
differentiation programs, and CBF alterations are frequently associated with
acute leukemia. The role of the CBF member RUNX2 in hematopoiesis is poorly
understood. Genetic evidence suggests that deregulation of Runx2 may cause
myeloid leukemia in mice expressing the fusion oncogene Cbfb-MYH11. In this
study, we show that sustained expression of Runx2 modulates Cbfbeta-smooth muscle
myosin heavy chain (SMMHC)-mediated myeloid leukemia development. Expression of
Runx2 is high in the hematopoietic stem cell compartment and decreases during
myeloid differentiation. Sustained Runx2 expression hinders myeloid progenitor
differentiation capacity and represses expression of CBF targets Csf1R, Mpo,
Cebpd, the cell cycle inhibitor Cdkn1a, and myeloid markers Cebpa and Gfi1. In
addition, full-length Runx2 cooperates with Cbfbeta-SMMHC in leukemia development
in transplantation assays. Furthermore, we show that the nuclear matrix-targeting
signal and DNA-binding runt-homology domain of Runx2 are essential for its
leukemogenic activity. Conversely, Runx2 haplo-insufficiency delays the onset and
reduces the incidence of acute myeloid leukemia. Together, these results indicate
that Runx2 is expressed in the stem cell compartment, interferes with
differentiation and represses CBF targets in the myeloid compartment, and
modulates the leukemogenic function of Cbfbeta-SMMHC in mouse leukemia.

PMCID: PMC2665897
PMID: 19179305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 3;106(5):1433-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0804863106.
Epub 2009 Jan 22.

Gfi-1 represses CDKN2B encoding p15INK4B through interaction with Miz-1.

Basu S(1), Liu Q, Qiu Y, Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606,
USA.

Gfi-1 is a nuclear zinc finger (ZF) transcriptional repressor that plays an
important role in hematopoiesis and inner ear development, and has been
implicated in lymphomagenesis. Gfi-1 represses transcription by directly binding 
to the consensus DNA sequence in the promoters of its target genes. We report
here an alternative mechanism by which Gfi-1 represses CDKN2B encoding
p15(INK4B). Gfi-1 does not directly bind to CDKN2B, but interacts with Miz-1 and,
via Miz-1, is recruited to the core promoter of CDKN2B. Miz-1 is a POZ-ZF
transcription factor that has been shown to mediate transcriptional repression by
c-Myc. Like c-Myc, upon recruitment to the CDKN2B promoter, Gfi-1 represses
transcriptional activation of CDKN2B by Miz-1 and in response to TGFbeta.
Consistent with its role in repressing CDKN2B transcription, knockdown of Gfi-1
in human leukemic cells or deficiency of Gfi-1 in mouse bone marrow cells results
in augmented expression of p15(INK4B). Notably, Gfi-1 and c-Myc are both
recruited to the CDKN2B core promoter and act in collaboration to repress CDKN2B.
Our data reveal a mechanism of transcriptional repression by Gfi-1 and may have
important implications for understanding the roles of Gfi-1 in normal development
and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2635772
PMID: 19164764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.11.006.

p53 regulates hematopoietic stem cell quiescence.

Liu Y(1), Elf SE, Miyata Y, Sashida G, Liu Y, Huang G, Di Giandomenico S, Lee JM,
Deblasio A, Menendez S, Antipin J, Reva B, Koff A, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Phamacology and Chemistry Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):7-8.

The importance of the p53 protein in the cellular response to DNA damage is well 
known, but its function during steady-state hematopoiesis has not been
established. We have defined a critical role of p53 in regulating hematopoietic
stem cell quiescence, especially in promoting the enhanced quiescence seen in
HSCs that lack the MEF/ELF4 transcription factor. Transcription profiling of HSCs
isolated from wild-type and p53 null mice identified Gfi-1 and Necdin as p53
target genes, and using lentiviral vectors to upregulate or knockdown the
expression of these genes, we show their importance in regulating HSC quiescence.
Establishing the role of p53 (and its target genes) in controlling the cell-cycle
entry of HSCs may lead to therapeutic strategies capable of eliminating quiescent
cancer (stem) cells.

PMCID: PMC2839936
PMID: 19128791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):7-8. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.12.007.

Hematopoietic stem cell quiescence: yet another role for p53.

van Os R(1), de Haan G, Dykstra BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Section Stem Cell Biology, University Medical
Center Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, the Netherlands.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jan 9;4(1):37-48.

p53, sometimes referred to as the "guardian of the genome," helps regulate
cell-cycle arrest, DNA-damage repair, apoptosis, and senescence. Adding to this
list, in this issue of Cell Stem Cell, Liu et al. (2009) show that p53 also plays
a role in regulating hematopoietic stem cell quiescence.

PMID: 19128788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 23;105(51):20100-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806501105. Epub 2008 Dec 22.

A gene regulatory network armature for T lymphocyte specification.

Georgescu C(1), Longabaugh WJ, Scripture-Adams DD, David-Fung ES, Yui MA,
Zarnegar MA, Bolouri H, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

Choice of a T lymphoid fate by hematopoietic progenitor cells depends on
sustained Notch-Delta signaling combined with tightly regulated activities of
multiple transcription factors. To dissect the regulatory network connections
that mediate this process, we have used high-resolution analysis of regulatory
gene expression trajectories from the beginning to the end of specification,
tests of the short-term Notch dependence of these gene expression changes, and
analyses of the effects of overexpression of two essential transcription factors,
namely PU.1 and GATA-3. Quantitative expression measurements of >50 transcription
factor and marker genes have been used to derive the principal components of
regulatory change through which T cell precursors progress from primitive
multipotency to T lineage commitment. Our analyses reveal separate contributions 
of Notch signaling, GATA-3 activity, and down-regulation of PU.1. Using
BioTapestry (www.BioTapestry.org), the results have been assembled into a draft
gene regulatory network for the specification of T cell precursors and the choice
of T as opposed to myeloid/dendritic or mast-cell fates. This network also
accommodates effects of E proteins and mutual repression circuits of Gfi1 against
Egr-2 and of TCF-1 against PU.1 as proposed elsewhere, but requires additional
functions that remain unidentified. Distinctive features of this network
structure include the intense dose dependence of GATA-3 effects, the
gene-specific modulation of PU.1 activity based on Notch activity, the lack of
direct opposition between PU.1 and GATA-3, and the need for a distinct,
late-acting repressive function or functions to extinguish stem and
progenitor-derived regulatory gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2629331
PMID: 19104054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Neurosci Methods. 2009 Mar 15;177(2):322-33. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.10.031. Epub 2008 Nov 6.

Loss of function genetic screens reveal MTGR1 as an intracellular repressor of
beta1 integrin-dependent neurite outgrowth.

Ossovskaya VS(1), Dolganov G, Basbaum AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94158, USA. vossovskaya@biparsciences.com <vossovskaya@biparsciences.com>

Integrins are transmembrane receptors that promote neurite growth and guidance.
To identify regulators of integrin-dependent neurite outgrowth, here we used two 
loss of function genetic screens in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. First, we
screened a genome-wide retroviral library of genetic suppressor elements (GSEs). 
Among the many genes identified in the GSE screen, we isolated the hematopoetic
transcriptional factor MTGR1 (myeloid translocation gene-related protein-1).
Treatment of SH-SY5Y cells with MTGR1 siRNA enhanced neurite outgrowth and
concurrently increased expression of GAP-43, a protein linked to neurite
outgrowth. Second, we transduced SH-SY5Y with a genome-wide GFP-labeled
lentiviral siRNA library, which expressed 40,000 independent siRNAs targeting
8500 human genes. From this screen we isolated GFI1 (growth factor
independence-1), which, like MTGR1, is a member of the myeloid translocation gene
on 8q22 (MTG8)/ETO protein complex of nuclear repressor proteins. These results
reveal novel contributions of MTGR1 and GFI1 to the regulation of neurite
outgrowth and identify novel repressors of integrin-dependent neurite outgrowth.

PMID: 19026687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Nov;38(11):3004-14. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838251.

The zinc finger protein Gfi1 is implicated in the regulation of IgG2b production 
and the expression of Igamma2b germline transcripts.

Igwe E(1), Kosan C, Khandanpour C, Sharif-Askari E, Brüne B, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie Tumorforschung, IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Essen, Germany. emekaigwe@zbc.kgu.de

Gfi1 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is undetectable in B lymphocytes 
but its expression rises rapidly upon antigenic stimulation or treatment with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Here we show that Gfi1(-/-) mice have higher serum
levels of gamma isotype immunoglobulin than WT animals. When challenged with
antigen, Gfi1(-/-) mice react with accelerated formation of PNA+/CD19+ germinal
center B cells and an increased production of antigen-specific IgG2a and IgG2b.
Moreover, Gfi1(-/-) B cells secrete more IgG2a and IgG2b than WT cells and
produce higher levels of Igamma2b sterile germline transcripts when cultured with
LPS. While the proliferative response to stimulation with anti-IgM antibodies and
plasma cell differentiation was normal in Gfi1(-/-) B cells, we found that mRNA
and protein levels of TGFbeta1 were significantly increased in the absence of
Gfi1. TGFbeta1 has been shown to be essential for the regulation of IgG subclass 
production and was previously found to selectively stimulate IgG2b secretion. Our
findings reveal a new function of Gfi1 in the control of IgG isotype production.

PMID: 18991277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 1;181(9):6222-9.

Transcription factor Gfi1 restricts B cell-mediated autoimmunity.

Rathinam C(1), Lassmann H, Mengel M, Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.

Retraction in
    Rathinam C, Lassmann H, Mengel M, Klein C. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 1;189(7):3777.

The zinc finger transcription factor Gfi1 (growth factor-independent-1) has been 
involved in various cellular differentiation processes. Gfi1 acts as a
transcriptional repressor and splicing control factor upon binding to cognate
binding sites in regulatory elements of its target genes. In this study, we
report that Gfi1-deficient mice develop autoimmunity. Gfi1-deficient peripheral B
cells show a hyperproliferative phenotype leading to expansion of plasma cells,
increased levels of nuclear autoantibodies, and Ig deposition in brain and
kidneys. Dysregulation of multiple transcription factors and cell cycle control
elements may contribute to B cell-dependent autoimmunity. Gfi1 thus emerges as a 
novel master regulator restricting autoimmunity.

PMID: 18941212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 14;283(46):32056-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802320200. Epub 2008
Sep 19.

Ajuba functions as a histone deacetylase-dependent co-repressor for
autoregulation of the growth factor-independent-1 transcription factor.

Montoya-Durango DE(1), Velu CS, Kazanjian A, Rojas ME, Jay CM, Longmore GD,
Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

Growth factor independent-1 (Gfi1) is a zinc finger protein with a
SNAG-transcriptional repressor domain. Ajuba is a LIM domain protein that
shuttles between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Ajuba functions as a co-repressor
for synthetic Gfi1 SNAG-repressor domain-containing constructs, but a role for
Ajuba co-repression of the cognate DNA bound Gfi1 protein has not been defined.
Co-immunoprecipitation of synthetic and endogenous proteins and co-elution with
gel filtration suggest that an endogenous Ajuba.Gfi1.HDAC multiprotein complex is
possible. Active histone deacetylase activity co-immunoprecipitates with Ajuba or
Gfi1, and both proteins depend upon histone deacetylases for full transcriptional
repression activity. Ajuba LIM domains directly bind to Gfi1, but the association
is not SNAG domain-dependent. ChIP analysis and reciprocal knockdown experiments 
suggest that Ajuba selectively functions as a co-repressor for Gfi1
autoregulation. The data suggest that Ajuba is utilized as a corepressor
selectively on Gfi1 target genes.

PMCID: PMC2581551
PMID: 18805794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 17;283(42):28216-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804174200. Epub 2008
Aug 13.

Gfi1-mediated stabilization of GATA3 protein is required for Th2 cell
differentiation.

Shinnakasu R(1), Yamashita M, Kuwahara M, Hosokawa H, Hasegawa A, Motohashi S,
Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The differentiation of naive CD4 T cells into Th2 cells requires the T cell
receptor-mediated activation of the ERK MAPK cascade. Little is known, however,
in regard to how the ERK MAPK cascade regulates Th2 cell differentiation. We
herein identified Gfi1 (growth factor independent-1) as a downstream target of
the ERK MAPK cascade for Th2 cell differentiation. In the absence of Gfi1,
interleukin-5 production and the change of histone modification at the
interleukin-5 gene locus were severely impaired. Furthermore, the interferon
gamma gene showed a striking activation in the Gfi1(-/-) Th2 cells. An enhanced
ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent degradation of GATA3 protein was observed in
Gfi1(-/-) Th2 cells, and the overexpression of GATA3 eliminated the defect of Th2
cell function in Gfi1-deficient Th2 cells. These data suggest that the T cell
receptor-mediated induction of Gfi1 controls Th2 cell differentiation through the
regulation of GATA3 protein stability.

PMCID: PMC2661392
PMID: 18701459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Med Sci Monit. 2008 Aug;14(8):RA114-25.

Novel approaches to treating sensorineural hearing loss. Auditory genetics and
necessary factors for stem cell transplant.

Vlastarakos PV(1), Nikolopoulos TP, Tavoulari E, Kiprouli C, Ferekidis E.

Author information: 
(1)ENT Depertment, Hippokrateion General Hospital of Athens, Athens, Greece.
pevlast@hotmail.com

Sensorineural hearing loss is a chronic disease, with a serious impact on human
communication and quality of life. Exposure to various factors can lead to
irreversible hearing impairment, as the auditory epithelium in humans comprises
terminally differentiated cells. By contrast, the inner ear of lower vertebrates 
and invertebrates shows regenerative capacity. Efforts to regenerate the damaged 
human inner ear may involve renewed cell proliferation, or transplanting cells
that can differentiate into sensory cells. Literature review. Animal studies, in 
vitro studies, retrospective-cohort studies, community-based case-controls,
clinical guidelines, and review articles. Embryonic stem cells, inner ear stem
cells, and stem cells from other tissues (i.e., neural tissue, hematopoietic
system) may be candidates for restoring the auditory epithelium. Transcriptional 
regulation of p27kip1 is the primary determinant of terminal mitosis and the
final number of postmitotic progenitors of hair and supporting cells. Basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor Math1 was found to be necessary and
sufficient for the production of auditory hair cells. Notch signaling seems to
play a major role in the regulation of Math1, through lateral inhibition. Brn3c, 
Gfi1, and Barhl1 are also specific transcription factors that have been
implicated in hair cell maintenance and consequent survival. Evidence concerning 
development, maintenance, and regeneration of hair cells is still at an embryonic
stage. Combined data, as attempted in the present study, will lead to a more
successful management of deafness.

PMID: 18668008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 1;322(1):33-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.004. Epub 2008
Jul 9.

Prox1 interacts with Atoh1 and Gfi1, and regulates cellular differentiation in
the inner ear sensory epithelia.

Kirjavainen A(1), Sulg M, Heyd F, Alitalo K, Ylä-Herttuala S, Möröy T, Petrova
TV, Pirvola U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Inner ear hair cells and supporting cells arise from common precursors and, in
mammals, do not show phenotypic conversion. Here, we studied the role of the
homeodomain transcription factor Prox1 in the inner ear sensory epithelia.
Adenoviral-mediated Prox1 transduction into hair cells in explant cultures led to
strong repression of Atoh1 and Gfi1, two transcription factors critical for hair 
cell differentiation and survival. Luciferase assays showed that Prox1 can
repress transcriptional activity of Gfi1 independently of Atoh1. Prox1
transduction into cochlear outer hair cells resulted in degeneration of these
cells, consistent with the known phenotype of Gfi1-deficient mice. These results 
together with the widespread expression of endogenous Prox1 within the population
of inner ear supporting cells point to the role for Prox1 in antagonizing the
hair cell phenotype in these non-sensory cells. Further, in vivo analyses of hair
cells from Gfi1-deficient mice suggest that the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p57(Kip2) mediates the differentiation- and survival-promoting functions of Gfi1.
These data reveal novel gene interactions and show that these interactions
regulate cellular differentiation within the inner ear sensory epithelia. The
data point to the tight regulation of phenotypic characteristics of hair cells
and supporting cells.

PMID: 18652815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cell Res. 2008 Jun;18(6):677-85. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.60.

Gfi1.1 regulates hematopoietic lineage differentiation during zebrafish
embryogenesis.

Wei W(1), Wen L, Huang P, Zhang Z, Chen Y, Xiao A, Huang H, Zhu Z, Zhang B, Lin
S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, Center of
Developmental Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, 
Ministry of Education, Beijing 100871, China.

Growth factor independence 1 (GFI1) is important for maturation of mammalian
lymphocytes and neutrophils and maintenance of adult hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs). The role of GFI1 in embryonic hematopoiesis is less well characterized.
Through an enhancer trap screen and bioinformatics analysis, we identified a
zebrafish homolog of Gfi1 (named gfi1.1) and analyzed its function during
embryonic development. Expression of both an endogenous gfi1.1 gene and a GFP
reporter gene inserted near its genomic locus was detected in hematopoietic cells
of zebrafish embryos. Morpholino (MO) knockdown of gfi1.1 reduced expression of
scl, lmo2, c-myb, mpo, rag1, gata1 and hemoglobin alpha embryonic-1 (hbae1), as
well as the total amount of embryonic hemoglobin, but increased expression of
pu.1 and l-plastin. Under the same conditions, MO injection did not affect the
markers involved in vascular and pronephric development. Conversely,
overexpression of gfi1.1 via mRNA injection enhanced expression of gata1 but
inhibited expression of pu.1. These findings suggest that Gfi1.1 plays a critical
role in regulating the balance of embryonic erythroid and myeloid lineage
determination, and is also required for the differentiation of lymphocytes and
granulocytes during zebrafish embryogenesis.

PMID: 18504458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Virology. 2008 Jul 20;377(1):100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.04.008. Epub 2008
May 27.

Retroviral gene insertion in breast milk mediated lymphomagenesis.

Chakraborty J(1), Okonta H, Bagalb H, Lee SJ, Fink B, Changanamkandat R, Duggan
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Health Science
Campus, University of Toledo, 3000 Arlington Avenue, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.
joana.chakraborty@utoledo.edu

We have demonstrated breast milk transmitted MoMuLV-ts1 retrovirus infection and 
subsequent lymphoma development in offspring of uninfected mothers suckled by
infected surrogate mothers. Additionally, we have shown that the lymphoma
development occurs as a result of viral gene integration into host genome. A
total of 146 pups from Balb/C mice were divided into 5 groups; one control and 4 
experimental. All offspring suckled from surrogate infected or control mothers,
except one group of infected pups left with their biological mothers. Thirteen of
91 infected pups developed lymphoma. Inverse-PCR, DNA cloning, and quantitative
real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) were used to study the virus integration sites (VIS) and 
alterations in gene expression. VIS were randomly distributed throughout the
genome. The majority of insertion sites were found in chromosomes 10, 12 and 13. 
A total of 209 proviral genomic insertion sites were located with 52 intragenic
and 157 intergenic sites. We have identified 29 target genes. Four genes
including Tacc3, Aurka, Gfi1 and Ahi1 showed the maximum upregulation of mRNA
expression. These four genes can be considered as candidate genes based on their 
association with cancer. Upregulation of these genes may be involved in this type
of lymphoma development. This model provides an important opportunity to gain
insight into the relationship of viral gene insertion into host genome and
development of lymphoma via natural transmission route such as breast milk.

PMID: 18501945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Panminerva Med. 2008 Mar;50(1):41-53.

Stem cells and molecular strategies to restore hearing.

Pauley S(1), Kopecky B, Beisel K, Soukup G, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University, Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

Hearing loss is a costly and growing problem for the elderly population worldwide
with millions of people being affected. There are currently two prosthetic
devices available to minimize problems associated with the two forms of hearing
loss: hearing aids that amplify sound to overcome middle ear based conductive
hearing loss and cochlear implants that restore some hearing after neurosensory
hearing loss. The current presentation provides information on the treatment of
neurosensory hearing loss. Although the cochlear implant solution for
neurosensory hearing loss is technologically advanced; it still provides only
moderate hearing capacity in neurosensory deaf individuals. Inducible stem cells 
and molecular therapies are appealing alternatives to the cochlear implant and
may provide more than a new form of treatment as they hold the promise for a
cure. To this end, current insights into inducible stem cells that may provide
cells for seeding the cochlea with the hope of new hair cell formation are being 
reviewed. Alternatively, similar to induction of stem cells, cells of the flat
epithelium that remains after hair cell loss could be induced to proliferate and 
differentiate into hair cells. In either of these strategies, hair cell specific 
genes known to be essential for hair cell differentiation or maintenance such as 
ATOH1, POU4F3, GFI1, and miRNA-183 will be utilized with the hope of completely
restoring hearing to all patients with hearing loss.

PMCID: PMC2610336
PMID: 18427387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Immunobiology. 2008;213(3-4):341-52. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2007.11.004. Epub 2008 
Jan 3.

The zinc finger protein and transcriptional repressor Gfi1 as a regulator of the 
innate immune response.

Möröy T(1), Zeng H, Jin J, Schmid KW, Carpinteiro A, Gulbins E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany. Tarik.Moroy@ercm.qc.ca

Gfi1 is a transcriptional repressor with a molecular weight between 47 and 55kDa.
The protein has six C-terminal C(2)H(2)-type zinc finger domains and a
characteristic stretch of 20 amino acids, called the SNAG-domain, at its
N-terminus. Expression of Gfi1 ranges from the hematopoietic and lymphoid system 
to sensory epithelia, lung and parts of the CNS. Gene knockout studies revealed
that Gfi1 is essential for the development of granulocytes and plays a role in
macrophage-dependent cytokine production, indicating that this protein shares the
responsibility for different lines of defense against pathogens. Strikingly,
Gfi1-deficient mice are highly sensitive to both endotoxin and bacterial
infections and die rapidly after an experimental application of endotoxin or
induction of infection with symptoms of septic shock. This sensitivity is
mediated by an overproduction of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and other
inflammatory cytokines. The lung could be identified as the principal organ in
which the accelerated inflammatory reactions take place in challenged
Gfi1-deficient mice. Several lines of experimental evidence support a role of
Gfi1 as a regulator of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) pathways, and, in general, as
an essential modulator preventing an overshooting of the inflammatory response.

PMID: 18406379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 15;180(8):5309-19.

Formation of IL-7Ralphahigh and IL-7Ralphalow CD8 T cells during infection is
regulated by the opposing functions of GABPalpha and Gfi-1.

Chandele A(1), Joshi NS, Zhu J, Paul WE, Leonard WJ, Kaech SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale Medical School, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

IL-7 is essential for the survival of naive and memory T cells, and IL-7 receptor
alpha-chain (IL-7Ralpha) expression is dynamically regulated in activated CD8 T
cells during acute viral and bacterial infections. Most virus-specific CD8 T
cells become IL-7Ralpha(low) and are relatively short-lived, but some escape
IL-7Ralpha repression (referred to as IL-7Ralpha(high) memory precursor effector 
cells) and preferentially enter the memory CD8 T cell pool. How antiviral
effector CD8 T cells regulate IL-7Ralpha expression in an "on and off" fashion
remains to be characterized. During lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection,
we found that opposing actions of the transcription factors GABPalpha (GA binding
protein alpha) and Gfi-1 (growth factor independence 1) control IL-7Ralpha
expression in effector CD8 T cells. Specifically, GABPalpha was required for
IL-7Ralpha expression in memory precursor effector cells, and this correlated
with hyperacetylation of the Il7ra promoter. In contrast, Gfi-1 was required for 
stable IL-7Ralpha repression in effector CD8 T cells and acted by antagonizing
GABPalpha binding and recruiting histone deacetylase 1, which deacetylated the
Il7ra promoter. Thus, Il7ra promoter acetylation and activity was dependent on
the reciprocal binding of GABPalpha and Gfi-1, and these data provide a
biochemical mechanism for the generation of stable IL-7Ralpha(high) and
IL-7Ralpha(low) states in virus-specific effector CD8 T cells.

PMCID: PMC2792750
PMID: 18390712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Anticancer Res. 2008 Jan-Feb;28(1A):261-6.

Adhesion to fibronectin induces megakaryocytic differentiation of JAS-REN cells.

Yamada H(1), Sekikawa T, Agawa M, Iwase S, Suzuki H, Horiguchi-Yamada J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of DNA Medicine, Jikei University,
School of Medicine, Tokyo 125-8506, Japan. hyamad@jikei.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Binding of integrins to the extracellular matrix elicits various
responses. We have previously reported a megakaryocytic-erythroid cell line
(JAS-R) that showed phenotypic changes after adhesion to plastic dishes. However,
the matrix protein and the mechanism responsible for megakaryocytic
differentiation still remain unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: JAS-REN (erythroid) cells were cultured on dishes coated
with various proteins. The cells were treated with RGDS, a tetrapeptide ligand to
integrins, or phorbol ester (12-o-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA) for 48
hours and then were harvested. Subsequently, the cell surface markers were
analyzed using flow cytometry and gene expression was studied by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The JAS-REN cells adhered to fibronectin-coated dishes, but showed poor 
adhesion to dishes coated with collagen, laminin or poly-D-lysine. The
TPA-stimulated JAS-REN cells showed an increase in the expression of integrin
alphaIIbbeta3 complex (CD41a) and integrin beta3 (CD61), while glycophorin A
(CD235a) expression was decreased. JAS-REN cells that were adherent to
fibronectin-coated dishes also showed a similar pattern of phenotype to
TPA-treated cells, but the changes were not so prominent. RT-PCR revealed that
TPA treatment altered the gene expression profile of JAS-REN cells, making it
similar to that of JAS-RAD (megakaryocytic) cells. The RGDS-treated and
fibronectin adherent JAS-REN cells also showed a mostly similar expression
profile to JAS-RAD cells, but these two stimuli did not alter the gene expression
profile as TPA stimulation did. Transcription factors, FLI1 and GFI1, were
induced by all stimuli.
CONCLUSION: Signals triggered by adhesion to fibronectin result in the induction 
of FLI1 that may play a pivotal role in the lineage shift of JAS-REN cells from
erythroid to megakaryocytic.

PMID: 18383854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Int J Lab Hematol. 2009 Jun;31(3):344-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2008.01056.x. 
Epub 2008 Mar 25.

CD34, RAB20, PU.1 and GFI1 mRNA expression in myelodysplastic syndrome.

Huh HJ(1), Chae SL, Lee M, Hong KS, Mun YC, Seong CM, Chung WS, Huh JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Dongguk University, College of Medicine,
Goyang, Korea.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with hypocellular bone marrow (BM) is often
difficult to distinguish from aplastic anemia (AA). Furthermore, the diagnosis of
MDS with low blast counts and normal karyotype may be problematic. These issues
highlight the need for a reliable marker for the diagnosis of MDS. This study was
conducted to determine if changes of mRNA expression in any of the four selected 
genes would be useful markers for differentiation of hypoplastic MDS from AA, and
MDS from benign disease, as well as to investigate whether mRNA expressions
differ between MDS risk subgroups. Thirty-five patients diagnosed with MDS, 27
patients with AA and 17 patients with benign diseases were included. The CD34,
RAB20, PU.1 and GFI1 mRNA levels were measured by real-time RT-PCR. The CD34 mRNA
expressions in hypoplastic MDS were higher than those found in AA. PU.1 and GFI1 
mRNA expressions were significantly lower in MDS with low blast counts and normal
karyotype than those of benign disease. High-risk MDS showed higher CD34
expressions than those of low-risk MDS. This study suggests that measurement of
CD34 and GFI1 mRNA expressions could be useful as a diagnostic and prognostic
marker for MDS.

PMID: 18371060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Mar;24(3):284-9. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2008243284.

[Granulopoeisis and leukemogenesis: lessons from congenital neutropenia].

[Article in French]

Donadieu J(1), Beaupain B, Bellanné-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hémato-oncologie Pédiatrique, Registre français des neutropénies
congénitales, Hôpital Trousseau, 26 avenue du Docteur Arnold Netter, 75012 Paris,
France. jean.donadieu@trs.aphp.fr

Congenital neutropenia are extremely rare diseases, defined by a permanent or
cyclic decrease of blood neutrophils. Molecular basis of several congenital
neutropenia has been recently determined, involving gene coding for the
neutrophil elastase gene (ELA2), GFI1, WAS protein and mitochondrial HAX1
protein. These mutations, dominant (ELA2, GFI1), X-linked (WAS) and autosomal
recessive (HAX1), result in instability of the contents of the granules-
particularly the neutrophil elastase- or in abnormalities of the cytoskeleton,
and possibly, in an increased apoptosis. ELA2 mutations resulting both in
profound and permanent neutropenia, and in cyclic--pseudo sinusoidal--neutropenia
lead to consider that time pattern is very close in the two apparently distinct
phenotypes. This observation suggests that temporal variations of neutrophils
could be represented by non linear functions. Congenital neutropenia,
specifically ELA2 mutated, are also characterized by a high rate of leukemia
(about 15% at 20 years of age). Leukemia risk does not appear to be related to an
oncogenic effect of ELA2 mutations, but much likely to the deepness of the
neutropenia, and the intensity of G-CSF therapy.

PMID: 18334177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Immunity. 2008 Mar;28(3):370-80. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2007.12.020. Epub 2008 Mar
6.

Mutations in growth factor independent-1 associated with human neutropenia block 
murine granulopoiesis through colony stimulating factor-1.

Zarebski A(1), Velu CS, Baktula AM, Bourdeau T, Horman SR, Basu S, Bertolone SJ, 
Horwitz M, Hildeman DA, Trent JO, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is characterized by a deficiency of mature
neutrophils, leading to recurrent bacterial and fungal infections. Although
mutations in Elastase-2, neutrophil (ELA2) predominate in human SCN, mutation of 
Ela2 in mice does not recapitulate SCN. The growth factor independent-1 (GFI1)
transcription factor regulates ELA2. Mutations in GFI1 are associated with human 
SCN, and genetic deletion of Gfi1 results in murine neutropenia. We examined
whether human SCN-associated GFI1N382S mutant proteins are causal in SCN and
found that GFI1 functions as a rate-limiting granulopoietic molecular switch. The
N382S mutation inhibited GFI1 DNA binding and resulted in a dominant-negative
block to murine granulopoiesis. Moreover, Gfi1N382S selectively derepressed the
monopoietic cytokine CSF1 and its receptor. Gfi1N382S-expressing Csf1-/- cells
formed neutrophils. These results reveal a common transcriptional program that
underlies both human and murine myelopoiesis, and that is central to the
pathogenesis of SCN associated with mutations in GFI1. This shared
transcriptional pathway may provide new avenues for understanding SCN caused by
mutations in other genes and for clinical intervention into human neutropenias.

PMCID: PMC2835494
PMID: 18328744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 15;68(2):492-7. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2930.

The adenocarcinoma-associated antigen, AGR2, promotes tumor growth, cell
migration, and cellular transformation.

Wang Z(1), Hao Y, Lowe AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305-5187, 
USA.

The AGR2 gene encodes a secretory protein that is highly expressed in
adenocarcinomas of the esophagus, pancreas, breast, and prostate. This study
explores the effect of AGR2 expression with well-established in vitro and in vivo
assays that screen for cellular transformation and tumor growth. AGR2 expression 
in SEG-1 esophageal adenocarcinoma cells was reduced with RNA interference.
Cellular transformation was examined using NIH3T3 cells that express AGR2 after
stable transfection. The cell lines were studied in vitro with assays for
density-dependent and anchorage-independent growth, and in vivo as tumor
xenografts in nude mice. SEG-1 cells with reduced AGR2 expression showed an 82%
decrease in anchorage-independent colony growth and a 60% reduction in tumor
xenograft size. In vitro assays of AGR2-expressing NIH3T3 cells displayed
enhanced foci formation and anchorage-independent growth. In vivo,
AGR2-expressing NIH3T3 cells established tumors in nude mice. Thus, AGR2
expression promotes tumor growth in esophageal adenocarcinoma cells and is able
to transform NIH3T3 cells. Immunohistochemistry of the normal mouse intestine
detected AGR2 expression in proliferating and differentiated intestinal cells of 
secretory lineage. AGR2 may be important for the growth and development of the
intestine as well as esophageal adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 18199544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Dec;37(12):3551-63.

Differential impact of the transcriptional repressor Gfi1 on mature CD4+ and CD8+
T lymphocyte function.

Pargmann D(1), Yücel R, Kosan C, Saba I, Klein-Hitpass L, Schimmer S, Heyd F,
Dittmer U, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Essen, Germany.

The transcriptional repressor Gfi1 is a nuclear zinc-finger protein that is
expressed in T cell precursors in the thymus, but is down-regulated in mature,
resting T cells. Gfi1 expression rises transiently to levels seen in thymocytes
upon antigenic activation. We show here that lack of Gfi1 causes delayed cell
cycle entry and apoptosis after antigenic stimulation in both mature CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells ex vivo. DNA micro-array analysis demonstrated that this correlated 
with an up-regulation of the death receptor CD95, the proapoptotic factors Bad
and Apaf1 and the cell cycle inhibitor p21, and a down-regulation of Bcl-2
expression in Gfi1-/- T cells. Surprisingly, while Gfi1-deficient CD4+ T cells
showed the same defective behavior in vivo, Gfi1-deficient CD8+ T cells showed no
aberration in vivo and were fully able to mount an anti-viral immune response.
This indicates that Gfi1 exerts different functions in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells very
likely by maintaining different genetic programs in both cell types, and appears 
to be essential for the CD4 helper T cell immune response but dispensable for the
function of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells.

PMID: 18034420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Development. 2007 Dec;134(23):4243-53. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Senseless functions as a molecular switch for color photoreceptor differentiation
in Drosophila.

Xie B(1), Charlton-Perkins M, McDonald E, Gebelein B, Cook T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Division of Developmental Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

A major question in development is how different specialized cell types arise
from a common progenitor. In the adult Drosophila compound eye, color
discrimination is achieved by UV-, blue- and green-sensitive photoreceptors
(PRs). These different PR subsets arise from neuronal precursors called R7 and R8
cells. Recent studies have demonstrated that R7-based UV-sensitive PRs require
the repression of R8-based blue/green-sensitive PR characteristics to properly
develop. This repression is mediated by the transcription factor Prospero (Pros).
Here, we report that Senseless (Sens), a Drosophila ortholog of the vertebrate
Gfi1 transcription factor, plays an opposing role to Pros by both negatively
regulating R7-based features and positively enforcing R8-based features during
terminal differentiation. In addition, we demonstrate that Pros and Sens function
together with the transcription factor Orthodenticle (Otd) to oppositely regulate
R7 and R8 PR Rhodopsin gene expression in vitro. These data show that sens,
previously shown to be essential for neuronal specification, also controls
differentiation of specific neuronal subtypes in the retina. Interestingly, Pros 
has recently been shown to function as a tumor suppressor, whereas Gfi1 is a
well-characterized oncogene. Thus, we propose that sens/pros antagonism is
important for regulating many biological processes.

PMID: 17978002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Blood. 2007 Dec 1;110(12):3881-90. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Smad1 and Smad5 differentially regulate embryonic hematopoiesis.

McReynolds LJ(1), Gupta S, Figueroa ME, Mullins MC, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway regulates multiple steps
of hematopoiesis, mediated through receptor-regulated Smads, including Smad1 and 
Smad5. Here, we use loss-of-function approaches in zebrafish to compare the roles
of Smad1 and Smad5 during embryonic hematopoiesis. We show that knockdown of
Smad1 or Smad5 generates distinct and even opposite hematopoietic phenotypes.
Embryos depleted for Smad1 have an increased number of primitive erythrocytes,
but fail to produce mature embryonic macrophages. In contrast, Smad5-depleted
embryos are defective in primitive erythropoiesis, yet have normal numbers of
macrophages. Loss of either Smad1 or Smad5 causes a failure in the generation of 
definitive hematopoietic progenitors. To investigate the mechanism behind these
phenotypes, we used rescue experiments and found that Smad5 is unable to rescue
the Smad1 loss-of-function phenotype, indicating that the 2 highly related
proteins have inherently distinct activities. Microarray experiments revealed
that the 2 proteins redundantly regulate the key initiators of the
hemato-vascular program, including scl, lmo2, and gfi1. However, each also
regulates a remarkably distinct genetic program, with Smad5 uniquely regulating
the BMP signaling pathway itself. Our results suggest that specificity of BMP
signaling output, with respect to hematopoiesis, can be explained by differential
functions of Smad1 and Smad5.

PMCID: PMC2200801
PMID: 17761518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cell. 2007 Aug 17;27(4):562-72.

Epigenetic regulation of hematopoietic differentiation by Gfi-1 and Gfi-1b is
mediated by the cofactors CoREST and LSD1.

Saleque S(1), Kim J, Rooke HM, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Gfi-1 and Gfi-1b are homologous transcriptional repressors involved in diverse
developmental contexts, including hematopoiesis and oncogenesis. Transcriptional 
repression by Gfi proteins requires the conserved SNAG domain. To elucidate the
function of Gfi proteins, we purified Gfi-1b complexes and identified interacting
proteins. Prominent among these is the corepressor CoREST, the histone
demethylase LSD1, and HDACs 1 and 2. CoREST and LSD1 associate with Gfi-1/1b via 
the SNAG repression domain. Gfi-1b further recruits these cofactors to the
majority of target gene promoters in vivo. Inhibition of CoREST and LSD1 perturbs
differentiation of erythroid, megakaryocytic, and granulocytic cells as well as
primary erythroid progenitors. LSD1 depletion derepresses Gfi targets in
lineage-specific patterns, accompanied by enhanced histone 3 lysine 4 methylation
at the respective promoters. Overall, we show that chromatin regulatory proteins 
CoREST and LSD1 mediate transcriptional repression by Gfi proteins.
Lineage-restricted deployment of these cofactors through interaction with Gfi
proteins controls hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 17707228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Blood. 2007 Dec 1;110(12):3853-61. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Cdc42 critically regulates the balance between myelopoiesis and erythropoiesis.

Yang L(1), Wang L, Kalfa TA, Cancelas JA, Shang X, Pushkaran S, Mo J, Williams
DA, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The Rho GTPase Cdc42 regulates adhesion, migration, and homing, as well as cell
cycle progression, of hematopoietic stem cells, but its role in multilineage
blood development remains unclear. We report here that inducible deletion of
cdc42 in cdc42-floxed mouse bone marrow by the interferon-responsive,
Mx1-Cre-mediated excision led to myeloid and erythroid developmental defects.
Cdc42 deletion affected the number of early myeloid progenitors while suppressing
erythroid differentiation. Cdc42-deficient mice developed a fatal
myeloproliferative disorder manifested by significant leukocytosis with
neutrophilia, myeloid hyperproliferation, and myeloid cell infiltration into
distal organs. Concurrently, Cdc42 deficiency caused anemia and splenomegaly
accompanied with decreased bone marrow erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-Es) and
colony-forming units-erythroid (CFU-Es) activities and reduced immature erythroid
progenitors, suggesting that Cdc42 deficiency causes a block in the early stage
of erythropoiesis. Cdc42 activity is responsive to stimulation by SCF, IL3,
SDF-1alpha, and fibronectin. The increased myelopoiesis and decreased
erythropoiesis of the knockout mice are associated with an altered gene
transcription program in hematopoietic progenitors, including up-regulation of
promyeloid genes such as PU.1, C/EBP1alpha, and Gfi-1 in the common myeloid
progenitors and granulocyte-macrophage progenitors and down-regulation of
proerythroid gene such as GATA-2 in the megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors.
Thus, Cdc42 is an essential regulator of the balance between myelopoiesis and
erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2190607
PMID: 17702896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Blood. 2007 Nov 1;110(9):3128-35. Epub 2007 Jul 23.

Gfi1 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation is inhibited by the ubiquitin
ligase Triad1.

Marteijn JA(1), van der Meer LT, van Emst L, van Reijmersdal S, Wissink W, de
Witte T, Jansen JH, Van der Reijden BA.

Author information: 
(1)Central Hematology Laboratory, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) is a transcriptional repressor essential for 
the function and development of many different hematopoietic lineages. The Gfi1
protein expression is regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. In
granulocytes, Gfi1 is rapidly degraded by the proteasome, while it is more stable
in monocytes. How the ubiquitination and degradation of Gfi1 is regulated is
unclear. Here, we show that the ubiquitin ligase Triad1 interacts with the
DNA-binding domain of Gfi1. Unexpectedly, we found that Triad1 inhibited Gfi1
ubiquitination, resulting in a prolonged half-life. Down-regulation of endogenous
Triad1 by siRNAs resulted in increased Gfi1 ubiquitination. In U937 cells, Triad1
caused an increase in endogenous Gfi1 protein levels and slowed cell
proliferation in a similar manner when Gfi1 itself was expressed. A Triad1 mutant
that lacks the Gfi1-binding domain did not affect Gfi1 levels and proliferation. 
Because neither proteasome-ubiquitin nor Triad1 ubiquitin ligase activity was
required for the inhibition of Gfi1 ubiquitination, these data suggest that
Triad1 competes for Gfi1 binding with as yet to be identified E3 ubiquitin
ligases that do mark Gfi1 for proteasomal degradation. The fine-tuning of Gfi1
protein levels regulated by Triad1 defines an unexpected role for this protein in
hematopoiesis.

PMID: 17646546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(19):6889-902. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Epigenetic regulation of protein-coding and microRNA genes by the
Gfi1-interacting tumor suppressor PRDM5.

Duan Z(1), Person RE, Lee HH, Huang S, Donadieu J, Badolato R, Grimes HL,
Papayannopoulou T, Horwitz MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Gfi1 transcriptionally governs hematopoiesis, and its mutations produce
neutropenia. In an effort to identify Gfi1-interacting proteins and also to
generate new candidate genes causing neutropenia, we performed a yeast two-hybrid
screen with Gfi1. Among other Gfi1-interacting proteins, we identified a
previously uncharacterized member of the PR domain-containing family of tumor
suppressors, PRDM5. PRDM5 has 16 zinc fingers, and we show that it acts as a
sequence-specific, DNA binding transcription factor that targets
hematopoiesis-associated protein-coding and microRNA genes, including many that
are also targets of Gfi1. PRDM5 epigenetically regulates transcription similarly 
to Gfi1: it recruits the histone methyltransferase G9a and class I histone
deacetylases to its target gene promoters and demonstrates repressor activity on 
synthetic reporters; on endogenous target genes, however, it functions as an
activator, in addition to a repressor. Interestingly, genes that PRDM5 activates,
as opposed to those it represses, are also targets of Gfi1, suggesting a
competitive mechanism through which two repressors could cooperate in order to
become transcriptional activators. In neutropenic patients, we identified PRDM5
protein sequence variants perturbing transcriptional function, suggesting a
potentially important role in hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2099216
PMID: 17636019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2276-85. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Transcription factor Gfi-1 induced by G-CSF is a negative regulator of CXCR4 in
myeloid cells.

De La Luz Sierra M(1), Gasperini P, McCormick PJ, Zhu J, Tosato G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The mechanisms underlying granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF)-induced
mobilization of granulocytic lineage cells from the bone marrow to the peripheral
blood remain elusive. We provide evidence that the transcriptional repressor
growth factor independence-1 (Gfi-1) is involved in G-CSF-induced mobilization of
granulocytic lineage cells from the bone marrow to the peripheral blood. We show 
that in vitro and in vivo G-CSF promotes expression of Gfi-1 and down-regulates
expression of CXCR4, a chemokine receptor essential for the retention of
hematopoietic stem cells and granulocytic cells in the bone marrow. Gfi-1 binds
to DNA sequences upstream of the CXCR4 gene and represses CXCR4 expression in
myeloid lineage cells. As a consequence, myeloid cell responses to the CXCR4
unique ligand SDF-1 are reduced. Thus, Gfi-1 not only regulates hematopoietic
stem cell function and myeloid cell development but also probably promotes the
release of granulocytic lineage cells from the bone marrow to the peripheral
blood by reducing CXCR4 expression and function.

PMCID: PMC1988943
PMID: 17596540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;15(2):278-82.

[Effect of adriamycin on Gfi-1 expression in K562 cells and its relationship with
the relevant apoptotic genes].

[Article in Chinese]

Chang W(1), Sun HY, Huang M, Zhou JF, Zhang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

The study was purposed to explore the effect of adriamycin (ADM) on K562 cells in
vitro and the mechanism of expression changes of relevant apoptotic genes and
oncogene Gfi-1. The apoptosis was assayed by flow cytometry (FCM) and the DNA
electrophoresis; the expression changes of Gfi-1, Bcl-2, bax mRNA and protein
were detected by RT-PCR and FCM after K562 cells were treated with different
concentrations of ADM for 24 hours. The results showed that when K562 cells were 
treated with 0 - 2.0 mg/L ADM for 24 hours, the typical apoptotic DNA
electrophoresis band of K562 cells were observed with the dose increasing. When
concentration of ADM was 0.5 and 2.0 mg/L, the expression of Gfi-1 decreased and 
the expression of bax increased; when concentration of ADM was 0.5 - 2.0 mg/L,
the expression of Bcl-2 was not found to be significantly changed, the levels of 
Bcl-2 mRNA and protein were of no statistical difference. When dose of ADM was
higher than 2.0 mg/L, the percentage of apoptotic K562 cells decreased with cell 
necrosis. It is concluded that at certain range of concentration, apoptosis or
necrosis of K562 cells can be induced by ADM, the percentage of apoptosis, the
changes of expression of Bcl-2, bax and Gfi-1 depend on the dose of ADM. The
mechanism of apoptosis in K562 cells induced by ADM may be related to suppression
of Gfi-1 oncogene and activation of expression of bax gene.

PMID: 17493331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Leuk Res. 2007 Nov;31(11):1537-43. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Segregation of megakaryocytic or erythroid cells from a megakaryocytic leukemia
cell line (JAS-R) by adhesion during culture.

Yamada H(1), Sekikawa T, Iwase S, Arakawa Y, Suzuki H, Agawa M, Akiyama M, Takeda
N, Horiguchi-Yamada J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of DNA Medicine, The Jikei
University, School of Medicine, 3-25-8 Nishi-Shinbashi, Tokyo, Japan.
hyamad@jikei.ac.jp

Adhesion is one of the important biologic characteristics of leukemic cells. We
previously reported a new megakaryocytic-erythroid cell line, JAS-R. In this
study, JAS-R cells were segregated into two types by the differences of
attachment to culture dishes. One type (designated as JAS-RAD cells) adhered to
the substratum of the culture dishes, while the other (JAS-REN cells) grew as a
single-cell suspension. Adhesion of JAS-RAD was inhibited by treatment with RGDS 
oligopeptide. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that JAS-RAD cells had high
expression of CD41a and CD61 versus low CD235a expression, and JAS-REN showed low
expression of CD41a, and CD61, and high CD235a. The two phenotypes were
reciprocally exchangeable by selecting adherent or suspended cells from each type
of culture. Microarray analysis and RT-PCR revealed that JAS-RAD cells expressed 
four major alpha-granule genes and JAS-REN cells expressed beta-globin.
Interestingly, erythropoietin was only secreted by JAS-RAD cells. With regard to 
transcription factors, it was shown that GFI1, FLI1 and RUNX1 were strongly
expressed in JAS-RAD cells while GATA1, FOG1 and NFE2 were equally expressed by
both types. These findings indicate that adhesion via integrins is related to the
phenotypic shift of JAS-R cells between megakaryocytic and erythroid lineages.

PMID: 17383723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Lab Invest. 2007 Apr;87(4):336-44.

Loss of GFI1 impairs pulmonary neuroendorine cell proliferation, but the
neuroendocrine phenotype has limited impact on post-naphthalene airway repair.

Linnoila RI(1), Jensen-Taubman S, Kazanjian A, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Section, Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, CCR, NCI, NIH,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Naphthalene exposure kills lung airway epithelial (Clara) cells, but is rapidly
followed by Clara cell reconstitution coincident with proliferation of pulmonary 
neuroendocrine cells (PNEC). Although a role for mature PNEC in the
reconstitution process has been excluded, the reconstituting progenitor cells
have been suggested to enter a transient neuroendocrine (NE) differentiation
phase before differentiating to Clara cells. Furthermore, these progenitors were 
suggested to be the target population for transformation to a NE tumor; small
cell lung cancer (SCLC). Although the NE phenotype is central to SCLC
oncogenesis, the relevance of NE differentiation to post naphthalene
reconstitution remains to be determined. The Growth factor independent-1 (Gfi1)
transcription factor is expressed in SCLC and is required for the NE
differentiation of PNEC. Gfi1(-/-) mice display a 70% reduction in airway cells
that express NE markers, and cells that stain for NE markers show weak expression
of some markers. Therefore, to determine the relevance of the NE phenotype to
post-naphthalene reconstitution, we examined post-naphthalene reconstitution in
Gfi1(-/-) mice. Our analyses indicate that the post-naphthalene regeneration
process includes both airway epithelial proliferation and apoptosis. Gfi1
deletion lowered both airway epithelial proliferation and apoptosis; however, the
post-naphthalene rate of increase in growth and apoptosis was not significantly
different between Gfi1(-/-) mice and wild-type littermates. Moreover, the timing 
and extent of CC10+ cell regeneration was unaffected by Gfi1 deletion. These data
suggest that neither Gfi1 nor the NE phenotype play a dominant role in the
regeneration process. However, the few Gfi1(-/-) cells capable of NE
differentiation show a significant reduction in post-naphthalene proliferation.
The modest proliferation seen in Gfi1(-/-) NE cells is consistent with the
previously proposed role for Gfi1 in controlling neuroendocrine cancer growth.

PMCID: PMC2839158
PMID: 17377622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS One. 2007 Mar 21;2(3):e306.

Transcriptional repressor Gfi1 integrates cytokine-receptor signals controlling
B-cell differentiation.

Rathinam C(1), Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany.

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(7). doi:
10.1371/annotation/4f75f09f-a8f0-4cae-b75f-30498d6b44d4.

Hematopoietic stem cell differentiation is specified by cytokines and
transcription factors, but the mechanisms controlling instructive and permissive 
signalling networks are poorly understood. We provide evidence that
CLP1-dependent IL7-receptor mediated B cell differentiation is critically
controlled by the transcriptional repressor Gfi1. Gfi1-deficient progenitor B
cells show global defects in IL7Ralpha-dependent signal cascades. Consequently,
IL7-dependent trophic, proliferative and differentiation-inducing responses of
progenitor B cells are perturbed. Gfi1 directly regulates expression levels of
IL7Ralpha and indirectly controls STAT5 signalling via expression of SOCS3. Thus,
Gfi1 selectively specifies IL7-dependent development of B cells from CLP1
progenitors, providing clues to the transcriptional networks integrating cytokine
signals and lymphoid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1810430
PMID: 17375192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Feb;25(4):999-1005.

Lhx3, a LIM domain transcription factor, is regulated by Pou4f3 in the auditory
but not in the vestibular system.

Hertzano R(1), Dror AA, Montcouquiol M, Ahmed ZM, Ellsworth B, Camper S, Friedman
TB, Kelley MW, Avraham KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

A dominant mutation of the gene encoding the POU4F3 transcription factor
underlies human non-syndromic progressive hearing loss DFNA15. Using
oligonucleotide microarrays to generate expression profiles of inner ears of
Pou4f3(ddl/ddl) mutant and wild-type mice, we have identified and validated Lhx3,
a LIM domain transcription factor, as an in vivo target gene regulated by Pou4f3.
Lhx3 is a hair cell-specific gene expressed in all hair cells of the auditory and
vestibular system as early as embryonic day 16. The level of Lhx3 mRNA is greatly
reduced in the inner ears of embryonic Pou4f3 mutant mice. Our data also show
that the expression of Lhx3 is regulated differently in auditory and vestibular
hair cells. This is the first example of a hair cell-specific gene expressed both
in auditory and in vestibular hair cells, with differential regulation of
expression in these two closely related systems.

PMID: 17331196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4181-90. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Growth factor independence-1 (Gfi-1) plays a role in mediating specific granule
deficiency (SGD) in a patient lacking a gene-inactivating mutation in the
C/EBPepsilon gene.

Khanna-Gupta A(1), Sun H, Zibello T, Lee HM, Dahl R, Boxer LA, Berliner N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.

Neutrophil-specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare congenital disorder marked
by recurrent bacterial infections. Neutrophils from SGD patients lack secondary
and tertiary granules and their content proteins and lack normal neutrophil
functions. Gene-inactivating mutations in the C/EBPepsilon gene have been
identified in 2 SGD patients. Our studies on a third SGD patient revealed a
heterozygous mutation in the C/EBPepsilon gene. However, we demonstrate elevated 
levels of C/EBPepsilon and PU.1 proteins in the patient's peripheral blood
neutrophils. The expression of the transcription factor growth factor
independence-1 (Gfi-1), however, was found to be markedly reduced in our SGD
patient despite the absence of an obvious mutation in this gene. This may explain
the elevated levels of both C/EBPepsilon and PU.1, which are targets of Gfi-1
transcriptional repression. We have generated a growth factor-dependent EML cell 
line from the bone marrow of Gfi-1(+/-) and Gfi-1(+/+) mice as a model for
Gfi-1-deficient SGD, and demonstrate that lower levels of Gfi-1 expression in the
Gfi-1(+/-) EML cells is associated with reduced levels of secondary granule
protein (SGP) gene expression. Furthermore, we demonstrate a positive role for
Gfi-1 in SGP expression, in that Gfi-1 binds to and up-regulates the promoter of 
neutrophil collagenase (an SGP gene), in cooperation with wild-type but not with 
mutant C/EBPepsilon. We hypothesize that decreased Gfi-1 levels in our SGD
patient, together with the mutant C/EBPepsilon, block SGP expression, thereby
contributing to the underlying etiology of the disease in our patient.

PMCID: PMC1885490
PMID: 17244686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Oncogene. 2007 May 24;26(24):3541-50. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Cooperative interaction between ETS1 and GFI1 transcription factors in the
repression of Bax gene expression.

Nakazawa Y(1), Suzuki M, Manabe N, Yamada T, Kihara-Negishi F, Sakurai T, Tenen
DG, Iwama A, Mochizuki M, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The proto-oncoproteins ETS1 and growth factor independent-1 (GFI1) are implicated
in cell growth and differentiation in various types of cells, and their
deregulated expression is involved in malignant transformation. Here, we report
that ETS1 and GFI1 interact and affect gene expression through their cross-talk. 
Co-immunoprecipitation analyses and glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays
revealed that ETS1 bound directly to GFI1 via its Ets domain, and GFI1 bound to
ETS1 via its zinc-finger domain. Luciferase (Luc) assays using artificial
reporters showed that GFI1 repressed ETS1-mediated transcriptional activation and
ETS1 repressed GFI1-mediated transcriptional activation, in a dose-dependent
manner. However, in the Bax promoter where the Ets- and Gfi-binding sites (EBS
and GBS) are adjacent, ETS1 and GFI1 cooperatively reduced activation.
Site-directed mutagenesis on the EBS and GBS of the Bax promoter showed that both
binding sites were necessary for full repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analyses confirmed that an ETS1-GFI1 complex formed on the Bax promoter even when
either EBS or GBS was mutated. Introduction of small interfering RNA against ETS1
and/or GFI1 enhanced endogenous Bax gene expression. Our results suggest that the
interaction between ETS1 and GFI1 facilitates their binding to specific sites on 
the Bax promoter and represses Bax expression in vivo.

PMID: 17213822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 Mar;103(3-5):742-6. Epub 2007 Jan 5.

Role of oncoprotein growth factor independent-1 (GFI1) in repression of
25-hydroxyvitamin D 1alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1): a comparative analysis in human
prostate cancer and kidney cells.

Dwivedi PP(1), Anderson PH, Tilley WD, May BK, Morris HA.

Author information: 
(1)Hanson Institute, Adelaide 5000, Australia. prem.dwivedi@imvs.sa.gov.au

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25D) inhibits growth of prostate cancer cells and has 
been proposed to play a protective role in prostate cancer. However,
25-hydroxyvitamin D 1alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1), the enzyme responsible for the 
cellular synthesis of 1,25D, is repressed in prostate cancer cells. Recently, we 
have identified a role for the transcription factor, Growth Factor Independent-1 
(GFI1) in the repression of the CYP27B1 gene in human prostate cancer cell lines.
GFI1 is known to form a large protein complex with co-repressors that recruit
histone deacetylases. We have proposed a model for the molecular repression of
CYP27B1 gene expression. The formation of such a repressive complex on the
inhibitory domain of the CYP27B1 gene in prostate cancer cells could lead to the 
silencing of gene expression either by inactivating nearby enhancer or proximal
promoter domains and lead to cancer progression by reducing local production of
1,25D. These studies demonstrate that GFI1 may play a significant role in the
down regulation of endogenous production of 1,25D in prostate cancer cells and
could provide a novel insight to future diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 17207994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 2;282(9):6473-83. Epub 2006 Dec 31.

The transcriptional repressor GFI-1 antagonizes PU.1 activity through
protein-protein interaction.

Dahl R(1), Iyer SR, Owens KS, Cuylear DD, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Health Sciences Center, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA. RDahl@salud.unm.edu

Mice lacking the zinc finger transcriptional repressor protein GFI-1 are
neutropenic. These mice generate abnormal immature myeloid cells exhibiting
characteristics of both macrophages and granulocytes. Furthermore, Gfi-1(-/-)
mice are highly susceptible to bacterial infection. Interestingly, Gfi-1(-/-)
myeloid cells overexpress target genes of the PU.1 transcription factor such as
the macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor and PU.1 itself. We therefore
determined whether GFI-1 modulates the transcriptional activity of PU.1. Our data
demonstrate that GFI-1 physically interacts with PU.1, repressing PU.1-dependent 
transcription. This repression is functionally significant, as GFI-1 blocked
PU.1-induced macrophage differentiation of a multipotential hematopoietic
progenitor cell line. Retroviral expression of GFI-1 in primary murine
hematopoietic progenitors increased granulocyte differentiation at the expense of
macrophage differentiation. We interbred Gfi-1(+/-) and PU.1(+/-) mice and
observed that heterozygosity at the PU.1 locus partially rescued the Gfi-1(-/-)
mixed myeloid lineage phenotype, but failed to restore granulocyte
differentiation. Our data demonstrate that GFI-1 represses PU.1 activity and that
lack of this repression in Gfi-1(-/-) myeloid cells contributes to the observed
mixed lineage phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3218793
PMID: 17197705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 28;103(48):18214-9. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

Gfi-1 plays an important role in IL-2-mediated Th2 cell expansion.

Zhu J(1), Jankovic D, Grinberg A, Guo L, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Enforced expression of growth factor independent 1 (Gfi-1), a transcription
repressor induced by T cell activation and IL-4/Stat6 signaling, strikingly
enhances Th2 cell expansion. Using conditionally Gfi1-deficient mice prepared for
this study, we show that in vitro or in vivo deletion of this factor dramatically
reduces Th2, but not Th1, cell expansion in response to IL-2. Both increased cell
apoptosis and reduced cell proliferation resulted from Gfi1 deletion. IL-2-Stat5 
signaling was partially reduced in Gfi1-deficient Th2 cells, but overexpression
of Stat5 failed to restore normal Th2 expansion in these cells, suggesting that
Gfi-1 also functioned downstream of, or in parallel with, Stat5 signaling.
Reduced Th2 cell expansion in the absence of Gfi-1 was confirmed by the
diminished frequency of IL-4-producing cells when these mice were infected with
Schistosoma mansoni.

PMCID: PMC1654136
PMID: 17116877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Mar;50(3):630-2.

Mosaic tetraploidy and transient GFI1 mutation in a patient with severe chronic
neutropenia.

Hochberg JC(1), Miron PM, Hay BN, Woda BA, Wang SA, Richert-Przygonska M,
Aprikyan AA, Newburger PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

This report presents the case of a 15-year-old male with severe chronic
neutropenia, leukopenia, and persistent tetraploid mosaicism in the bone marrow
and peripheral blood. His father had mild neutropenia and bone marrow
tetraploidy. Flow cytometric analysis of DNA content peripheral blood showed
tetraploidy in 20% of granulocytes and 15% of monocytes. Sequence analysis of the
ELA2 gene was normal, but the GFI1 gene exhibited transient appearance of single 
base changes the coding region and promoter. We speculate that an underlying
genetic defect, inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, leads to both
disordered mitosis and neutropenia in this kindred.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17096407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Blood. 2007 Mar 15;109(6):2356-64. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Gfi1b:green fluorescent protein knock-in mice reveal a dynamic expression pattern
of Gfi1b during hematopoiesis that is largely complementary to Gfi1.

Vassen L(1), Okayama T, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Gfi1b and Gfi1 are 37- and 55-kDa transcriptional repressors that share common
features such as a 20-amino acid (aa) N-terminal SNAG domain, a nonconserved
intermediary domain, and 6 highly conserved C-terminal zinc fingers. Both gene
loci are under autoregulatory and cross-regulatory feedback control. We have
generated a reporter mouse strain by inserting the cDNA for green fluorescent
protein (GFP) into the Gfi1b gene locus which allowed us to follow Gfi1b
expression during hematopoiesis and lymphopoiesis by measuring green
fluorescence. We found highly dynamic expression patterns of Gfi1b in erythroid
cells, megakaryocytes, and their progenitor cells (MEPS) where Gfi1 is not
detected. Vice versa, Gfi1b could not be found in granulocytes, activated
macrophages, or their granulomonocytic precursors (GMPs) or in mature naive or
activated lymphocytes where Gfi1 is expressed, suggesting a complementary
regulation of both loci during hematopoiesis. However, Gfi1b was found to be
up-regulated in early stages of B-cell and in a subset of early T-cell
development, where Gfi1 is also present, suggesting that cross-regulation of both
loci exists but is cell-type specific.

PMID: 17095621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Blood. 2007 Mar 1;109(5):1817-24. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Neutrophil elastase in cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia.

Horwitz MS(1), Duan Z, Korkmaz B, Lee HH, Mealiffe ME, Salipante SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. horwitz@u.washington.edu

Mutations in ELA2 encoding the neutrophil granule protease, neutrophil elastase
(NE), are the major cause of the 2 main forms of hereditary neutropenia, cyclic
neutropenia and severe congenital neutropenia (SCN). Genetic evaluation of other 
forms of neutropenia in humans and model organisms has helped to illuminate the
role of NE. A canine form of cyclic neutropenia corresponds to human
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS2) and results from mutations in AP3B1
encoding a subunit of a complex involved in the subcellular trafficking of
vesicular cargo proteins (among which NE appears to be one). Rare cases of SCN
are attributable to mutations in the transcriptional repressor Gfi1 (among whose 
regulatory targets also include ELA2). The ultimate biochemical consequences of
the mutations are not yet known, however. Gene targeting of ELA2 has thus far
failed to recapitulate neutropenia in mice. The cycling phenomenon and origins of
leukemic transformation in SCN remain puzzling. Nevertheless, mutations in all 3 
genes are capable of causing the mislocalization of NE and may also induce the
unfolded protein response, suggesting that there might a convergent pathogenic
mechanism focusing on NE.

PMCID: PMC1801070
PMID: 17053055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Sep;4(9):655-65.

ZNF652, a novel zinc finger protein, interacts with the putative breast tumor
suppressor CBFA2T3 to repress transcription.

Kumar R(1), Manning J, Spendlove HE, Kremmidiotis G, McKirdy R, Lee J, Millband
DN, Cheney KM, Stampfer MR, Dwivedi PP, Morris HA, Callen DF.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Genetics Group, Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories,
Hanson Institute, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Frome Road,
Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia.

The transcriptional repressor CBFA2T3 is a putative breast tumor suppressor. To
define the role of CBFA2T3, we used a segment of this protein as bait in a yeast 
two-hybrid screen and identified a novel uncharacterized protein, ZNF652. In
general, primary tumors and cancer cell lines showed lower expression of ZNF652
than normal tissues. Together with the location of this gene on the long arm of
chromosome 17q, a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity in cancer, these
results suggest a possible role of ZNF652 in tumorigenesis. In silico analysis of
this protein revealed that it contains multiple classic zinc finger domains that 
are predicted to bind DNA. Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that ZNF652
strongly interacts with CBFA2T3 and this interaction occurs through the
COOH-terminal 109 amino acids of ZNF652. In contrast, there was a weak
interaction of ZNF652 with CBFA2T1 and CBFA2T2, the other two members of this ETO
family. Transcriptional reporter assays further confirmed the strength and
selectivity of the ZNF652-CBFA2T3 interaction. The transcriptional repression of 
growth factor independent-1 (GFI-1), a previously characterized ETO effector zinc
finger protein, was shown to be enhanced by CBFA2T1, but to a lesser extent by
CBFA2T2 and CBFA2T3. We therefore suggest that each of the various gene effector 
zinc finger proteins may specifically interact with one or more of the ETO
proteins to generate a defined range of transcriptional repressor complexes.

PMID: 16966434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cell. 2006 Aug 25;126(4):755-66.

Multilineage transcriptional priming and determination of alternate hematopoietic
cell fates.

Laslo P(1), Spooner CJ, Warmflash A, Lancki DW, Lee HJ, Sciammas R, Gantner BN,
Dinner AR, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell 
Biology, The University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, GCIS W522, IL 60637,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Aug 25;126(4):650-2.

Hematopoietic stem cells and their progenitors exhibit multilineage patterns of
gene expression. Molecular mechanisms underlying the generation and refinement of
these patterns during cell fate determination remain unexplored because of the
absence of suitable experimental systems. Using PU.1(-/-) progenitors, we
demonstrate that at subthreshold levels, this Ets transcription factor regulates 
a mixed pattern (macrophage/neutrophil) of gene expression within individual
myeloid progenitors. Increased PU.1 levels refine the pattern and promote
macrophage differentiation by modulating a novel regulatory circuit comprised of 
counter antagonistic repressors, Egr-1,2/Nab-2 and Gfi-1. Egr-1 and Egr-2
function redundantly to activate macrophage genes and to repress the neutrophil
program. These results are used to assemble and mathematically model a gene
regulatory network that exhibits both graded and bistable behaviors and accounts 
for the onset and resolution of mixed lineage patterns during cell fate
determination.

PMID: 16923394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2006 Oct;16(5):496-501. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal.

Akala OO(1), Clarke MF.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, 1050
Arastradero Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304-1334, USA.

Recent studies have begun to elucidate the mechanisms controlling hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) self-renewal. Self-renewal requires the integration of survival
signals and proliferation controls with the maintenance of an undifferentiated
state. This demands a complex crosstalk between extrinsic signals from the
microenvironment and the cell-intrinsic regulators of self-renewal. The Polycomb 
protein Bmi1 is absolutely required for the maintenance of both adult HSCs and
neural stem cells. Evidence from studies in murine and human embryonic stem cells
indicates that Polycomb group proteins play a dynamic role in concert with master
transcriptional regulators in actively maintaining an undifferentiated state,
suggesting that this mechanism applies to multiple types of stem cell. Recently, 
various new players that regulate HSC maintenance (e.g. Mcl1, Tel/Etv6, Gfi1,
Pten and Stat5) have been identified. In order to better understand HSC
self-renewal, we need to understand how these pathways are coordinated.

PMID: 16919448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Blood. 2007 Jan 1;109(1):100-8. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Diminished proteasomal degradation results in accumulation of Gfi1 protein in
monocytes.

Marteijn JA(1), van der Meer LT, Van Emst L, de Witte T, Jansen JH, van der
Reijden BA.

Author information: 
(1)Central Hematology Laboratory, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre for 
Molecular Life Sciences (NCMLS), PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Gfi1 is a transcriptional repressor essential during myeloid differentiation.
Gfi1-/- mice exhibit a block in myeloid differentiation resulting in the
accumulation of an immature myelo-monocytic cell population and the complete
absence of mature neutrophils. Even though mRNA levels of Gfi1 appear to be very 
low in monocytes, Gfi1 might play a role in the monocytic lineage as Gfi1-/- mice
exhibit diminished monocyte-derived dendritic cells and disturbed cytokine
production by macrophages in response to LPS. We show here that Gfi1 protein
levels are mainly regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Upon forced
monocytic differentiation of U937 cells, Gfi1 mRNA levels dropped but protein
levels increased due to diminished proteasomal turnover. Similarly, Gfi1 mRNA
levels are low in primary monocytes whereas the protein is clearly detectable.
Conversely, Gfi1 mRNA levels are high in granulocytes but the protein is swiftly 
degraded by the proteasome in these cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that Gfi1 binds to the promoter of several
granulocyte-specific genes in primary monocytes, including C/EBPalpha, neutrophil
elastase, and Gfi1 itself. The binding of the repressor Gfi1 to these promoters
correlated with low expression of these genes in monocytes compared with
granulocytes. Our data fit a model in which Gfi1 protein levels are induced in
primary monocytes, due to diminished proteasomal degradation, to repress genes
that play a role in granulocytic differentiation.

PMID: 16888099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 8;103(32):11993-8. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Notch/Delta signaling constrains reengineering of pro-T cells by PU.1.

Franco CB(1), Scripture-Adams DD, Proekt I, Taghon T, Weiss AH, Yui MA, Adams SL,
Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 19;103(38):14255.

PU.1 is essential for early stages of mouse T cell development but antagonizes it
if expressed constitutively. Two separable mechanisms are involved: attenuation
and diversion. Dysregulated PU.1 expression inhibits pro-T cell survival,
proliferation, and passage through beta-selection by blocking essential T cell
transcription factors, signaling molecules, and Rag gene expression, which
expression of a rearranged T cell antigen receptor transgene cannot rescue.
However, Bcl2 transgenic cells are protected from this attenuation and may even
undergo beta-selection, as shown by PU.1 transduction of defined subsets of Bcl2 
transgenic fetal thymocytes with differentiation in OP9-DL1 and OP9 control
cultures. The outcome of PU.1 expression in these cells depends on Notch/Delta
signaling. PU.1 can efficiently divert thymocytes toward a myeloid-like state
with multigene regulatory changes, but Notch/Delta signaling vetoes diversion.
Gene expression analysis distinguishes sets of critical T lineage regulatory
genes with different combinatorial responses to PU.1 and Notch/Delta signals,
suggesting particular importance for inhibition of E proteins, Myb, and/or Gfi1
(growth factor independence 1) in diversion. However, Notch signaling only
protects against diversion of cells that have undergone T lineage specification
after Thy-1 and CD25 up-regulation. The results imply that in T cell precursors, 
Notch/Delta signaling normally acts to modulate and channel PU.1 transcriptional 
activities during the stages from T lineage specification until commitment.

PMCID: PMC1567686
PMID: 16880393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cell Microbiol. 2006 Jul;8(7):1096-105.

Regulation of pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection by the transcriptional
repressor Gfi1.

Grassmé H(1), Jin J, Wilker B, von Kürthy G, Wick W, Weller M, Möröy T, Gulbins
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse
55, 45122 Essen, Germany.

Pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections are characterized by the release of
proinflammatory mediators, focal induction of apoptosis in respiratory epithelial
cells and internalization of the bacteria. Here, we demonstrate that the
transcriptional regulator Gfi1 is critically involved in the regulation of
proinflammatory cytokine release and the induction of apoptosis in respiratory
epithelial cells and macrophages upon P. aeruginosa infection. Gfi1-deficient
mice responded to a pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection with uncontrolled pulmonary
release of interleukin (IL)-1 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, sepsis and 
death, which were delayed by injection of IL-1- and TNF-alpha-neutralizing
antibodies. The uncontrolled release of cytokines seems to be caused by a failure
of Gfi1-deficient respiratory epithelial cells in large to small bronchi and
macrophages to respond to P. aeruginosa infection with an induction of apoptosis.
Pharmacological inhibition of apoptosis in wild-type mice by intravenous
injection of the broad-spectrum caspase inhibitor zVAD-cmk mimicked the phenotype
of Gfi1-deficient mice and resulted in a profound sensitization of mice to P.
aeruginosa, an increased release of cytokines, sepsis and death of the animals.
Thus, Gfi1 controls apoptosis of respiratory epithelial cells and macrophages
upon infection with P. aeruginosa. Inhibition of apoptosis by Gfi1 deficiency or 
caspase blockers sensitizes mice to P. aeruginosa infections, suggesting that
apoptosis functions as a novel defence mechanisms in the regulation of the local 
innate immune response.

PMID: 16819963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nat Immunol. 2006 Aug;7(8):859-67. Epub 2006 Jul 2.

Auxiliary splice factor U2AF26 and transcription factor Gfi1 cooperate directly
in regulating CD45 alternative splicing.

Heyd F(1), ten Dam G, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

By alternative splicing, different isoforms of the transmembrane tyrosine
phosphatase CD45 are generated that either enhance or limit T cell receptor
signaling. We report here that CD45 alternative splicing is regulated by
cooperative action of the splice factor U2AF26 and the transcription factor Gfi1.
U2AF26 promoted formation of the less-active CD45RO by facilitating exon
exclusion. Gfi1 antagonized that process by directly interacting with U2AF26,
identifying a previously unknown link between a transcription factor and
alternative splicing. The presence of Gfi1 led to formation of the more-active
CD45RB, whereas loss of Gfi1 favored CD45RO production. We propose that the
relative abundance of U2AF26 and Gfi1 determines the ratio of CD45 isoforms,
thereby regulating T cell activation.

PMID: 16819553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jun 27;103(26):9976-81. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Gene expression patterns define novel roles for E47 in cell cycle progression,
cytokine-mediated signaling, and T lineage development.

Schwartz R(1), Engel I, Fallahi-Sichani M, Petrie HT, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093-0377, USA.

In maturing T lineage cells, the helix-loop-helix protein E47 has been shown to
enforce a critical proliferation and developmental checkpoint commonly referred
to as beta selection. To examine how E47 regulates cellular expansion and
developmental progression, we have used an E2A-deficient lymphoma cell line and
DNA microarray analysis to identify immediate E47 target genes. Hierarchical
cluster analysis of gene expression patterns revealed that E47 coordinately
regulates the expression of genes involved in cell survival, cell cycle
progression, lipid metabolism, stress response, and lymphoid maturation. These
include Plcgamma2, Cdk6, CD25, Tox, Gadd45a, Gadd45b, Gfi1, Gfi1b, Socs1, Socs3, 
Id2, Eto2, and Xbp1. We propose a regulatory network linking Janus kinase
(JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-mediated signaling,
E47, and suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins in a common pathway.
Finally, we suggest that the aberrant activation of Cdk6 in E47-deficient T
lineage cells contributes to the development of lymphoid malignancy.

PMCID: PMC1502564
PMID: 16782810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2006 Aug;59(2):85-97. Epub 2006 May 23.

The growth factor independence-1 transcription factor: new functions and new
insights.

Kazanjian A(1), Gross EA, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular Therapeutics, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

The growth factor independence-1 (Gfi1) transcription factor is required for
proper development of neuroendocrine cells, sensory neurons, and blood. Patients 
with mutations in Gfi1 exhibit severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) or non-immune 
chronic idiopathic neutropenia of adults. Gfi1 was initially described as an
oncoprotein that mediates tumor progression in a mouse model of leukemia;
however, recent data suggest that Gfi1 may act as either an oncogene or an
anti-proliferative tumor suppressor gene depending on the cell type. Here we
review the latest literature on Gfi1, and emphasize its role in the
hematopoietic, sensory and neuroendocrine systems.

PMCID: PMC2830489
PMID: 16716599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Haematologica. 2006 May;91(5):589-95.

Neutrophil elastase and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor mutation
analyses and leukemia evolution in severe congenital neutropenia patients
belonging to the original Kostmann family in northern Sweden.

Carlsson G(1), Aprikyan AA, Ericson KG, Stein S, Makaryan V, Dale DC,
Nordenskjöld M, Fadeel B, Palmblad J, Hentera JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Woman and Child Health, Karolinska University Hospital Solna,
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) or Kostmann
syndrome was originally reported to be an autosomal recessive disease of
neutrophil production causing recurrent, life-threatening infections. Mutations
in the neutrophil elastase gene (ELA-2) have previously been identified in
patients with sporadic or autosomal dominant SCN.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 14 individuals (four patients with SCN and ten
close relatives) belonging to the original Kostmann family in northern Sweden for
mutations in the ELA-2 and the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)
receptor genes.
RESULTS: One patient belonging to the original Kostmann family harbored a novel
heterozygous ELA-2 mutation (g.2310T-->A;Leu92His) that was not inherited from
her parents. The mutation was identified in DNA isolated from both whole blood
and skin fibroblasts, suggesting a sporadic de novo mutation. As a young adult
this patient sequentially acquired two mutations in the gene for the G-CSF
receptor (G-CSFR) and therefore recently received a hematopoietic stem cell
transplant, due to the risk of evolution to leukemia. Moreover, another patient
developed acute leukemia and was treated with transplantation. No pathogenic
ELA-2 or G-CSFR gene mutations were found in this patient or the other two
patients, nor in any healthy relative.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Our data are the first to document leukemia
evolution and G-CSFR gene mutations in the original Kostmann kindred. In
addition, our findings indicate that ELA-2 mutations are not the primary cause of
SCN in the Swedish Kostmann family.

PMID: 16670064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Development. 2006 May;133(10):1979-89. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Senseless physically interacts with proneural proteins and functions as a
transcriptional co-activator.

Acar M(1), Jafar-Nejad H, Giagtzoglou N, Yallampalli S, David G, He Y, Delidakis 
C, Bellen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

The zinc-finger transcription factor Senseless is co-expressed with basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proneural proteins in Drosophila sensory organ precursors
and is required for their normal development. High levels of Senseless synergize 
with bHLH proteins and upregulate target gene expression, whereas low levels of
Senseless act as a repressor in vivo. However, the molecular mechanism for this
dual role is unknown. Here, we show that Senseless binds bHLH proneural proteins 
via its core zinc fingers and is recruited by proneural proteins to their target 
enhancers to function as a co-activator. Some point mutations in the Senseless
zinc-finger region abolish its DNA-binding ability but partially spare the
ability of Senseless to synergize with proneural proteins and to induce sensory
organ formation in vivo. Therefore, we propose that the structural basis for the 
switch between the repressor and co-activator functions of Senseless is the
ability of its core zinc fingers to interact physically with both DNA and bHLH
proneural proteins. As Senseless zinc fingers are approximately 90% identical to 
the corresponding zinc fingers of its vertebrate homologue Gfi1, which is thought
to cooperate with bHLH proteins in several contexts, the Senseless/bHLH
interaction might be evolutionarily conserved.

PMID: 16624856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):10745-51. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Increased CCAAT enhancer-binding protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) expression and
premature apoptosis in myeloid cells expressing Gfi-1 N382S mutant associated
with severe congenital neutropenia.

Zhuang D(1), Qiu Y, Kogan SC, Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio 43606,
USA.

Granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) stimulates the activation of
multiple signaling pathways, leading to alterations in the activities of
transcription factors. Gfi-1 is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor that is
required for granulopoiesis. How Gfi-1 acts in myeloid cells is poorly
understood. We show here that the expression of Gfi-1 was up-regulated during
G-CSF-induced granulocytic differentiation in myeloid 32D cells. Truncation of
the carboxyl terminus of the G-CSF receptor, as seen in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia evolving from severe congenital neutropenia, disrupted Gfi-1
up-regulation by G-CSF. Ectopic expression of a dominant negative Gfi-1 mutant,
N382S, which was associated with severe congenital neutropenia, resulted in
premature apoptosis and reduced proliferation of cells induced to differentiate
with G-CSF. The expression of neutrophil elastase (NE) and CCAAT enhancer-binding
protein epsilon (C/EBPepsilon) was significantly increased in 32D cells
expressing N382S. In contrast, overexpression of wild type Gfi-1 abolished
G-CSF-induced up-regulation of C/EBPepsilon but had no apparent effect on NE
up-regulation by G-CSF. Notably, G-CSF-dependent proliferation and survival were 
inhibited upon overexpression of C/EBPepsilon but not NE. These data indicate
that Gfi-1 down-regulates C/EBPepsilon expression and suggest that increased
expression of C/EBPepsilon as a consequence of loss of Gfi-1 function may be
deleterious to the proliferation and survival of early myeloid cells.

PMID: 16500901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cell Res. 2006 Jan;16(1):3-10.

GATA-3 promotes Th2 responses through three different mechanisms: induction of
Th2 cytokine production, selective growth of Th2 cells and inhibition of Th1
cell-specific factors.

Zhu J(1), Yamane H, Cote-Sierra J, Guo L, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

Naïve CD4 T cells can differentiate into at least two different types of T
helpers, Th1 and Th2 cells. Th2 cells, capable of producing IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13,
are involved in humoral immunity against extracellular pathogens and in the
induction of asthma and other allergic diseases. In this review, we summarize
recent reports regarding the transcription factors involved in Th2
differentiation and cell expansion, including Stat5, Gfi-1 and GATA-3. Stat5
activation is necessary and sufficient for IL-2-mediated function in Th2
differentiation. Enhanced Stat5 signaling induces Th2 differentiation independent
of IL-4 signaling; although it does not up-regulate GATA-3 expression, it does
require the presence of GATA-3 for its action. Gfi-1, induced by IL-4, promotes
the expansion of GATA-3-expressing cells. Analysis of conditional Gata3 knockout 
mice confirmed the critical role of GATA-3 in Th2 cell differentiation (both IL-4
dependent and IL-4 independent) and in Th2 cell proliferation and also showed the
importance of basal GATA-3 expression in inhibiting Th1 differentiation.

PMID: 16467870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Feb;36(2):421-30.

The zinc finger protein Gfi1 acts upstream of TNF to attenuate endotoxin-mediated
inflammatory responses in the lung.

Jin J(1), Zeng H, Schmid KW, Toetsch M, Uhlig S, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Tumorforschung, IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Gfi1 is a 55-kD nuclear zinc finger protein that is differentially expressed in
lymphoid and myeloid cells. Gfi1(-/-) mice show a very strong systemic response
to the endotoxin LPS and die rapidly within 36 h with symptoms of septic shock.
Here we report that the pathohysiological processes for this exaggerated
inflammatory response take place in the lung. After LPS treatment, lungs of
Gfi1(-/-) mice showed a rapid accumulation of mononuclear cells and a significant
overproduction of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF, IL-1beta and IL-6.
Increased cytokine production was also observed in blood-free perfused lungs from
Gfi1(-/-) mice exposed to either LPS or overventilation. Alveolar macrophages but
not airway epithelial cells from Gfi1(-/-) mice were found to be responsible for 
the enhanced cytokine production. Strikingly, when the TNF gene was deleted,
Gfi1(-/-) animals were completely rescued from LPS hypersensitivity and had
significantly lower IL-1beta and IL-6 levels. We conclude that the unrestrained
endotoxin response of Gfi1(-/-) mice occurs mainly in the lung and that Gfi1
represents a novel factor limiting the inflammatory immune response of this
organ, and propose that Gfi1 exerts its regulatory function in alveolar
macrophages downstream of the LPS receptor (TLR4) and upstream of TNF.

PMID: 16402406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. EMBO Rep. 2006 Mar;7(3):326-33. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Gfi1 and Gfi1b act equivalently in haematopoiesis, but have distinct,
non-overlapping functions in inner ear development.

Fiolka K(1), Hertzano R, Vassen L, Zeng H, Hermesh O, Avraham KB, Dührsen U,
Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen, 45122 
Essen, Germany.

Gfi1 is a transcriptional repressor essential for haematopoiesis and inner ear
development. It shares with its paralogue Gfi1b an amino-terminal SNAG repressor 
domain and six carboxy-terminal zinc-finger motifs, but differs from Gfi1b in
sequences separating these domains. Here, we describe two knock-in mouse models, 
in which the N-terminal SNAG repressor domain was mutated or in which the Gfi1
coding region was replaced by Gfi1b. Mouse mutants without an intact SNAG domain 
show the full phenotype of Gfi1 null mice. However, Gfi1:Gfi1b knock-in mice show
almost normal pre-T-cell and neutrophil development, but lack properly formed
inner ear hair cells. Hence, our findings show that an intact SNAG domain is
essential for all functions of Gfi1 and that Gfi1b can replace Gfi1 functionally 
in haematopoiesis but, surprisingly, not in inner ear hair cell development,
demonstrating that Gfi1 and Gfi1b have equivalent and domain-dependent, cell
type-specific functions.

PMCID: PMC1456886
PMID: 16397623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Blood. 2006 Apr 1;107(7):2855-62. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

Altered IL-7Ralpha expression with aging and the potential implications of IL-7
therapy on CD8+ T-cell immune responses.

Kim HR(1), Hong MS, Dan JM, Kang I.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, TAC S541C, Yale
School of Medicine, PO Box 208031, New Haven, CT 06520. insoo.kang@yale.edu.

We investigated the effects of aging on the IL-7-mediated CD8+ T-cell survival
pathway and of IL-7 therapy on T-cell immunity. Cells expressing IL-7 receptor
(IL-7R) alphahigh and alphalow were identified in a CD45RA+ effector memory
(EM(CD45RA+), CD45RA+CCR7-) CD8+ T-cell subset. Elderly subjects (65 years and
older) had an increased frequency of EM(CD45RA+) IL-7Ralphalow) CD8+ T cells,
leading to decreased STAT5 phosphorylation and survival responses to IL-7
compared with young subjects (40 years and younger). These EM(CD45RA+)
IL-7Ralphalow cells were largely antigen experienced (CD27-CD28-), replicatively 
senescent (CD57+), and perforinhigh CD8+ T cells that had decreased IL-7Ralpha
mRNA, independent of guanine and adenine binding protein alpha (GABPalpha) and
growth factor independence-1 (GFI1) expression. In measuring T-cell receptor
(TCR) repertoires of EM(CD45RA+) CD8+ T cells, the elderly had a limited
repertoire in IL-7Ralphahigh and IL-7Ralphalow cells, whereas the young had a
diverse repertoire in IL-7Ralphahigh but not in IL-7Ralphalow cells. These
findings suggest that aging affects IL-7Ralpha expression by EM(CD45RA+) CD8+ T
cells, leading to impaired signaling and survival responses to IL-7, and that
IL-7 therapy may improve the survival of EM(CD45RA+) CD8+ T cells with a diverse 
TCR repertoire in the young but not in the elderly.

PMCID: PMC1440715
PMID: 16357322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Curr Opin Hematol. 2006 Jan;13(1):1-6.

Zinc-finger transcription factor Gfi-1: versatile regulator of lymphocytes,
neutrophils and hematopoietic stem cells.

Hock H(1), Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. hock.hanno@mgh.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Gfi-1, originally identified as a transcriptional repressor in
lymphoid cells, is now recognized to have essential, independent functions in
neutrophil maturation and hematopoietic stem cell biology. Here we review recent 
studies pertaining to Gfi-1 and its cell context specific functions in
hematopoietic development.
RECENT FINDINGS: Progress in mapping the precise timing of requirements for
myeloid transcription factors during hematopoietic development reveals a more
refined picture of their sequence of action. We contrast Gfi-1's role in
neutrophil development with PU.1, C/EBPalpha, and C/EBPepsilon. Gfi-1 has been
found to be a major regulator of adult hematopoietic stem cells. It is required
for restricting the proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells and maintaining
their functional integrity. We discuss its role and compare its function with
that of other regulators recently implicated in the biology of hematopoietic stem
cells.
SUMMARY: Considerable progress has been made in understanding Gfi-1's
context-sensitive roles at defined stages of hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 16319680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Genomics. 2006 Jan;87(1):113-8. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Mouse cDNA microarray analysis uncovers Slug targets in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts.

Bermejo-Rodríguez C(1), Pérez-Caro M, Pérez-Mancera PA, Sánchez-Beato M, Piris
MA, Sánchez-García I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio 13, Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer,
CSIC/Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Unamuno, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.

There is a need to reveal mechanisms that account for maintenance of the
mesenchymal phenotype in normal development and cancer. Slug (approved gene
symbol Snai2), a member of the Snail gene family of zinc-finger transcription
factors, is believed to function in the maintenance of the nonepithelial
phenotype. This study identified candidate Slug target genes linked to Slug gene 
suppression in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Expression analyses were
performed with a mouse cDNA microarray (Mousechip-CNIO) containing 15,000 clones.
A total of 15 novel Slug target species were validated by real-time PCR or
Western analyses. These included self-renewal genes (Bmi1, Nanog, Gfi1),
epithelial-mesenchymal genes (Tcfe2a, Ctnb1, Sin3a, Hdac1, Hdac2, Muc1, Cldn11), 
survival genes (Bcl2, Bbc3), and cell cycle/damage genes (Cdkn1a, Rbl1, Mdm2).
Expression patterns were studied in wild-type MEFs and Slug-deficient MEFs.
Slug-complementation studies recovered aberrant gene expression in cells lacking 
Slug, indicating that these genes were regulated directly by Slug. These results 
highlight their potential roles in mediating Slug function in mesenchymal cells
and may help to identify novel therapeutic biomarkers in cancers linked to Slug.

PMID: 16311016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(23):10338-51.

Gfi1 coordinates epigenetic repression of p21Cip/WAF1 by recruitment of histone
lysine methyltransferase G9a and histone deacetylase 1.

Duan Z(1), Zarebski A, Montoya-Durango D, Grimes HL, Horwitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Box 357720, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1) transcriptional regulator oncoprotein
plays a crucial role in hematopoietic, inner ear, and pulmonary neuroendocrine
cell development and governs cell processes as diverse as self-renewal of
hematopoietic stem cells, proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, cell fate
specification, and oncogenesis. However, the molecular basis of its
transcriptional functions has remained elusive. Here we show that Gfi1 recruits
the histone lysine methyltransferase G9a and the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in
order to modify the chromatin of genes targeted for repression by Gfi1. G9a and
HDAC1 are both in a repressive complex assembled by Gfi1. Endogenous Gfi1
colocalizes with G9a, HDAC1, and K9-dimethylated histone H3. Gfi1 associates with
G9a and HDAC1 on the promoter of the cell cycle regulator p21Cip/WAF1, resulting 
in an increase in K9 dimethylation at histone H3. Silencing of Gfi1 expression in
myeloid cells reverses G9a and HDAC1 recruitment to p21Cip/WAF1 and elevates its 
expression. These findings highlight the role of epigenetics in the regulation of
development and oncogenesis by Gfi1.

PMCID: PMC1291230
PMID: 16287849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Genes Dev. 2005 Oct 15;19(20):2412-7.

Gfi1 functions downstream of Math1 to control intestinal secretory cell subtype
allocation and differentiation.

Shroyer NF(1), Wallis D, Venken KJ, Bellen HJ, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Gfi1 is a transcriptional repressor implicated in lymphomagenesis, neutropenia,
and hematopoietic development, as well as ear and lung development. Here, we
demonstrate that Gfi1 functions downstream of Math1 in intestinal secretory
lineage differentiation. Gfi1(-/-) mice lack Paneth cells, have fewer goblet
cells, and supernumerary enteroendocrine cells. Gfi1(-/-) mice show gene
expression changes consistent with this altered cell allocation. These data
suggest that Gfi1 functions to select goblet/Paneth versus enteroendocrine
progenitors. We propose a model of intestinal cell fate choice in which
beta-catenin and Cdx function upstream of Math1, and lineage-specific genes such 
as Ngn3 act downstream of Gfi1.

PMCID: PMC1257395
PMID: 16230531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(21):9576-85.

Mtgr1 is a transcriptional corepressor that is required for maintenance of the
secretory cell lineage in the small intestine.

Amann JM(1), Chyla BJ, Ellis TC, Martinez A, Moore AC, Franklin JL, McGhee L,
Meyers S, Ohm JE, Luce KS, Ouelette AJ, Washington MK, Thompson MA, King D,
Gautam S, Coffey RJ, Whitehead RH, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 512 Preston Research Building, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, 23rd and Pierce Avenue, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Two members of the MTG/ETO family of transcriptional corepressors, MTG8 and
MTG16, are disrupted by chromosomal translocations in up to 15% of acute myeloid 
leukemia cases. The third family member, MTGR1, was identified as a factor that
associates with the t(8;21) fusion protein RUNX1-MTG8. We demonstrate that Mtgr1 
associates with mSin3A, N-CoR, and histone deacetylase 3 and that when tethered
to DNA, Mtgr1 represses transcription, suggesting that Mtgr1 also acts as a
transcriptional corepressor. To define the biological function of Mtgr1, we
created Mtgr1-null mice. These mice are proportionally smaller than their
littermates during embryogenesis and throughout their life span but otherwise
develop normally. However, these mice display a progressive reduction in the
secretory epithelial cell lineage in the small intestine. This is not due to the 
loss of small intestinal progenitor cells expressing Gfi1, which is required for 
the formation of goblet and Paneth cells, implying that loss of Mtgr1 impairs the
maturation of secretory cells in the small intestine.

PMCID: PMC1265807
PMID: 16227606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cell. 2005 Aug 26;122(4):633-44.

The AXH domain of Ataxin-1 mediates neurodegeneration through its interaction
with Gfi-1/Senseless proteins.

Tsuda H(1), Jafar-Nejad H, Patel AJ, Sun Y, Chen HK, Rose MF, Venken KJ, Botas J,
Orr HT, Bellen HJ, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is a neurodegenerative disease caused by an 
expanded glutamine tract in human Ataxin-1 (hAtx-1). The expansion stabilizes
hAtx-1, leading to its accumulation. To understand how stabilized hAtx-1 induces 
selective neuronal degeneration, we studied Drosophila Atx-1 (dAtx-1), which has 
a conserved AXH domain but lacks a polyglutamine tract. Overexpression of hAtx-1 
in fruit flies produces phenotypes similar to those of dAtx-1 but different from 
the polyglutamine peptide alone. We show that the Drosophila and mammalian
transcription factors Senseless/Gfi-1 interact with Atx-1's AXH domain. In flies,
overexpression of Atx-1 inhibits sensory-organ development by decreasing
Senseless protein. Similarly, overexpression of wild-type and glutamine-expanded 
hAtx-1 reduces Gfi-1 levels in Purkinje cells. Deletion of the AXH domain
abolishes the effects of glutamine-expanded hAtx-1 on Senseless/Gfi-1.
Interestingly, loss of Gfi-1 mimics SCA1 phenotypes in Purkinje cells. These
results indicate that the Atx-1/Gfi-1 interaction contributes to the selective
Purkinje cell degeneration in SCA1.

PMID: 16122429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Immunity. 2005 Jun;22(6):717-28.

The transcriptional repressor Gfi1 controls STAT3-dependent dendritic cell
development and function.

Rathinam C(1), Geffers R, Yücel R, Buer J, Welte K, Möröy T, Klein C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Carl
Neuberg Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The mechanisms controlling the differentiation of dendritic cells (DCs) remain
largely unknown. Using a transcriptional profiling approach, we identified Gfi1
as a novel critical transcription factor in DC differentiation. Gfi1-/- mice
showed a global reduction of myeloid and lymphoid DCs in all lymphoid organs
whereas epidermal Langerhans cells were enhanced in number. In vivo, Gfi1-/- DCs 
showed striking phenotypic and functional alterations such as defective
maturation and increased cytokine production. In vitro, Gfi1-/- hematopoietic
progenitor cells were unable to develop into DCs. Instead, they differentiated
into macrophages, suggesting that Gfi1 is a critical modulator of DC versus
macrophage development. Analysis of hematopoietic chimeras and
retrovirus-reconstituted hematopoietic progenitor cells established a cell
autonomous and nonredundant role for Gfi1 in DC development. The developmental
defect of Gfi1-/- progenitor cells was associated with decreased STAT3
activation. In conclusion, we have identified Gfi1 as a critical transcription
factor that controls DC versus macrophage development and dissociates DC
maturation and activation.

PMID: 15963786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 May;63 Suppl 5:559-64.

[Primary immunodeficiency diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Futatani T(1), Kanegane H, Miyawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical University.

PMID: 15954409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2005 Jun;12(2):351-65.

Identification of growth factor independent-1 (GFI1) as a repressor of
25-hydroxyvitamin D 1-alpha hydroxylase (CYP27B1) gene expression in human
prostate cancer cells.

Dwivedi PP(1), Anderson PH, Omdahl JL, Grimes HL, Morris HA, May BK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
South Australia, 5005, Australia. prem.dwivedi@adelaide.edu.au

The hormone 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25D) may play a protective role in
prostate cancer. 25-hydroxyvitamin D 1-alpha hydroxylase (CYP27B1) is the enzyme 
responsible for the regulation of cellular 1,25D levels. CYP27B1 is substantially
repressed in prostate cancer cells. We have investigated the molecular basis for 
this inhibition. First, we identify a repressive region between -997 and -1200 in
the human CYP27B1 promoter following transient transfection analysis in the
prostate cancer cell lines DU145, PC3 and LNCaP. Next, we demonstrate a role for 
the transcription factor growth factor independent-1 (GFI1) in the repression of 
CYP27B1. Electrophoretic mobility assays with nuclear extracts from prostate
cancer cell lines established binding of GFI1 to the sequence
5'-TGGTACAATCATAACTCACTGCAG-3' present at -997 to -1200 in the repressive region.
Site directed mutagenesis of the core GFI1 binding sequence (5'-AATC-3')
substantially increased while forced expression of GFI1 decreased the expression 
of the CYP27B1 reporter construct. Importantly, GFI1 repression is dependent on
an intact GFI1 binding site in the -997 to -1200 region. GFI1 is an oncoprotein
known to form a large protein complex with co-repressors that recruit histone
deacetylases. We propose that the formation of such a repressive complex on the
inhibitory domain of the CYP27B1 gene in prostate cancer cells could lead to
silencing of either the nearby enhancer or proximal promoter domains and lead to 
cancer progression by reducing local production of 1,25D. These studies provide
the basis for a more detailed understanding of CYP27B1 repression in prostate
cancer cells and could provide a novel insight in future diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 15947108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Feb 17;33(3):987-98. Print 2005.

Direct transcriptional repression of the genes encoding the zinc-finger proteins 
Gfi1b and Gfi1 by Gfi1b.

Vassen L(1), Fiolka K, Mahlmann S, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Gfi1b is a 37 kDa transcriptional repressor with six zinc-finger domains that is 
differentially expressed during hemato- and lymphopoiesis. We show here that
transcription from the Gfi1b gene locus is silenced in the spleen but not in the 
bone marrow of transgenic mice that constitutively express Gfi1b under the
control of the pan-hematopoietic vav promoter. Sequence analysis of the Gfi1b
promoter showed the presence of potential Gfi1/Gfi1b-binding sites close to the
mRNA start site. The expression of reporter gene constructs containing the Gfi1b 
core promoter appended to the luciferase gene were strongly repressed in the
presence of exogenous Gfi1b. Moreover, analysis of combinatorial mutant mice that
carry the vav-Gfi1b transgene and a green fluorescent protein-tagged Gfi1 gene
locus demonstrated that the Gfi1 gene can be repressed by Gfi1b. Direct binding
of Gfi1b and Gfi1 to the potential binding sites in the Gfi1b promoter could be
demonstrated by gel-shift analyses in vitro. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that both the Gfi1b and the Gfi1 promoter are indeed occupied 
by Gfi1b in vivo. Hence, we conclude from our data that Gfi1b can auto-repress
its own expression, but, in addition, is also able to cross-repress expression of
the Gfi1 gene most likely in a cell type specific manner.

PMCID: PMC549408
PMID: 15718298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Trends Mol Med. 2005 Feb;11(2):49-52.

Gfi-1 takes center stage in hematopoietic stem cells.

Duan Z(1), Horwitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics/Department of Medicine, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, 1705 NE Pacific Street, HSB-K236B, Box 357720, Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

Hematopoiesis can be scripted into multiple acts that open with hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) and close with the production of nonproliferating mature blood 
cells. Its lifelong durability requires that HSCs choose between mutually
exclusive fates: self-renewal versus a capacity for multilineage differentiation.
The growth factor independence 1 (Gfi-1) oncoprotein was first discovered playing
supporting roles in lymphopoiesis and myelopoiesis. Two new studies indicate that
Gfi-1 regulates self-renewal and preserves the functional integrity of HSCs,
adding Gfi-1 to the short list of intrinsic regulators of self-renewal and
casting it among the major players featured in starring roles in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 15694865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Trends Immunol. 2005 Feb;26(2):68-71.

Gfi-1: another piece in the HSC puzzle.

Cellot S(1), Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer/Université de Montréal, C.P.
6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada.

PMID: 15668120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;37(3):541-6.

The zinc finger transcription factor Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1).

Möröy T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122
Essen, Germany. moeroey@uni-essen.de

Growth Factor Independence 1 (Gfi1) is a transcriptional repressor with a
molecular weight between 47 and 55 kDa The protein has six C-terminal C2H2-type
zinc-finger domains and a characteristic stretch of 20 amino acids, called the
SNAG-domain, at its N-terminus. Expression of Gfi1 ranges from the hematopoietic 
and lymphoid system, to sensory epithelia, lung and parts of the CNS. Gene
knock-out studies revealed that Gfi1 is essential for the development of
granulocytes and plays a role in T-cell differentiation and macrophage-dependent 
cytokine production, indicating that this protein shares responsibility for
different lines of defense against pathogens. Also, Gfi1 is required for the
proper development of inner ear hair cells illustrated by ataxia and deafness in 
knock-out mice. While hereditary hearing loss has so far not been associated with
Gfi1 malfunction, crippling mutations in the Gfi1 gene have been reported in
patients suffering from neutropenia suggesting an important role of Gfi1 in this 
human disease.

PMID: 15618011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Curr Opin Hematol. 2005 Jan;12(1):22-30.

Autosomal-dominant primary immunodeficiencies.

Lawrence T(1), Puel A, Reichenbach J, Ku CL, Chapgier A, Renner E, Minard-Colin
V, Ouachée M, Casanova JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, University of Paris, René
Descartes INSERM U550, Paris, France.

The vast majority of known primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are autosomal or
X-linked recessive Mendelian traits. Only four classical primary
immunodeficiencies are thought to be autosomal-dominant, three of which still
lack a well-defined genetic etiology: isolated congenital asplenia, isolated
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, and hyper IgE syndrome. The large deletions on
chromosome 22q11.2 associated with Di George syndrome suggest that this disease
may be dominant but not Mendelian, possibly involving several genes. The clinical
and genetic features of six novel autosomal-dominant primary immunodeficiencies
have however been described in recent years. These primary immunodeficiencies are
caused by germline mutations in seven genes: ELA2, encoding a neutrophil
elastase, and GFI1, encoding a regulator of ELA2 (mutations associated with
severe congenital neutropenia); CXCR4, encoding a chemokine receptor (warts,
hypogammaglobulinemia, infections and myelokathexis syndrome); LCRR8, encoding a 
key protein for B-cell development (agammaglobulinemia); IFNGR1, encoding the
ligand-binding chain of the interferon-gamma receptor; STAT1, encoding the signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1 downstream from interferon-gammaR1
(Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases); and IKBA, encoding
IkappaBalpha, the inhibitor alpha of NF-kappaB (anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
with immunodeficiency). These recent data suggest that many more
autosomal-dominant PIDs are likely to be identified in the near future.

PMID: 15604887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 1;64(19):6874-82.

Growth factor independence-1 is expressed in primary human neuroendocrine lung
carcinomas and mediates the differentiation of murine pulmonary neuroendocrine
cells.

Kazanjian A(1), Wallis D, Au N, Nigam R, Venken KJ, Cagle PT, Dickey BF, Bellen
HJ, Gilks CB, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular Therapeutics and Departments of Surgery, Biochemistry, 
and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville,
Kentucky 40202, USA.

Human small cell lung cancers might be derived from pulmonary cells with a
neuroendocrine phenotype. They are driven to proliferate by autocrine and
paracrine neuropeptide growth factor stimulation. The molecular basis of the
neuroendocrine phenotype of lung carcinomas is relatively unknown. The
Achaete-Scute Homologue-1 (ASH1) transcription factor is critically required for 
the formation of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and is a marker for human small
cell lung cancers. The Drosophila orthologues of ASH1 (Achaete and Scute) and the
growth factor independence-1 (GFI1) oncoprotein (Senseless) genetically interact 
to inhibit Notch signaling and specify fly sensory organ development. Here, we
show that GFI1, as with ASH1, is expressed in neuroendocrine lung cancer cell
lines and that GFI1 in lung cancer cell lines functions as a DNA-binding
transcriptional repressor protein. Forced expression of GFI1 potentiates tumor
formation of small-cell lung carcinoma cells. In primary human lung cancer
specimens, GFI1 expression strongly correlates with expression of ASH1, the
neuroendocrine growth factor gastrin-releasing peptide, and neuroendocrine
markers synaptophysin and chromogranin A (P < 0.0000001). GFI1 colocalizes with
chromogranin A and calcitonin-gene-related peptide in embryonic and adult murine 
pulmonary neuroendocrine cells. In addition, mice with a mutation in GFI1 display
abnormal development of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells, indicating that GFI1 is
important for neuroendocrine differentiation.

PMID: 15466176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nature. 2004 Oct 21;431(7011):1002-7. Epub 2004 Sep 29.

Gfi-1 restricts proliferation and preserves functional integrity of
haematopoietic stem cells.

Hock H(1), Hamblen MJ, Rooke HM, Schindler JW, Saleque S, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) sustain blood production throughout life. HSCs
are capable of extensive proliferative expansion, as a single HSC may
reconstitute lethally irradiated hosts. In steady-state, HSCs remain largely
quiescent and self-renew at a constant low rate, forestalling their exhaustion
during adult life. Whereas nuclear regulatory factors promoting proliferative
programmes of HSCs in vivo and ex vivo have been identified, transcription
factors restricting their cycling have remained elusive. Here we report that the 
zinc-finger repressor Gfi-1 (growth factor independent 1), a cooperating oncogene
in lymphoid cells, unexpectedly restricts proliferation of HSCs. After loss of
Gfi-1, HSCs display elevated proliferation rates as assessed by
5-bromodeoxyuridine incorporation and cell-cycle analysis. Gfi-1-/- HSCs are
functionally compromised in competitive repopulation and serial transplantation
assays, and are rapidly out-competed in the bone marrow of mouse chimaeras
generated with Gfi-1-/- embryonic stem cells. Thus, Gfi-1 is essential to
restrict HSC proliferation and to preserve HSC functional integrity.

PMID: 15457180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(20):8803-12.

Gfi/Pag-3/senseless zinc finger proteins: a unifying theme?

Jafar-Nejad H(1), Bellen HJ.

Collaborators: Bellen HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PMCID: PMC517899
PMID: 15456856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 13;23(20):4116-25. Epub 2004 Sep 23.

Transcription factor Gfi1 regulates self-renewal and engraftment of hematopoietic
stem cells.

Zeng H(1), Yücel R, Kosan C, Klein-Hitpass L, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Essen, Germany.

The generation of all blood cells depends on the ability of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) for self-renewal and multilineage differentiation. We show here that
the transcription factor Gfi1 is expressed in HSCs and in more mature cells such 
as common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) and granulo/monocytic progenitors, but is
absent in common myeloid progenitors and megakaryocyte/erythroid progenitors.
When Gfi1 is deleted in mice, HSC frequencies are significantly reduced and CLPs 
all but disappear from the bone marrow. This specific requirement of Gfi1 for the
maintenance of HSC numbers is cell autonomous. Transplantation of Gfi1-deficient 
bone marrow results in a compromised radioprotection and lower numbers of colony 
forming units in the spleen of wild-type recipients. Strikingly, Gfi1-/- bone
marrow cells are severely impaired in competitive long-term reconstituting
abilities after transplantation and show a surprisingly high proportion of
actively cycling HSCs, suggesting that Gfi1 restrains proliferation of HSCs and
thereby regulates their self-renewal and long-term engraftment abilities.

PMCID: PMC524350
PMID: 15385956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Immunity. 2004 Aug;21(2):289-302.

Suppression of IL7Ralpha transcription by IL-7 and other prosurvival cytokines: a
novel mechanism for maximizing IL-7-dependent T cell survival.

Park JH(1), Yu Q, Erman B, Appelbaum JS, Montoya-Durango D, Grimes HL, Singer A.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Building 10 Room
4B36, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Survival of naive T cells is dependent upon IL-7, which is present in vivo in
limiting amounts with the result that naive T cells must compete for
IL-7-mediated survival signals. It would seem imperative during T cell
homeostasis that limiting IL-7 be shared by the greatest possible number of T
cells. We now describe a novel regulatory mechanism that specifically suppresses 
IL7Ralpha transcription in response to IL-7 and other prosurvival cytokines
(IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-15). Consequently, IL7R expression is reduced on T
cells that have received cytokine-mediated survival signals so they do not
compete with unsignaled T cells for remaining IL-7. Interestingly,
cytokine-mediated suppression of IL7Ralpha transcription involves different
molecular mechanisms in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, as CD8+ T cells utilize the
transcriptional repressor GFI1 while CD4+ T cells do not. We suggest that this
homeostatic regulatory mechanism promotes survival of the maximum possible number
of T cells for the amount of IL-7 available.

PMID: 15308108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Pathol. 2004 Sep;204(1):101-9.

Evaluation of immunohistochemical markers in non-small cell lung cancer by
unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis: a tissue microarray study of 284
cases and 18 markers.

Au NH(1), Cheang M, Huntsman DG, Yorida E, Coldman A, Elliott WM, Bebb G, Flint
J, English J, Gilks CB, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre of the Department of Pathology and
Prostate Centre--Vancouver General Hospital, British Columbia Cancer Agency and
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

This study has investigated a panel of immunomarkers in non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis was used to
investigate the possibility of identifying different subgroups in NSCLC based on 
their molecular expression profile rather than morphological features. A tissue
microarray consisting of 284 cases of NSCLC was constructed. Immunohistochemistry
was used to detect the presence of 18 biomarkers including synaptophysin,
chromogranin, bombesin, NSE, GFI1, ASH-1, p53, p63, p21, p27, E2F-1, cyclin D1,
Bcl-2, TTF-1, CEA, HER2/neu, cytokeratin 5/6, and pancytokeratin. Univariate
analysis of all 18 markers for prognostic significance was performed.
Immunohistochemical scoring data for NSCLC were analysed by unsupervised
hierarchical clustering analysis. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were plotted for
the different cluster groups of lung tumours identified by this method. Analysis 
of the three different World Health Organization (WHO) subtypes (adenocarcinoma, 
squamous cell carcinoma, large cell carcinoma) of NSCLC individually showed that 
different markers were significant in different subtypes. For example, p53 and
p63 were significant for squamous cell carcinoma (p = 0.007 and p = 0.03,
respectively), whereas cyclin D1 and HER2/neu were significant prognostic markers
for adenocarcinoma (p = 0.025 and p = 0.015, respectively). These markers were
not significant prognostic predictors for NSCLC as a group. Hierarchical
clustering analysis of NSCLC produced four separate cluster groups, although the 
vast majority of cases were found in two cluster groups, one dominated by
squamous cell carcinoma and the other by adenocarcinoma. The clinical outcomes of
cases from the four cluster groups were not significantly different. Prognostic
indicators vary between different morphological subtypes of NSCLC. Unsupervised
hierarchical clustering analysis, based on an extended immunoprofile, identifies 
two main cluster groups corresponding to adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma; cases of large cell carcinomas are assigned to one of these two groups
based on their molecular phenotype.

PMID: 15307143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Sep 15;13(18):2143-53. Epub 2004 Jul 14.

Transcription profiling of inner ears from Pou4f3(ddl/ddl) identifies Gfi1 as a
target of the Pou4f3 deafness gene.

Hertzano R(1), Montcouquiol M, Rashi-Elkeles S, Elkon R, Yücel R, Frankel WN,
Rechavi G, Möröy T, Friedman TB, Kelley MW, Avraham KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Pou4f3 (Brn3.1, Brn3c) is a class IV POU domain transcription factor that has a
central function in the development of all hair cells in the human and mouse
inner ear sensory epithelia. A mutation of POU4F3 underlies human autosomal
dominant non-syndromic progressive hearing loss DFNA15. Through a comparison of
inner ear gene expression profiles of E16.5 wild-type and Pou4f3 mutant deaf mice
using a high density oligonucleotide microarray, we identified the gene encoding 
growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) as a likely in vivo target gene regulated by 
Pou4f3. To validate this result, we performed semi-quantitative RT-PCR and in
situ hybridizations for Gfi1 on wild-type and Pou4f3 mutant mice. Our results
demonstrate that a deficiency of Pou4f3 leads to a statistically significant
reduction in Gfi1 expression levels and that the dynamics of Gfi1 mRNA abundance 
closely follow the pattern of expression for Pou4f3. To examine the role of Gfi1 
in the pathogenesis of Pou4f3-related deafness, we performed comparative analyses
of the embryonic inner ears of Pou4f3 and Gfi1 mouse mutants using
immunohistochemistry and scanning electron microscopy. The loss of Gfi1 results
in outer hair cell degeneration, which appears comparable to that observed in
Pou4f3 mutants. These results identify Gfi1 as the first downstream target of a
hair cell specific transcription factor and suggest that outer hair cell
degeneration in Pou4f3 mutants is largely or entirely a result of the loss of
expression of Gfi1.

PMID: 15254021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):40906-17. Epub 2004 Jul 13.

Gfi1:green fluorescent protein knock-in mutant reveals differential expression
and autoregulation of the growth factor independence 1 (Gfi1) gene during
lymphocyte development.

Yücel R(1), Kosan C, Heyd F, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The Gfi1 gene encodes a 55-kDa transcriptional repressor protein with important
functions in T-cell development, in granulopoiesis, and in the regulation of the 
innate immune response. To follow expression of the Gfi1 gene during the
differentiation of specific immune cells, we have generated a mouse mutant in
which the Gfi1 coding region is replaced by the gene for the green fluorescent
protein (GFP). We found that Gfi1 gene expression is highest in early B-cell
subpopulation and differentially expressed during T-cell development with peak
levels at stages where pre-TCR or positive/negative selection takes place. Gfi1
is absent in mature B-cells, whereas in peripheral T-cells Gfi1 gene expression
is low but rises significantly upon T-cell receptor triggering and decreases
again in T-memory cells. Constitutive expression of an lck promoter-driven Gfi1
transgene led to transcriptional silencing of the Gfi1:GFP allele in T-cells.
Because Gfi1 was found to occupy genomic sites of its own promoter in thymocytes 
and was able to repress its own transcription in vitro we propose that
transcription of the Gfi1 gene is regulated through an autoregulatory feedback
loop.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15252036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cancer Res. 2004 Jul 1;64(13):4419-27.

High-throughput retroviral tagging for identification of genes involved in
initiation and progression of mouse splenic marginal zone lymphomas.

Shin MS(1), Fredrickson TN, Hartley JW, Suzuki T, Akagi K, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 15;66(6):3345. Agaki, Keiko [corrected to Akagi, Keiko].

Human B-cell lymphomas are frequently associated with specific genetic changes
caused by chromosomal translocations that activate proto-oncogenes. For lymphomas
of mice expressing murine leukemia virus, mutagenic proviral insertions are
thought to play a similar role. Here we report studies designed to determine
whether specific retroviral integration sites might be associated with a specific
subset of mouse B-cell lymphomas and if the genes associated with these sites are
regularly altered in expression. We studied splenic marginal zone lymphomas (MZL)
of NFS.V(+) mice that are unusual in exhibiting frequent progression from low to 
high grade, potentially allowing assignment of cancer genes to processes of
initiation and progression. We used inverse PCR to clone and analyze 212
retroviral integration sites from 43 MZL at different stages of progression.
Sixty-two marked common integration sites and included 31 that had been marked
previously. Among the new common integration sites, seven were unique to MZL.
Using microarrays and real-time quantitative PCR analysis, we defined
differential patterns of gene expression in association with disease progression 
for Gfi1, Sox4, Brca2, Snf1lk, Nfkb1, Pou2af1, Prdm1, Stat6, and Blnk. Heightened
expression of Gfi1 distinguishes MZL from other lymphoma types. The combined use 
of proviral tagging and analyses of gene expression thus provides a powerful
approach to understanding of genes that collaborate in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15231650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 May 6;32(8):2508-19. Print 2004.

Targeted transcriptional repression of Gfi1 by GFI1 and GFI1B in lymphoid cells.

Doan LL(1), Porter SD, Duan Z, Flubacher MM, Montoya D, Tsichlis PN, Horwitz M,
Gilks CB, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular Therapeutics, University of Louisville, KY, USA.

Growth factor independence-1 (GFI1) and GFI1B are closely related, yet
differentially expressed transcriptional repressors with nearly identical DNA
binding domains. GFI1 is upregulated in the earliest thymocyte precursors, while 
GFI1B expression is restricted to T lymphopoiesis stages coincident with
activation. Transgenic expression of GFI1 potentiates T-cell activation, while
forced GFI1B expression decreases activation. Both mice and humans with mutant
Gfi1 display lymphoid abnormalities. Here we describe autoregulation of Gfi1 in
primary mouse thymocytes and a human T-cell line. GFI1 binding to cis-element
sequences conserved between rat, mouse and human Gfi1 mediates direct and potent 
transcriptional repression. In addition, dramatic regulation of Gfi1 can also be 
mediated by GFI1B. These data provide the first example of a gene directly
targeted by GFI1 and GFI1B. Moreover, they support a role for auto- and
trans-regulation of Gfi1 by GFI1 and GFI1B in maintaining the normal expression
patterns of Gfi1, and suggest that GFI1B may indirectly affect T-cell activation 
through repression of Gfi1.

PMCID: PMC419458
PMID: 15131254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Jan;4(1):53-7.

Parapineal specific expression of gfi1 in the zebrafish epithalamus.

Dufourcq P(1), Rastegar S, Strähle U, Blader P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement UMR5547, bât. 4R3, Université Paul
Sabatier, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France.

We describe the isolation of zebrafish growth factor independent 1 (gfi1) and
present an analysis of its pattern of expression during early development. As
with its murine homologue, gfi1 expression is detected in the ganglion cells of
the neural retina and in developing hair cells of the ear. In keeping with a role
in the development of sensory hair cells, gfi1 is also expressed in neuromasts of
the anterior and posterior lateral line system. Finally, gfi1 is expressed in the
developing epithalamus in the dorsal diencephalon where its transcription is
restricted to the parapineal.

PMID: 14678828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 1;264(1):240-54.

Math5 determines the competence state of retinal ganglion cell progenitors.

Yang Z(1), Ding K, Pan L, Deng M, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Aging and Developmental Biology, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

In mice, all of the six retinal neuron types are generated from common
multipotent retinal progenitors, and their differentiation from progenitors is
regulated by both extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Previously, we showed that
targeted deletion of the atonal (ato) homologue math5 blocked the differentiation
of most retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), revealing an essential role for math5 in
RGC differentiation. In this study, we used the Cre-loxP recombination system to 
trace the fate of math5-expressing cells in retina. Our results demonstrated that
math5 expression was associated with the differentiation of multiple retinal
neuron types, including RGCs, photoreceptor, horizontal, and amacrine cells,
implying that math5 expression alone is not sufficient to determine the RGC fate.
Math5 expression was restricted to postmitotic cells in developing retina,
suggesting that cell fate commitment of retinal neurons occurs after the terminal
mitosis. The insufficiency of and requirement for math5 in RGC differentiation
indicates that, like ato in the development of Drosophila R8 photoreceptors,
math5 plays a role in determining the RGC competence state of retinal progenitors
and that additional positive and negative factors are required in determining RGC
fate. Furthermore, we show that loss of Math5 function severely reduced the RGC
expression of the transcription factors Brn-3b, Gfi-1, Isl-1, Isl-2, Nscl-1,
Nscl-2, and RPF-1, suggesting that Math5 expression is required to activate a
comprehensive transcription network of RGC differentiation.

PMID: 14623245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;101(1):84-9.

Elucidation of correspondence between swine chromosome 4 and human chromosome 1
by assigning 27 genes to the ImpRH map, and development of microsatellites in the
proximity of 14 genes.

Hiraiwa H(1), Sawazaki T, Suzuki K, Fujishima-Kanaya N, Toki D, Ito Y, Uenishi H,
Hayashi T, Awata T, Yasue H.

Author information: 
(1)New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization, Toshima, Tokyo,
Japan.

Loci affecting swine intramuscular fat content, backfat thickness, carcass
weight, and daily weight gain were assigned to regions of swine chromosome (SSC) 
4, which were shown to correspond to human chromosome (HSA) 1p22--> q25 by
ZOO-FISH, bidirectional chromosome painting, as well as by the linkage map of
genes. In order to select candidate genes responsible for the above traits from
the human genome database, precise correspondence between SSC4 and HSA1 is a
prerequisite. In the present study, 27 genes, PTGFR, GBP1, GBP2, GFI1, GCLM,
ABCD3, EXTL2, KCNA3, ADORA3, KCND3, WNT2B, NRAS, SYCP1, PTGFRN, IGSF2, NOTCH2,
S100A10, SHC1, SSR2, LMNA, CCT3, CD5L, PEA15, FCER1G, EAT2, DDR2, and LAMB3,
located in the HSA1 region corresponding to SSC4 or possibly SSC4, were assigned 
to the IMpRH map. The alignment of genes from centromere to telomere in the SSC4 
q arm is basically conserved in HSA1p22-->q25 with the direction from the q arm
to the p arm, which is in good agreement with results from linkage mapping. In
addition, the present study first demonstrated that WNT2B residing in the middle 
of the HSA1 region was assigned to SSC18 with a high lod score (> 5), and that at
least three intrachromosomal rearrangements occurred in the region in the process
of swine and human evolution. PTGFR, and LAMB3 localized at both ends of the HSA1
region were assigned to SSC6 and SSC9, respectively, which is consistent with
regional correspondence reported earlier. In the course of the above analysis,
microsatellite markers were developed in the proximity of eleven genes localized 
on SSC4, and three genes on other swine chromosomes.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14571142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hematology. 2003 Oct;8(5):339-44.

Gfi-1 oncoproteins in hematopoiesis.

Duan Z(1), Horwitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle
98195-7720, USA. zjduan@u.washington.edu

The family of Gfi-1 zinc finger transcriptional repressor oncoproteins consists
of Gfi-1 and Gfi-1B. Recent gene targeting experiments and mutational screening
in humans have revealed an essential role for Gfi-1 and Gfi-1B in hematopoiesis. 
Mice lacking Gfi-1 are unexpectedly neutropenic. Neutrophil differentiation is
abolished and T lymphocyte differentiation is partially blocked in these mice.
Heterozygous germline mutations of Gfi-1 causes severe congenital neutropenia
(SCN) in humans. Ela2, whose germline mutation is the major contributor to
hereditary neutropenias, is repressed in vivo by Gfi-1. Gfi-1B disruption is
embryonic lethal due to a block of erythropoiesis. Gfi-1B is required for both
erythroid and megakaryocyte development. The ongoing identification of repressed 
target genes and interacting transcriptional cofactors is helping to unravel the 
central contributions of these two hematopoietic factors.

PMID: 14530176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 30;100(20):11523-8. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

CCAAT-binding factor regulates expression of the beta1 subunit of soluble
guanylyl cyclase gene in the BE2 human neuroblastoma cell line.

Sharina IG(1), Martin E, Thomas A, Uray KL, Murad F.

Collaborators: Murad F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology and Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, University of Texas Medical School, 6431 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) is a cytosolic enzyme producing the intracellular 
messenger cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) on activation with nitric oxide
(NO). sGC is an obligatory heterodimer composed of alpha and beta subunits. We
investigated human beta1 sGC transcriptional regulation in BE2 human
neuroblastoma cells. The 5' upstream region of the beta1 sGC gene was isolated
and analyzed for promoter activity by using luciferase reporter constructs. The
transcriptional start site of the beta1 sGC gene in BE2 cells was identified. The
functional significance of consensus transcriptional factor binding sites
proximal to the transcriptional start site was investigated by site deletions in 
the 800-bp promoter fragment. The elimination of CCAAT-binding factor (CBF) and
growth factor independence 1 (GFI1) binding cores significantly diminished
whereas deletion of the NF1 core elevated the transcription. Electrophoretic
mobility-shift assay (EMSA) and Western analysis of proteins bound to biotinated 
EMSA probes confirmed the interaction of GFI1, CBF, and NF1 factors with the
beta1 sGC promoter. Treatment of BE2 cells with genistein, known to inhibit the
CBF binding to DNA, significantly reduced protein levels of beta1 sGC by
inhibiting transcription. In summary, our study represents an analysis of the
human beta1 sGC promoter regulation in human neuroblastoma BE2 cells and
identifies CBF as a critically important factor in beta1 sGC expression.

PMCID: PMC208791
PMID: 14504408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Cycle. 2003 Sep-Oct;2(5):447-51.

The role of apoptosis in the pathophysiology of chronic neutropenias associated
with bone marrow failure.

Papadaki HA(1), Eliopoulos GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology of the University of Crete School of Medicine,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece. epapadak@med.uoc.gr

Chronic neutropenia syndromes associated with bone marrow (BM) failure comprise
distinct congenital and acquired hematologic disorders with varying degree of
neutropenia due to decreased or ineffective BM neutrophil production. Recent
evidence suggests that defective granulocytopoiesis in these neutropenia states
is a consequence of accelerated apoptotic cell death of BM myeloid progenitor
cells and/or their differentiated progeny. Inherited or spontaneously appearing
mutations in the ELA2 gene encoding for neutrophil elastase have been implicated 
in the accelerated apoptotic process of the BM myeloid cells in patients with
cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia. A disturbed balance between
pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic intracellular or membrane molecules such as
downregulation of the bcl-2 family members or upregulation of the death receptor 
Fas, have been implicated in neutropenia associated with myelokathexis,
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome and acquired chronic idiopathic neutropenia of adult. 
In this review we summarize the available evidence suggesting that abnormally
increased apoptosis and impaired proliferative and differentiating properties of 
neutrophil progenitor and precursor cells represent a common pathogenetic
mechanism for impaired granulocytopoiesis in both acquired idiopathic and
congenital neutropenia states. The underlying distinct cellular and molecular
abnormalities and the role of the BM microenvironment are extensively analysed.

PMID: 12963840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Aug 1;89(5):1005-18.

Gfi-1 attaches to the nuclear matrix, associates with ETO (MTG8) and histone
deacetylase proteins, and represses transcription using a TSA-sensitive
mechanism.

McGhee L(1), Bryan J, Elliott L, Grimes HL, Kazanjian A, Davis JN, Meyers S.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, 1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport, LA 
71130, USA.

Gfi-1 and Gfi-1B can repress transcription and play important roles in
hematopoietic cell survival and differentiation. Although these proteins are
known to bind DNA through a C-terminal zinc-finger domain and may require an
N-terminal SNAG domain (SNAIL/Gfi-1) to repress transcription, the mechanism by
which Gfi-1 and Gfi-1B act is unknown. A first step towards understanding the
mechanism by which these proteins repress transcription is to identify
interacting proteins that could contribute to transcriptional repression. ETO
(also termed MTG8), was first identified through its involvement in the (8;21)
translocation associated with acute myelogenous leukemia. It attaches to the
nuclear matrix and associates with histone deacetylases and the co-repressors
N-CoR, SMRT, and mSin3A, and may act as a co-repressor for site-specific
transcriptions factors. In this report we demonstrate that Gfi-1 interacts with
ETO and related proteins both in vitro and in vivo and with histone deacetylase
proteins in vivo. We observed that a portion of Gfi-1 and Gfi-1B associated with 
the nuclear matrix, as is the case with ETO. Moreover, Gfi-1 and ETO co-localize 
to punctate subnuclear structures. When co-expressed in mammalian cells, Gfi-1
associates with histone deacetylse-1 (HDAC-1), HDAC-2, and HDAC-3. These data
identify ETO as a partner for Gfi-1 and Gfi-1B, and suggest that Gfi-1 proteins
repress transcription through recruitment of histone deacetylase-containing
complexes.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12874834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Nat Genet. 2003 Jul;34(3):308-12.

Mutations in proto-oncogene GFI1 cause human neutropenia and target ELA2.

Person RE(1), Li FQ, Duan Z, Benson KF, Wechsler J, Papadaki HA, Eliopoulos G,
Kaufman C, Bertolone SJ, Nakamoto B, Papayannopoulou T, Grimes HL, Horwitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Box
357720, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Mice lacking the transcriptional repressor oncoprotein Gfi1 are unexpectedly
neutropenic. We therefore screened GFI1 as a candidate for association with
neutropenia in affected individuals without mutations in ELA2 (encoding
neutrophil elastase), the most common cause of severe congenital neutropenia
(SCN; ref. 3). We found dominant negative zinc finger mutations that disable
transcriptional repressor activity. The phenotype also includes immunodeficient
lymphocytes and production of a circulating population of myeloid cells that
appear immature. We show by chromatin immunoprecipitation, gel shift, reporter
assays and elevated expression of ELA2 in vivo in neutropenic individuals that
GFI1 represses ELA2, linking these two genes in a common pathway involved in
myeloid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2832179
PMID: 12778173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 May 13;100(10):5932-7. Epub 2003 Apr 29.

Targets of the transcriptional repressor oncoprotein Gfi-1.

Duan Z(1), Horwitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, 1705 Northeast Pacific Street, HSB-K236B, P.O. Box 357720,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 20;108(38):16134.

Gfi-1 is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor originally recognized for its
role in T cell differentiation and lymphomas. Recent experiments reveal that
gene-targeted Gfi-1-deficient mice are neutropenic and that Gfi-1 mutations cause
human neutropenia. In both cases, myeloid progenitor cells lose the ability to
distinctly differentiate granulocytes from monocytes. The molecular mechanism of 
the hematopoietic abnormalities caused by Gfi-1 deficiency remains undetermined
because of a lack of known Gfi-1 target genes. To identify Gfi-1 targets in vivo,
we performed large-scale chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis on a set of 34
candidate genes in myeloblast (KG-1 and HL-60), monoblast (U937), and T
lymphocyte cell lines (Jurkat), in concert with RT-PCR-based expression
profiling. We identified 32 Gfi-1 binding sites in a functionally variable set of
16 genes, including complements of cell-cycle regulators, transcription factors, 
and granulocyte-specific markers. Cluster analysis of expression patterns and
chromatin immunoprecipitation data reveals that Gfi-1 targets a subset of genes
differentiating hematopoietic lineages and therefore plays a relatively superior 
role in the hierarchy of factors governing stem cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC156304
PMID: 12721361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Exp Med. 2003 Apr 7;197(7):831-44.

The transcriptional repressor Gfi1 affects development of early, uncommitted
c-Kit+ T cell progenitors and CD4/CD8 lineage decision in the thymus.

Yücel R(1), Karsunky H, Klein-Hitpass L, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany. moeroey@uni-essen.de

In the thymus, several steps of proliferative expansion and selection coordinate 
the maturation of precursors into antigen-specific T cells. Here we identify the 
transcriptional repressor Gfi1 as an important regulator of this maturation
process. Mice lacking Gfi1 show reduced thymic cellularity due to an increased
cell death rate, lack of proliferation, and a differentiation block in the very
early uncommitted CD4-/CD8-/c-Kit+ cytokine-dependent T cell progenitors that
have not yet initiated VDJ recombination. In addition, Gfi1-deficient mice show
increased major histocompatibility complex class I-restricted positive selection 
and develop significantly more CD8+ cells suggesting a requirement of Gfi1 for a 
correct CD4/CD8 lineage decision. Absence of Gfi1 correlates with high level
expression of the genes for lung Krüppel-like factor (LKLF), inhibitor of DNA
binding (Id)1 and Id2, suggesting the existence of new regulatory pathways in
pre-T cell development and thymic selection in which Gfi1 acts upstream of LKLF
as well as the E-proteins, which are negatively regulated by Id1 and Id2.

PMCID: PMC2193890
PMID: 12682108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Immunol. 2003 Mar 1;170(5):2356-66.

Growth factor independence-1B expression leads to defects in T cell activation,
IL-7 receptor alpha expression, and T cell lineage commitment.

Doan LL(1), Kitay MK, Yu Q, Singer A, Herblot S, Hoang T, Bear SE, Morse HC 3rd, 
Tsichlis PN, Grimes HL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular Therapeutics and Department of Surgery, University of
Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

T cell differentiation in the thymus is dependent upon signaling through the TCR 
and is characterized by the resulting changes in expression patterns of CD4 and
CD8 surface coreceptor molecules. Although recent studies have characterized the 
effects of proximal TCR signaling on T cell differentiation, the downstream
integration of these signals remains largely unknown. The growth factor
independence-1 (GFI1) and GFI1B transcriptional repressors may regulate cytokine 
signaling pathways to affect lymphocyte growth and survival. In this study, we
show that Gfi1 expression is induced upon induction of the T cell program. Gfi1B 
expression is low and dynamic during T cell development, but is terminated in
mature thymocytes. Transgenic expression of GFI1 and GFI1B in T cells allowed us 
to determine the functional consequences of constitutive expression. GFI1
potentiates response to TCR stimulation and IL-2, whereas GFI1B-transgenic T
cells are defective in T cell activation. Moreover, GFI1B-transgenic thymocytes
display reduced expression of the late-activation marker IL-7R alpha, and a
decrease in CD4(-)8(+) single-positive T cells that can be mitigated by
transgenic expression of BCL2 or GFI1. These data show that GFI1 and GFI1B are
functionally unique, and implicate a role for GFI1 in the integration of
activation and survival signals.

PMID: 12594258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Mol Med. 2003 Mar;11(3):383-8.

Identification and characterization of human SNAIL3 (SNAI3) gene in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan.

Human SNAIL1 (SNAI1) protein encoded by SNAI1/SNA gene represses transcription of
E-cadherin/CDH1 gene. Human SNAIL2 (SNAI2) protein encoded by SNAI2/SLUG gene
induces the first phase of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), including
desmosome dissociation, cell spreading, and initiation of cell separation. Here, 
we have identified human SNAIL3 (SNAI3) gene using bioinformatics. Human SNAI3
gene, consisting of at least three exons, spans around the nucleotide position
320214-328221 of human reference genomic contig NT_010404.8 in the reverse
orientation. SNAI3 gene, was located between KIAA0233 gene and CBFA2T3 gene in
human chromosome 16q24.3, a region affected in breast cancer, gastric cancer,
hepatocellular carcinoma, ovarian cancer, and therapy-related myeloid leukemia
with t(16;21)(q24;q22) translocation. Human SNAI3 gene was found to encode
292-amino-acid polypeptide with the N-terminal SNAG domain and five zinc finger
domains. N-terminal SNAG domain was identified in zinc finger proteins SNAI1,
SNAI2, SNAI3, SCRATCH (SCRT1), GFI1, and GFI1B. ATP/GTP binding site was
identified in SCRT1, GFI1 and GFI1B, but not in SNAI1, SNAI2 and SNAI3.
Phylogenetic analysis of human zinc finger proteins with SNAG domain revealed
that SNAI1, SNAI2 and SNAI3 were more closely related. These results clearly
indicate that SNAI1, SNAI2 and SNAI3 constitute a subfamily among SNAG
zinc-finger proteins. Human SNAI3 mRNA was expressed in skin melanotic melanoma, 
lung epidermoid carcinoma, and germ cell tumor. Because SNAG zinc-finger proteins
are transcriptional repressors implicated in carcinogenesis and embryogenesis,
SNAI3 gene might be a potent target of pharmacogenomics in the field of oncology 
and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 12579345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Immunity. 2003 Jan;18(1):109-20.

Intrinsic requirement for zinc finger transcription factor Gfi-1 in neutrophil
differentiation.

Hock H(1), Hamblen MJ, Rooke HM, Traver D, Bronson RT, Cameron S, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We report essential roles of zinc finger transcription factor Gfi-1 in myeloid
development. Gene-targeted Gfi-1(-/-) mice lack normal neutrophils and are highly
susceptible to abscess formation by gram-positive bacteria. Arrested,
morphologically atypical, Gr1(+)Mac1(+) myeloid cells expand with age in the bone
marrow. RNAs encoding primary but not secondary or tertiary neutrophil
(granulocyte) granule proteins are expressed. The atypical Gr1(+)Mac1(+) cell
population shares characteristics of both the neutrophil and macrophage lineages 
and exhibits phagocytosis and respiratory burst activity. Reexpression of Gfi-1
in sorted Gfi-1(-/-) progenitors ex vivo rescues neutrophil differentiation in
response to G-CSF. Thus, Gfi-1 not only promotes differentiation of neutrophils
but also antagonizes traits of the alternate monocyte/macrophage program.

PMID: 12530980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Virol. 2003 Feb;77(3):2056-62.

Genome-based identification of cancer genes by proviral tagging in mouse
retrovirus-induced T-cell lymphomas.

Kim R(1), Trubetskoy A, Suzuki T, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Lenz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York 10461, USA.

The identification of tumor-inducing genes is a driving force for elucidating the
molecular mechanisms underlying cancer. Many retroviruses induce tumors by
insertion of viral DNA adjacent to cellular oncogenes, resulting in altered
expression and/or structure of the encoded proteins. The availability of the
mouse genome sequence now allows analysis of retroviral common integration sites 
in murine tumors to be used as a genetic screen for identification of large
numbers of candidate cancer genes. By positioning the sequences of inverse
PCR-amplified, virus-host junction fragments within the mouse genome, 19 target
genes were identified in T-cell lymphomas induced by the retrovirus SL3-3. The
candidate cancer genes included transcription factors (Fos, Gfi1, Lef1, Myb, Myc,
Runx3, and Sox3), all three D cyclins, Ras signaling pathway components
(Rras2/TC21 and Rasgrp1), and Cmkbr7/CCR7. The most frequent target was Rras2.
Insertions as far as 57 kb away from the transcribed portion were associated with
substantially increased transcription of Rras2, and no coding sequence mutations,
including those typically involved in Ras activation, were detected. These
studies demonstrate the power of genome-based analysis of retroviral insertion
sites for cancer gene discovery, identify several new genes worth examining for a
role in human cancer, and implicate the pathways in which those genes act in
lymphomagenesis. They also provide strong genetic evidence that overexpression of
unmutated Rras2 contributes to tumorigenesis, thus suggesting that it may also do
so if it is inappropriately expressed in human tumors.

PMCID: PMC140962
PMID: 12525640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Development. 2003 Jan;130(1):221-32.

The zinc finger transcription factor Gfi1, implicated in lymphomagenesis, is
required for inner ear hair cell differentiation and survival.

Wallis D(1), Hamblen M, Zhou Y, Venken KJ, Schumacher A, Grimes HL, Zoghbi HY,
Orkin SH, Bellen HJ.

Collaborators: Bellen HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Gfi1 was first identified as causing interleukin 2-independent growth in T cells 
and lymphomagenesis in mice. Much work has shown that Gfi1 and Gfi1b, a second
mouse homolog, play pivotal roles in blood cell lineage differentiation. However,
neither Gfi1 nor Gfi1b has been implicated in nervous system development, even
though their invertebrate homologues, senseless in Drosophila and pag-3 in C.
elegans are expressed and required in the nervous system. We show that Gfi1 mRNA 
is expressed in many areas that give rise to neuronal cells during embryonic
development in mouse, and that Gfi1 protein has a more restricted expression
pattern. By E12.5 Gfi1 mRNA is expressed in both the CNS and PNS as well as in
many sensory epithelia including the developing inner ear epithelia. At later
developmental stages, Gfi1 expression in the ear is refined to the hair cells and
neurons throughout the inner ear. Gfi1 protein is expressed in a more restricted 
pattern in specialized sensory cells of the PNS, including the eye, presumptive
Merkel cells, the lung and hair cells of the inner ear. Gfi1 mutant mice display 
behavioral defects that are consistent with inner ear anomalies, as they are
ataxic, circle, display head tilting behavior and do not respond to noise. They
have a unique inner ear phenotype in that the vestibular and cochlear hair cells 
are differentially affected. Although Gfi1-deficient mice initially specify inner
ear hair cells, these hair cells are disorganized in both the vestibule and
cochlea. The outer hair cells of the cochlea are improperly innervated and
express neuronal markers that are not normally expressed in these cells.
Furthermore, Gfi1 mutant mice lose all cochlear hair cells just prior to and soon
after birth through apoptosis. Finally, by five months of age there is also a
dramatic reduction in the number of cochlear neurons. Hence, Gfi1 is expressed in
the developing nervous system, is required for inner ear hair cell
differentiation, and its loss causes programmed cell death.

PMID: 12441305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Immunity. 2002 May;16(5):733-44.

Growth factor independent-1 induced by IL-4 regulates Th2 cell proliferation.

Zhu J(1), Guo L, Min B, Watson CJ, Hu-Li J, Young HA, Tsichlis PN, Paul WE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
jfzhu@niaid.nih.gov

IL-4 is important in Th2 differentiation and in cell expansion. Stat6 is
necessary and sufficient for both functions. Although Gata3 is critical for Th2
polarization, it is not sufficient to mediate IL-4-driven cell expansion. We
report that growth factor independent-1 (Gfi-1), a Stat6-dependent
transcriptional repressor, strikingly increases Th2 cell expansion by promoting
proliferation and preventing apoptosis. Cells infected with a Gfi-1 retrovirus
show striking enhancement of IL-2-induced Stat5 phosphorylation and repression of
p27(Kip-1) expression, suggesting a potential mechanism for the Gfi-1 growth
effect. The synergy of Gfi-1 and Gata3 provides a mechanism through which IL-4
could selectively promote Th2 cell expansion.

PMID: 12049724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Oncogene. 2002 Feb 28;21(10):1571-9.

High levels of the onco-protein Gfi-1 accelerate T-cell proliferation and inhibit
activation induced T-cell death in Jurkat T-cells.

Karsunky H(1), Mende I, Schmidt T, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Gfi-1 is a nuclear zinc finger protein with the activity of a transcriptional
repressor and the ability to predispose for the development of T-cell lymphoma
when expressed constitutively at high levels. Whereas thymic T-cell precursors
express endogenous Gfi-1, mature peripheral T-cells lack Gfi-1 but upregulate its
expression transiently after antigenic stimulation and activation of Erk1/2
demonstrating a role of Gfi-1 in T-cell activation. Here we show that
constitutive expression of Gfi-1 accelerates S phase entry of primary, resting
T-cells upon antigenic stimulation. In addition, high level Gfi-1 expression
inhibits phorbol ester induced G1 arrest and activation induced cell death in
Jurkat T-cells. We demonstrate that these effects of Gfi-1 concur with lower
absolute levels and hyperphosphorylation of the pocket protein pRb. Moreover,
phorbol ester induced expression of the negative cell cycle regulator p21(WAF1)
is blocked in the presence of Gfi-1. These findings suggest that Gfi-1
contributes to T-cell lymphomagenesis by overriding a late G1 cell cycle
checkpoint which controls activation induced death and S phase entry of T-cells.

PMID: 11896586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nat Genet. 2002 Mar;30(3):295-300. Epub 2002 Jan 28.

Inflammatory reactions and severe neutropenia in mice lacking the transcriptional
repressor Gfi1.

Karsunky H(1), Zeng H, Schmidt T, Zevnik B, Kluge R, Schmid KW, Dührsen U, Möröy 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The transcriptional repressor Gfi1 is a nuclear zinc-finger protein expressed in 
T-cell precursors in the thymus and in activated mature T lymphocytes. Previous
experiments have shown that Gfi1 is involved in T-cell lymphomagenesis and in the
development of T-cell progenitors. Here we show that Gfi1 is also expressed
outside the lymphoid system in granulocytes and activated macrophages, cells that
mediate innate immunity (that is, non-specific immunity). We have generated
Gfi1-deficient mice (Gfi1-/-) and show that these animals are severely
neutropenic and accumulate immature monocytic cells in blood and bone marrow.
Their myeloid precursor cells are unable to differentiate into granulocytes upon 
stimulation with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) but can develop
into mature macrophages. We found that Gfi1-/- macrophages produce enhanced
levels of inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
interleukin-10 (IL-10) and IL-1beta, when stimulated with bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and that Gfi1-/- mice succumb to low doses of this
endotoxin that are tolerated by wildtype mice. We conclude that Gfi1 influences
the differentiation of myeloid precursors into granulocytes or monocytes and acts
in limiting the inflammatory immune response.

PMID: 11810106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 11;283(3):644-7.

A house fly gene homologous to the zinc finger proto-oncogene Gfi-1.

Kasai S(1), Scott JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Comstock Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York,
14853-0901, USA.

Gfi-1 was first cloned from rats (and subsequently from mice, chickens, and
humans) and was found to be a 55-kDa protein that bound to DNA in a
sequence-specific manner to act as a transcriptional repressor and
proto-oncogene. Using PCR, a Gfi-1 homologous cDNA (mdGfi-1) was cloned from the 
house fly, Musca domestica. Comparison of the mdGfi-1-deduced amino acid sequence
with those of vertebrates indicates only moderate overall homology (40.9-43.0%
identity). However, these proteins are highly conserved when the zinc finger
domains are compared, with mdGfi-1 having 81.0-82.2% identity to the vertebrate
homologues. Within each of the six zinc finger domains there are three amino
acids that are predicted to contact the DNA and these amino acids are 100%
identical for all six domains for all species. Given that Gfi-1 is highly
conserved from insects to vertebrates suggests this may be an important
transcription factor in many taxa.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11341773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Oncogene. 2001 Jan 18;20(3):295-302.

Runx2: a novel oncogenic effector revealed by in vivo complementation and
retroviral tagging.

Blyth K(1), Terry A, Mackay N, Vaillant F, Bell M, Cameron ER, Neil JC, Stewart
M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, University of Glasgow Veterinary School,
Bearsden, Glasgow, G61 1QH, UK.

The Runx2 (Cbfa1, Pebp2alphaA, Aml3) gene was previously identified as a frequent
target for transcriptional activation by proviral insertion in T-cell lymphomas
of CD2-MYC transgenic mice. We have recently shown that over-expression of the
full-length, most highly expressed Runx2 isoform in the thymus perturbs T-cell
development, leads to development of spontaneous lymphomas at low frequency and
is strongly synergistic with Myc. To gain further insight into the relationship
of Runx2 to other lymphomagenic pathways, we tested the effect of combining the
CD2-Runx2 transgene either with a Pim1 transgene (E(mu)-Pim1) or with the p53
null genotype, as each of these displays independent synergy with Myc. In both
cases we observed synergistic tumour development. However, Runx2 appeared to have
a dominant effect on the tumour phenotype in each case, with most tumours
conforming to the CD3(+), CD8(+), CD4(+/-) phenotype seen in CD2-Runx2 mice.
Neonatal infection of CD2-Runx2 mice with Moloney murine leukaemia virus (Moloney
MLV) also led to a dramatic acceleration of tumour onset. Analysis of known
Moloney MLV target genes in these lymphomas showed a high frequency of
rearrangement at c-Myc or N-Myc (82%), and a significant number at Pim1 or Pim2
(23%), and at Pal1/Gfi1 (18%). These results indicate that Runx2 makes a distinct
contribution to T-cell lymphoma development which does not coincide with any of
the oncogene complementation groups previously identified by retroviral tagging.

PMID: 11313958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Ann Hum Genet. 2000 Jan;64(Pt 1):83-6.

Cloning and characterization of the TATA-less promoter from the human GFI1
proto-oncogene.

Liu S(1), Cowell JK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The growth factor independent 1 (GFI1) gene encodes a zinc finger protein which
acts as a transcriptional repressor and confers growth factor independence on
tumor cells, as suggested by the study of its mouse ortholog, Gfi1. We previously
isolated the human GFI1 gene but no information about the structure and location 
of the promotor of this gene has been reported. In this study we have cloned and 
characterized the human GFI1 promoter. The nucleotide sequence of the promoter
region is GC-rich and does not contain a typical TATA or CAAT box. Several Sp1
sites are present and computer predictions indicate that either of the two Sp1
sites might serve as the sites for transcription initiation. Analysis of various 
lengths of the promoter region using the luciferase reporter assay identifies a
functional promoter that is active in NIH3T3 cells. The strongest activity lies
within a region 312-602 basepairs upstream from the translation start site.

PMID: 11246463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cancer Res. 2001 Feb 1;61(3):1144-53.

Identification of a novel member of the snail/Gfi-1 repressor family, mlt 1,
which is methylated and silenced in liver tumors of SV40 T antigen transgenic
mice.

Tateno M(1), Fukunishi Y, Komatsu S, Okazaki Y, Kawai J, Shibata K, Itoh M,
Muramatsu M, Held WA, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation and Genome Science Laboratory,
RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Ibaraki.

DNA methylation is the only known mechanism for an epigenetic genomic DNA
modification that is capable of altering gene expression. A recent study reveals 
that the pattern of CpG island methylation is largely characteristic of tumor
type, suggesting that distinct sets of genes are inactivated by methylation
during development of each tumor type. We compared previously the methylation
status between normal liver and liver tumors in SV40 T/t antigen transgenic mice 
(MT-D2 mice) using Restriction Landmark Genomic Scanning for Methylation (RLGS-M)
and identified several loci/spots that appeared to be methylated frequently in
liver tumors. One of these spots, B236, identified a locus on chromosome 12
(D12Ncvs7) syntenic with human 14q12-q21 that is frequently lost in certain human
cancers. Shotgun sequencing of a bacterial artificial chro mosome clone
containing this spot/locus was performed to identify genes within this region.
The Genescan program predicted an open reading frame of a novel, intron-less gene
adjacent to the B236 spot that encodes a putative 493-amino acid protein
containing the SNAG repressor motif in the NH2-terminal region and five C2H2-type
zinc finger motifs in the COOH-terminal half. This putative gene, methylated in
liver tumor (mlt 1), is a novel member of the SNAG transcriptional repressor
family with 43% amino acid identity to insulinoma-associated protein 1. An open
reading frame encoding a protein quite similar to mouse mlt 1 (56% amino acid
identity) was located in the syntenic region of the human genome, indi cating
that mlt 1 is evolutionarily conserved in human. Northern blot analysis revealed 
that mlt 1 is normally expressed in brain, spleen, stom ach, and liver. However, 
mlt 1 expression was silenced in the liver tumors of MT-D2 mice. The putative
promoter region of mlt 1 is unmethylated in normal tissues but methylated in all 
liver tumors from 11 MT-D2 mice We also found that mlt 1 was methylated and not
expressed in N18TG-22 cells, a mouse neuroblastoma cell line. Treatment of
N18TG-2 cells with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-deoxycytidine, resulted in an
expression of mlt 1, indicating that the repression of mlt 1 is attributable to
methylation Thus, mlt 1 is a novel target gene that is silenced by methylation
during liver tumorigenesis initiated by SV40 T antigen.

PMID: 11221845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. EMBO J. 2000 Nov 1;19(21):5845-55.

The zinc finger protein Gfi-1 can enhance STAT3 signaling by interacting with the
STAT3 inhibitor PIAS3.

Rödel B(1), Tavassoli K, Karsunky H, Schmidt T, Bachmann M, Schaper F, Heinrich
P, Shuai K, Elsässer HP, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

STAT factors act as signal transducers of cytokine receptors and
transcriptionally activate specific target genes. The recently discovered protein
PIAS3 binds directly to STAT3 and blocks transcriptional activation. Here, we
present experimental evidence implementing the zinc finger protein Gfi-1 as a new
regulatory factor in STAT3-mediated signal transduction. The interaction between 
the two proteins first became evident in a yeast two-hybrid screen but was also
seen in coprecipitation experiments from eukaryotic cells. Moreover, we found
that both Gfi-1 and PIAS3 colocalize in a characteristic nuclear dot structure.
While PIAS3 exerts a profound inhibitory effect on STAT3-mediated transcription
of target promoters, Gfi-1 can overcome the PIAS3 block and significantly
enhances STAT3-mediated transcriptional activation. In primary T cells, Gfi-1 was
able to amplify IL-6-dependent T-cell activation. As Gfi-1 is a known, dominant
proto-oncogene, our findings bear particular importance for the recently
described ability of STAT3 to transform cells malignantly and offer an
explanation of the oncogenic potential of Gfi-1 in T lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC305799
PMID: 11060035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Int J Mol Med. 2000 May;5(5):553-6.

A new region of synteny between human chromosome 1p22 and mouse chromosome 5.

Chelsea DM(1), Roberts T, Cowell JK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Genetics/NB20, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

By constructing a physical map of the p22 region of human chromosome 1 we have
been able to show the relative orientation of four genes; GFI1, NB4S/EVI5, RPL5
and DR1. Analysis of the mouse physical map shows that the murine orthologs of
these genes are located on mouse chromosome 5. Through this analysis we have
established a new region of synteny between mouse chromosome 5 and human
chromosome region 1p22.

PMID: 10762661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Gene. 1998 Dec 28;225(1-2):77-87.

Cloning, sequencing and characterization of the rat hereditary hemochromatosis
promoter: comparison of the human, mouse and rat HFE promoter regions.

Sánchez M(1), Queralt R, Bruguera M, Rodés J, Oliva R.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona,
Institut de Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Casanova 143, 08036,
Barcelona, Spain.

We have cloned and sequenced 1398bp of the rat HFE gene promoter region. The
alignment of the rat promoter HFE sequence with the HFE promoter sequence from
human and mouse detected several highly conserved sequences present at
orthologous or heterologous positions in the three species. Subsequent analysis
of the conserved promoter sequences identified the presence of 10 novel
transcription elements present in the promoter regions of the human, mouse and
rat HFE genes (GATA, NF-IL6, AP1, AP2, CREB, PEA3, gamma-IRE, GFI1, HNF-3beta,
HFH2). Different gel retardation analyses performed with rat-liver nuclear
extracts have confirmed the presence of factors binding to some of these
transcription elements. This represents the first data concerning the
identification of potential transcriptional elements of the HFE promoter in these
three species. The expression pattern of the transcription factors corresponding 
to the novel elements identified in the HFE promoter is consistent with the
potential role of the HFE promoter in the transcription regulation and function
of the HFE gene. Knowledge of the identified conserved elements in the HFE
promoter from human, mouse and rat provides the basis for subsequent in-vitro or 
in-vivo studies leading to identification of the detailed mechanisms involved in 
the regulation of the iron metabolism and the design of potential future
alternative therapies.

PMID: 9931446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Oncogene. 1998 Nov 19;17(20):2661-7.

Zinc finger protein GFI-1 has low oncogenic potential but cooperates strongly
with pim and myc genes in T-cell lymphomagenesis.

Schmidt T(1), Karsunky H, Gau E, Zevnik B, Elsässer HP, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

The gfi-1 gene encodes a zinc finger containing protein that is specifically
expressed in T-lymphocytes and is a frequent target of proviral insertion in
T-cell lymphoma provoked by infection with MoMuLV--a non acute transforming
retrovirus. Expression of a gfi-1 transgene targeted to T-cells by the lck
proximal promoter provokes a reduction of peripheral CD4 and CD8 positive T-cells
but nevertheless weakly predisposes transgenic animals for the development of
T-cell lymphoma. Forced coexpression of the serine/threonine kinase Pim-1 can
partially restore normal T-cell numbers in double pim-1/gfi-1 transgenic mice.
Moreover, the combinatorial expression of Pim-1 and Gfi-1 leads to accelerated
development of T-cell lymphoma with a mean latency period of 114 days. A similar 
accelerated rate of lymphoma development was observed when lck-gfi-1 mice were
crossed with mice that carry a L-myc gene targeted to be expressed at high levels
in T-cells. The results show that gfi-1 can act with low activity as a dominant
oncogene when overexpressed but also demonstrate that it is most efficient only
in the presence of a cooperative partner protein as for example Pim-1 or L-Myc.
In addition, the results suggest that Pim-1 and Gfi-1 are acting synergistically 
in both T-cell lymphomagenesis and T-cell development.

PMID: 9840930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 15;17(18):5349-59.

Evidence implicating Gfi-1 and Pim-1 in pre-T-cell differentiation steps
associated with beta-selection.

Schmidt T(1), Karsunky H, Rödel B, Zevnik B, Elsässer HP, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

After rearrangement of the T-cell receptor (TCR) beta-locus, early CD4(-)/CD8(-) 
double negative (DN) thymic T-cells undergo a process termed 'beta-selection'
that allows the preferential expansion of cells with a functional TCR beta-chain.
This process leads to the formation of a rapidly cycling subset of DN cells that 
subsequently develop into CD4(+)/CD8(+) double positive (DP) cells. Using
transgenic mice that constitutively express the zinc finger protein Gfi-1 and the
serine/threonine kinase Pim-1, we found that the levels of both proteins are
important for the correct development of DP cells from DN precursors at the stage
where 'beta-selection' occurs. Analysis of the CD25(+)/CD44(-,lo) DN
subpopulation from these animals revealed that Gfi-1 inhibits and Pim-1 promotes 
the development of larger beta-selected cycling cells ('L subset') from smaller
resting cells ('E subset') within this subpopulation. We conclude from our data
that both proteins, Pim-1 and Gfi-1, participate in the regulation of
beta-selection-associated pre-T-cell differentiation in opposite directions and
that the ratio of both proteins is important for pre-T-cells to pass the 'E' to
'L' transition correctly during beta-selection.

PMCID: PMC1170861
PMID: 9736613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Apr 17;245(2):370-7.

Identification of conserved potentially regulatory sequences of the SRY gene from
10 different species of mammals.

Margarit E(1), Guillén A, Rebordosa C, Vidal-Taboada J, Sánchez M, Ballesta F,
Oliva R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clínic, Institut de Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

We have sequenced the 5' region of the SRY gene from human, chimpanzee, sheep,
and mouse and from four additional mammalian species, not previously
characterized (gorilla, gazelle, rat, and guinea pig). In order to identify
conserved DNA elements potentially involved in the regulation of the SRY gene,
the newly determined sequences were analyzed and compared to all mammalian SRY
promoter sequences available at present. Ten highly conserved potential
regulatory elements have been identified in all 10 species (AP1, Barbie, GATA,
Gfi1, cMyb, vMyb, NF1, Oct1, Sp1, and SRY). The known function of several of
these regulatory elements fits well with the known expression of the SRY gene.
However, except for the highly conserved coding HMG motif, only a short region
close to the initiation of transcription in the human SRY is conserved in the
exact position along the gene in all the species analyzed. This lack of sequence 
identity at the orthologous positions is consistent with the suggested rapid
evolution of the SRY gene. This relative lack of homology contrasts with a high
sequence identity of the putative regulatory sequences found within each
taxonomic group of species (primates, bovids, and rodents), which supports a
common mechanism of SRY expression and possibly also a similar function.

PMID: 9571157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Gene. 1997 Aug 22;195(2):277-84.

Structure and erythroid cell-restricted expression of a chicken cDNA encoding a
novel zinc finger protein of the Cys + His class.

Fuchs B(1), Wagner T, Rössel N, Antoine M, Beug H, Niessing J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung der Philipps-Universität,
Marburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Gene 1998 Jan 5;206(1):151.

We report the cloning, sequence analysis and expression pattern of chGfi, a zinc 
finger protein (Zfp)-encoding cDNA that was isolated from a cDNA library
constructed with RNA from avian erythroblastosis virus (AEV)-transformed primary 
chicken erythroblasts. The 1387-bp-long chGfi cDNA encodes a full-length
337-amino-acid (aa) protein that contains six zinc fingers (Zf) of the 2Cys +
2His class at its C-terminus. Immunoblotting experiments with extracts from bone 
marrow cells detected a 38-kDa protein that corresponds to the M(r) of 38,690
calculated for the protein deduced from chGfi. The chGfi protein is most
homologous to the rat Gfi-1 showing a sequence similarity of 92% over the Zf
region and only two exchanges within the N-terminal 19 aa that constitute the
Gfi-1 repressor domain. Expression of chGfi is only detected in transformed
primary erythroblasts, in erythroid cells of the primitive and definitive lineage
and in bone marrow cells. chGfi activity does not vary significantly during
differentiation of transformed primary erythroblasts of the definitive lineage.
No chGfi expression is detected in cells of the myeloid and lymphoid lineages or 
in a total of nine different organs of adult origin. Our results indicate that
chGfi expression is restricted to erythroid cells of the primitive and definitive
lineage.

PMID: 9305773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 18;15(8):899-910.

Pertubation of B and T cell development and predisposition to lymphomagenesis in 
Emu Bmi1 transgenic mice require the Bmi1 RING finger.

Alkema MJ(1), Jacobs H, van Lohuizen M, Berns A.

Author information: 
(1)The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Division of Molecular Genetics, Amsterdam.

Proviral activation of the Bmi1 gene has implicated Bmi1 as a collaborator of
c-Myc in lymphomagenesis. To determine the effect of Bmi1 overexpression on
hematopoiesis and lymphomagenesis transgenic mice were generated that overexpress
different forms of the Bmi1 protein in their lymphoid compartment. Emu Bmi1
transgenic mice, overexpressing the wild type Bmi1 protein showed a perturbed
lymphoid development and were highly susceptible to B and T cell lymphomagenesis.
Mutational analysis of the Bmi1 protein demonstrated that the conserved
N-terminal RING finger and central part of Bmi1 are essential for its oncogenic
potential whereas the C-terminal Pro-Ser rich region is not required. We have
used provirus tagging in the Emu Bmi1 mice to identify genes that cooperate with 
Bmi1 in lymphomagenesis. MoMLV infection in Emu Bmi1 transgenic mice accelerated 
lymphoma development. Proviral activation of the Pim and Myc genes but not the
Gfi1 gene were frequently observed in these tumors. These results demonstrate
that Bmi1 is a potent oncogene and suggest that it plays an important role in
early lymphoid development.

PMID: 9285685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Development. 1997 May;124(10):2063-73.

The C. elegans gene pag-3 is homologous to the zinc finger proto-oncogene gfi-1.

Jia Y(1), Xie G, McDermott JB, Aamodt E.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana State University Medical Center-Shreveport, 71130-3932, USA.

Mutations in the Caenorhabditis elegans gene pag-3 result in misexpression of
touch receptor-specific genes in the BDU interneurons and in motility defects. We
cloned pag-3 and found that the gene encodes a C2H2-type zinc finger protein
related to the mammalian GFI-1 protein. Sequencing of the three pag-3 alleles
showed that two apparent null alleles encode a nonsense mutation before the zinc 
fingers and a missense mutation in the fourth zinc finger that changes a
coordinating histidine to a tyrosine. The third allele contains a nonsense
mutation in the N-terminal region but is not a null allele. Northern analysis
showed that a single pag-3 transcript of about 1.6 kb is present in embryos and
L1, L2 and L3 larvae. pag-3 message levels were about twofold higher in pag-3
mutants than in wild-type animals, which suggested that pag-3 may negatively
regulate its own expression. pag-3lacZ fusion genes were expressed in the BDU
interneurons, the touch neurons, 11 VA and 11 VB ventral cord motor neurons, two 
AVF interneurons and in unidentified neurons of the retrovesicular ganglion. The 
BDU neurons and the ALM touch neurons are lineal sister cells in the AB.a lineage
and the VA and VB motor neurons are lineal sister cells in the AB.p lineage. The 
VA motor neurons are required for backward movement and the VB motor neurons are 
required for forward movement. Mosaic analysis showed that the wild-type pag-3
gene is required in the AB.p lineage for coordinated movement and in the AB.a
lineage to suppress touch neuron gene expression in the BDU neurons. Because
pag-3 is expressed in both the BDU neurons and in the touch neurons, another
protein(s) not expressed in the touch neurons may interact with pag-3 to repress 
touch neuron gene expression in the BDU neurons. Alternatively, another protein
in the touch receptor cells may inactivate PAG-3 and allow expression of the
touch receptor program. These results show that pag-3 is a temporally regulated
gene that is expressed early in development and functions in multiple types of
neurons. They also strongly suggest that the PAG3 protein is a DNA-binding
protein with properties similar to the mammalian proto-oncogene product GFI-1.

PMID: 9169852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 6;14(9):1023-9.

Proviral integrations at the Evi5 locus disrupt a novel 90 kDa protein with
homology to the Tre2 oncogene and cell-cycle regulatory proteins.

Liao X(1), Du Y, Morse HC 3rd, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Evi5 is a common site of retroviral integration in T-cell lymphomas of AKXD mice.
Mapping studies have localized Evi5 to a region approximately 18 kb upstream of
another common viral integration site, Gfi1, on mouse chromosome 5 (Liao X,
Jenkins NA and Copeland NG, (1995a). J. Virol., 69, 7132-7137). Gfi1 encodes a
zinc finger transcription factor involved in interleukin-2 signaling. To
determine if Evi5 encodes a gene separate from Gfi1 that might also be involved
in T-cell disease, we have searched within the Evi5 locus for novel transcripts. 
A 6.0 kb transcript was identified in these studies that spans the Evi5 locus and
is disrupted by viral integration at Evi5. This transcript is expressed in all
embryonic and adult mouse tissues examined. While blast searches indicated that
Evi5 is a novel gene, homologies were detected between Evi5 and a known oncogene,
Tre2, as well as mammalian and yeast cell cycle regulatory proteins. Evi5 thus
encodes a gene separate from Gfi1 that may also be involved in T-cell disease.

PMID: 9070650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 27;14(8):1003-5.

Cloning of the human Gfi-1 gene and its mapping to chromosome region 1p22.

Roberts T(1), Cowell JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 
Ohio 44195, USA.

Recently the rat and mouse Growth Factor Independence (Gfi-1) genes have been
cloned (Gilks et al., 1993; Zoring et al; 1996). This gene allows cells in
culture to overcome the depletion of growth factors in the culture medium and
maintain their proliferative potential. As part of a cloning strategy to isolated
genes from human chromosome 1p22 which are associated with a constitutional
chromosome translocation from a patient with stage 4S neuroblastoma, we have
identified the human homologue of the Gfi gene and defined a 50 Kb map position
within a well characterised YAC contig from the region. The full length cDNA
sequence is 81% homologous with the rodent counterparts and, at the protein
level, is even more highly conserved.

PMID: 9051000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. In Vivo. 1997 Jan-Feb;11(1):9-12.

Upregulation of Gfi-1, a gene involved in IL-2-independent growth of T cells, in 
a murine retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency syndrome.

Liao X(1), Tang Y, Chattopadhyay SK, Hartley JW, Morse HC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0760, USA.

BACKGROUND: A prominent feature of retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency in mice
(MAIDS) is early polyclonal activation of CD4+ T cells followed by the appearance
of monoclonal lymphomas marked by clonal proviral integrations. These events
appear to occur independent of interleukin-2 (IL-2), suggesting the activity of
an alternative growth-promoting pathway. We studied the possible contributions to
T cell expansion of a gene, Gfi-1, previously shown to confer IL-2 independence
to rat T cell lymphomas.
MATERIALS, RESULTS, CONCLUSIONS: We studied 17 mice with MAIDS that had clonal
populations of T cells. Proviral integrations at Gfi-1 were detected in two
animals. These integrations were associated with enhanced transcription of Gfi-1.
Unexpectedly, elevated levels of Gfi-1 transcripts were also observed in four T
cell lymphomas without detectable integrations at this locus. This suggests that 
IL-2-independent T cell growth in MAIDS may be driven by transcriptional
activation of Gfi-1 by proviral insertion or transactivation.

PMID: 9067766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Virol. 1997 Jan;71(1):9-16.

Characterization of pal-1, a common proviral insertion site in murine leukemia
virus-induced lymphomas of c-myc and Pim-1 transgenic mice.

Scheijen B(1), Jonkers J, Acton D, Berns A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

Insertional mutagenesis with Moloney murine leukemia virus (MoMLV) in c-myc and
Pim-1 transgenic mice permits the identification of oncogenes that collaborate
with the transgenes in lymphomagenesis. The recently identified common insertion 
site pal-1, in MoMLV-induced lymphomas, is located in a region in which several
independent integration clusters are found: eis-1, gfi-1, and evi-5. Proviral
insertions of MoMLV in the different integration clusters upregulate the
transcriptional activity of the Gfi-1 gene, which is located within the pal-1
locus. The eis-1/pal-1/gfi-1/evi-5 locus serves as a target for MoMLV proviral
insertions in pre-B-cell lymphomas of Emu-myc transgenic mice (20%) and in T-cell
lymphomas of H-2K-myc (75%) and Emu-pim-1 (93%) transgenic mice. Many tumors
overexpress both Gfi-1 as well as Myc and Pim gene family members, indicating
that Gfi-1 collaborates with Myc and Pim in lymphomagenesis. Proviral
integrations in the previously identified insertion site bmi-1 are, however,
mutually exclusive with integrations in the eis-1/pal-1/gfi-1/evi-5 locus. This
finding suggests that Bmi-1 and Gfi-1 belong to the same complementation group in
lymphoid transformation.

PMCID: PMC191018
PMID: 8985317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 10;93(25):14569-73.

The Gfi-1 protooncoprotein represses Bax expression and inhibits T-cell death.

Grimes HL(1), Gilks CB, Chan TO, Porter S, Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The Gfi-1 protooncogene encodes a nuclear zinc-finger protein that carries a
novel repressor domain, SNAG, and functions as a position- and
orientation-independent active transcriptional repressor. The Gfi-1 repressor
allows interleukin 2 (IL-2)-dependent T cells to escape G1 arrest induced by IL-2
withdrawal in culture and collaborates with c-myc and pim-1 for the induction of 
retrovirus-induced lymphomas in animals. Here we show that overexpression of
Gfi-1 also inhibits cell death induced by cultivation of IL-2-dependent T-cell
lines in IL-2-deficient media. Similarly, induction of Gfi-1 in primary
thymocytes from mice carrying a metal-inducible Gfi-1 transgene inhibits cell
death induced by cultivation in vitro. The protein and mRNA levels of the
proapoptotic regulator Bax are down-regulated by Gfi-1 in both immortalized
T-cell lines and primary transgenic thymocytes. The repression is direct and
depends on several Gfi-1-binding sites in the p53-inducible Bax promoter. In
addition to Bax, Gfi-1 also represses Bak, another apoptosis-promoting member of 
the Bcl-2 gene family. Therefore, Gfi-1 may inhibit apoptosis by means of its
repression of multiple proapoptotic regulators. The antiapoptotic properties of
Gfi-1 provide a potential explanation for its strong collaboration with c-myc
during oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC26174
PMID: 8962093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6263-72.

The Gfi-1 proto-oncoprotein contains a novel transcriptional repressor domain,
SNAG, and inhibits G1 arrest induced by interleukin-2 withdrawal.

Grimes HL(1), Chan TO, Zweidler-McKay PA, Tong B, Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

The Gfi-1 proto-oncogene is activated by provirus insertion in T-cell lymphoma
lines selected for interleukin-2 (IL-2) independence in culture and in primary
retrovirus-induced thymomas and encodes a nuclear, sequence-specific DNA-binding 
protein. Here we show that Gfi-1 is a position- and orientation-independent
active transcriptional repressor, whose activity depends on a 20-amino-acid
N-terminal repressor domain, coincident with a nuclear localization motif. The
sequence of the Gfi-1 repressor domain is related to the sequence of the
repressor domain of Gfi-1B, a Gfi-1-related protein, and to sequences at the N
termini of the insulinoma-associated protein, IA-1, the homeobox protein Gsh-1,
and the vertebrate but not the Drosophila members of the Snail-Slug protein
family (Snail/Gfi-1, SNAG domain). Although not functionally characterized, these
SNAG-related sequences are also likely to mediate transcriptional repression.
Therefore, the Gfi-1 SNAG domain may be the prototype of a novel family of
evolutionarily conserved repressor domains that operate in multiple cell
lineages. Gfi-1 overexpression in IL-2-dependent T-cell lines allows the cells to
escape from the G1 arrest induced by IL-2 withdrawal. Since a single point
mutation in the SNAG domain (P2A) inhibits both the Gfi-1-mediated
transcriptional repression and the G1 arrest induced by IL-2 starvation, we
conclude that the latter depends on the repressor activity of the SNAG domain.
Induction of Gfi-1 may therefore contribute to T-cell activation and tumor
progression by repressing the expression of genes that inhibit cellular
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC231629
PMID: 8887656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;16(8):4024-34.

Gfi-1 encodes a nuclear zinc finger protein that binds DNA and functions as a
transcriptional repressor.

Zweidler-Mckay PA(1), Grimes HL, Flubacher MM, Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

The Gfi-1 proto-oncogene encodes a zinc finger protein with six C2H2-type,
C-terminal zinc finger motifs and is activated by provirus integration in T-cell 
lymphoma lines selected for interleukin-2 independence in culture and in primary 
retrovirus-induced thymomas. Gfi-1 expression in adult animals is restricted to
the thymus, spleen, and testis and is enhanced in mitogen-stimulated splenocytes.
In this report, we show that Gfi-1 is a 55-kDa nuclear protein that binds DNA in 
a sequence-specific manner. The Gfi-1 binding site, TAAATCAC(A/T)GCA, was defined
via random oligonucleotide selection utilizing a bacterially expressed
glutathione S-transferase-Gfi-1 fusion protein. Binding to this site was
confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNase I footprinting.
Methylation interference analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays with 
mutant oliginucleotides defined the relative importance of specific bases at the 
consensus binding site. Deletion of individual zinc fingers demonstrated that
only zinc fingers 3, 4, and 5 are required for sequence-specific DNA binding.
Potential Gfi-1 binding sites were detected in a large number of eukaryotic
promoter-enhancers, including the enhancers of several proto-oncogenes and
cytokine genes and the enhancer of the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) major
immediate-early promoter, which contains two such sites. HCMV major
immediate-early-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter constructs,
transfected into NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, were repressed by Gfi-1, and the repression
was abrogated by mutation of critical residues in the two Gfi-1 binding sites.
These results suggest that Gfi-1 may play a role in HCMV biology and may
contribute to oncogenesis and T-cell activation by repressing the expression of
genes that inhibit these processes.

PMCID: PMC231398
PMID: 8754800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 1;24(13):2528-34.

MoMuLV proviral integrations identified by Sup-F selection in tumors from
infected myc/pim bitransgenic mice correlate with activation of the gfi-1 gene.

Schmidt T(1), Zörnig M, Beneke R, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Essen, Germany.

Infecting mice with a mutant Moloney murine leukemia virus which contains the
bacterial suppressor tRNA supF in its LTR allows rapid cloning of proviral
integration sites from genomic tumour DNA. In a previous study Emu pim-1/Emu
L-myc bitransgenic mice had been inoculated neonatally with MoMuLV supF virus.
The retroviral infection led to acceleration of lymphomagenesis indicating the
proviral activation of further oncogenes cooperating with myc and pim-1 in tumour
development. Using a functional supF screen for analysis of genomic mouse tumour 
DNA libraries which had been constructed in the phage vector EMBL3A, a common
proviral integration site on mouse chromosome 5 was cloned and found to be
identical to the proviral integration site evi-5 which has recently been
identified in an AKXD T-cell lymphoma and which is located 18 kb upstream of the 
gfi-1 gene. Tumours bearing evi-5 integrations showed an enhanced gfi-1
expression level suggesting that gfi-1 is the target gene for insertions at the
evi-5 locus. Together with three other previously described Moloney integration
clusters all responsible for enhanced gfi-1 expression the number of tumours from
infected double transgenic Emu L-myc/Emu pim-1 transgenic mice with retrovirally 
activated gfi-1 added up to 53% underscoring the role of GFI-1 as an effective
collaborator for MYC and PIM-1 in the process of lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC145976
PMID: 8692692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Oncogene. 1996 Apr 18;12(8):1789-801.

Zinc finger protein GFI-1 cooperates with myc and pim-1 in T-cell lymphomagenesis
by reducing the requirements for IL-2.

Zörnig M(1), Schmidt T, Karsunky H, Grzeschiczek A, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Insitut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps Universität
Marburg, Germany.

The clonality of lymphomas that originate in myc/pim-1 bitransgenic mice due to
synergistic action of both oncogenes indicates the requirement of additional
events for progression to full malignancy. To isolate genes that cooperate with
both myc and pim-1, we have used provirus tagging with E mu L-myc/pim-1 double
transgenic mice. We find accelerated tumour formation in infected animals and
show that the gfi-1 gene and neighbouring loci on mouse chromosome 5 are occupied
by proviruses in about 53% of the tumours leading in all cases to high level
gfi-1 expression. In agreement with data from Gilks et al. (1993) we find that
forced expression of the gfi-1 encoded zinc finger protein in IL-2 dependent
T-cells provokes increased survival upon IL-2 depletion and we present evidence
that this occurs at least in part through stimulation of proliferation. Our data 
suggest that gfi-1 is a proto-oncogene cooperation with both myc and pim-1 genes 
in T-cell lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 8622900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Endocrinology. 1995 Apr;136(4):1805-8.

Prolactin (PRL)-dependent expression of a zinc finger protein-encoding gene,
Gfi-1, in Nb2 lymphoma cells: constitutive expression in autonomous sublines.

Gilks CB(1), Porter SD, Barker C, Tsichlis PN, Gout PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The proliferation of cultured rat Nb2 lymphoma cells is dependent on prolactin
(PRL) acting as the principal growth factor. Previously, PRL-independent Nb2
sublines were obtained by PRL starvation of the parent line and cloning of
surviving cells. Development of PRL independence was in some cases found to be
associated with a reciprocal translocation involving chromosome 14 at breakpoint 
14p22. In the present study, a novel, 14p22 zinc finger protein-encoding gene,
Gfi-1, has been examined for a role in Nb2 cell proliferation. PRL-dependent Nb2 
cells expressed the gene during active growth; in comparison, in stationary,
early G1-arrested cells obtained by an 18 hr lactogen starvation, Gfi-1 gene
expression was markedly decreased. Addition of PRL to such stationary cells led
to induction of Gfi-1 gene expression within a few hr with a maximum in late G1. 
Actively growing cells from 5 different PRL-independent Nb2 sublines, cultured in
chemically defined, mitogen-free medium, expressed the gene constitutively. In
two sublines, carrying the 14p22 rearrangement, the gene was markedly
overexpressed. The results suggest the Gfi-1 gene product has a regulatory role
in Nb2 cell mitogenesis and that unscheduled activation could contribute to loss 
of PRL dependency.

PMID: 7895694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1995;70(3-4):263-7.

Chromosomal localization of a gene, GF1, encoding a novel zinc finger protein
reveals a new syntenic region between man and rodents.

Bell DW(1), Taguchi T, Jenkins NA, Gilbert DJ, Copeland NG, Gilks CB,
Zweidler-McKay P, Grimes HL, Tsichlis PN, Testa JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA.

The Gfi1 gene encodes a zinc finger protein which binds DNA and is involved in
transcriptional regulation. Gfi1 was assigned to the central portion of mouse Chr
5 by interspecific backcross mapping and to human chromosome band 1p22 and rat
chromosome band 14p22 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Comparative
mapping data presented here describes a new syntenic region between man and
rodents.

PMID: 7789186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1759-68.

Progression of interleukin-2 (IL-2)-dependent rat T cell lymphoma lines to
IL-2-independent growth following activation of a gene (Gfi-1) encoding a novel
zinc finger protein.

Gilks CB(1), Bear SE, Grimes HL, Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.

During progression of Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MuLV)-induced rat T cell 
lymphomas, growth selection results in the expansion of cell clones carrying
increasing numbers of integrated proviruses. These new provirus insertions
reproducibly contribute to enhanced growth, allowing the emergence of cell clones
from the initially heterogeneous population of tumor cells. The Mo-MuLV-induced
rat T cell lymphoma lines 2780d and 5675d, which are dependent on interleukin-2
(IL-2) for growth in culture (IL-2d), were placed in IL-2-free medium to select
for IL-2-independent (IL-2i) mutants. Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from 
these mutants, which was hybridized to a Mo-MuLV long terminal repeat probe,
revealed that all mutants carried new provirus insertions (from one to four new
proviruses per cell line). A locus of integration identified through cloning of
the single new provirus detected in one of the IL-2i mutants, 2780i.5, was found 
to be the target of provirus insertion in 1 additional IL-2i cell line of 24
tested. A full-length cDNA of a gene (growth factor independence-1 [Gfi-1])
activated by promoter insertion in the 2780i.5 cells was cloned and shown to
encode a novel zinc finger protein. Gfi-1 is expressed at low levels in IL-2d
cell lines cultured in IL-2-containing medium and at high levels in most IL-2i
cell lines, including the two harboring a provirus at this locus. Gfi-1
expression in adult animals is restricted to the thymus, spleen, and testis. In
mitogen-stimulated splenocytes, Gfi-1 expression begins to rise at 12 h after
stimulation and reaches very high levels after 50 h, suggesting that it may be
functionally involved in events occurring after the interaction of IL-2 with its 
receptor, perhaps during the transition from the G1 to the S phase of the cell
cycle. In agreement with this, Gfi-1 does not induce the expression of IL-2.
Expression of Gfi-1 in 2780d cells following transfer of a Gfi-1/LXSN retrovirus 
construct contributes to the emergence of the IL-2i phenotype.

PMCID: PMC359488
PMID: 8441411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


