
1. Mol Pharmacol. 2016 Apr 1. pii: mol.115.102434. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of GLI1 Expression by Targeting the CRD-BP-GLI1 mRNA Interaction Using
Specific Oligonucleotide.

Mehmood K(1), Akhtar D(1), Mackedenski S(1), Wang C(1), Lee CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Northern British Columbia. (2)University of Northern British
Columbia chow.lee@unbc.ca.

The stabilization of GLI1 mRNA by Coding Region Determinant-Binding Protein
(CRD-BP) through the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is implicated in the
proliferation of colorectal cancer and basal cell carcinoma. Here, we set out to 
characterize the physical interaction between CRD-BP and GLI1 mRNA so as to find 
inhibitors for such interaction. Studies using CRD-BP variants with a point
mutation in the GXXG motif at each KH domain showed that KH1 and KH2 domain are
critical for the binding of GLI1 RNA. The smallest region of GLI1 RNA binding to 
CRD-BP was mapped to nts 320-380. A 37-nt S1 RNA sense oligonucleotide,
containing two distinct stem loops present in nts 320-380 of GLI1 RNA, was found 
to be effective in blocking CRD-BP-GLI1 RNA interaction. Studies using various
competitor RNAs with modifications to S1 RNA oligonucleotide further displayed
that both the sequences and the structure of the two stem loops are important for
CRD-BP-GLI1 RNA binding. The role of the two stem loop motif in influencing
CRD-BP-RNA interaction was further investigated in cells. The 2'-O-methyl
derivative of the S1 RNA oligonucleotide significantly decreased GLI1, c-myc and 
CD44 mRNA levels, in a panel of colon and breast cancer cells. The results from
this study demonstrate the potential importance of the two-stem loop motif as a
target region for the inhibition of the CRD-BP-GLI1 RNA interaction and Hh
signaling pathway. Such results pave the way for the development of novel
inhibitors which act by destabilizing the CRD-BP-GLI1 mRNA interaction.

The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.

PMID: 27036131  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncol Rep. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4709. [Epub ahead of print]

Curcumin inhibits hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in pancreatic
cancer cells via suppression of the hedgehog signaling pathway.

Cao L(1), Xiao X(1), Lei J(2), Duan W(2), Ma Q(2), Li W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong
University Health Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

Hypoxic microenvironment, a common feature of pancreatic cancer, is associated
with tumor proliferation, metastasis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
changes. In recent years, many natural agents, including curcumin, have been
proven to possess the ability to inhibit the progression of pancreatic cancer.
However, whether curcumin is able to suppress hypoxia-induced pancreatic cancer
progression and the underlying mechanisms are still not fully elucidated. The aim
of the present study was to evaluate whether curcumin affects hypoxia-induced EMT
and the activation of Hh signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer. The human
pancreatic cancer cell line Panc-1, was treated with hypoxic condition and
curcumin. Cell proliferation was assessed by the MTT assay. Wound healing assay
and transwell invasion assay were used to detect the migratory and invasive
activity of cancer cells. The EMT-related factors, E-cadherin, N-cadherin,
vimentin were detected by QT-PCR, western blot analysis and immunofluorescence
staining. The Hh signaling-related factors, SHH, SMO and GLI1 were detected by
western blot analysis. The results of present study showed that curcumin could
not only inhibit the hypoxia-induced cell proliferation, migration and invasion
in pancreatic cancer, but also mediate the expression of EMT-related factors. In 
addition, curcumin remarkably inhibited hypoxia-mediated activation of Hh
signaling pathway. Taken together, these data indicate that curcumin plays an
important role in suppressing hypoxia-induced pancreatic cancer metastasis by
inhibiting the Hh signaling pathway. Curcumin might be a potential candidate for 
chemoprevention of this severe disease.

PMID: 27035865  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Curr Genomics. 2016 Feb;17(1):14-32. doi: 10.2174/1389202916666151014221954.

Genetics of Bladder Malignant Tumors in Childhood.

Zangari A(1), Zaini J(2), Gulìa C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Azienda Ospedaliera San Camillo Forlanini, Roma, Italy. (2)Università degli
Studi della Tuscia, dipartimento di scienze biologiche (DEB), Viterbo, Italy.
(3)Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, Dipartimento di Urologia, Roma,
Italy.

Bladder masses are represented by either benign or malignant entities. Malignant 
bladder tumors are frequent causes of disease and death in western countries.
However, in children they are less common. Additionally, different features are
found in childhood, in which non epithelial tumors are more common than
epithelial ones. Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common pediatric bladder tumor, but
many other types of lesions may be found, such as malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT),
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor and neuroblastoma. Other rarer tumors
described in literature include urothelial carcinoma and other epithelial
neoplasms. Rhabdomyosarcoma is associated to a variety of genetic syndromes and
many genes are involved in tumor development. PAX3-FKHR and PAX7-FKHR (P-F)
fusion state has important implications in the pathogenesis and biology of RMS,
and different genes alterations are involved in the pathogenesis of P-F negative 
and embryonal RMS, which are the subsets of tumors most frequently affecting the 
bladder. These genes include p53, MEF2, MYOG, Ptch1, Gli1, Gli3, Myf5, MyoD1,
NF1, NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, FGFR4, PIK3CA, CTNNB1, FBXW7, IGF1R, PDGFRA, ERBB2/4, MET,
BCOR. Malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) usually shows SMARCB1/INI1 alterations.
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene translocations are the most frequently
associated alterations in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT). Few genes
alterations in urothelial neoplasms have been reported in the paediatric
population, which are mainly related to deletion of p16/lnk4, overexpression of
CK20 and overexpression of p53. Here, we reviewed available literature to
identify genes associated to bladder malignancies in children and discussed their
possible relationships with these tumors.

PMCID: PMC4780472 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 27013922  [PubMed]


4. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2016 Mar 24;38(4):1288-1302. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting GLI1 Suppresses Cell Growth and Enhances Chemosensitivity in CD34+
Enriched Acute Myeloid Leukemia Progenitor Cells.

Long B, Wang LX, Zheng FM, Lai SP, Xu DR, Hu Y, Lin DJ, Zhang XZ, Dong L, Long
ZJ, Tong XZ, Liu Q.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Resistance of leukemia stem cells (LSCs) to chemotherapy in
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) causes relapse of disease. Hedgehog
(Hh) signaling plays a critical role in the maintenance and differentiation of
cancer stem cells. Yet its role in AML remains controversial. The purpose of the 
present study is to investigate the role of GLI1, the transcriptional activator
of Hh signaling, in AML progenitor cells and to explore the anti-AML effects of
GLI small-molecule inhibitor GANT61.
METHODS: The expression of GLI1 mRNA and protein were examined in AML progenitor 
cells and normal cells. The proliferation, colony formation, apoptosis and
differentiation of AML progenitor cells were also analyzed in the presence of
GANT61.
RESULTS: Kasumi-1 and KG1a cells, containing more CD34+ cells, expressed higher
level of GLI1 compared to U937 and NB4 cells with fewer CD34+ cells.
Consistently, a positive correlation between the protein levels of GLI1 and CD34 
was validated in the bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMC) of AML patients tested.
GANT61 inhibited the proliferation and colony formation in AML cell lines.
Importantly, GANT61 induced apoptosis in CD34+ enriched Kasumi-1 and KG1a cells, 
whereas it induced differentiation in U937 and NB4 cells. Furthermore, GANT61
enhanced the cytotoxicity of cytarabine (Ara-c) in primary CD34+ AML cells,
indicating that inhibition of GLI1 could be a promising strategy to enhance
chemosensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings suggested that Hh signaling was activated in
AML progenitor cells. GLI1 acted as a potential target for AML therapy.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 27008269  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 21. pii: jbc.M116.720698. [Epub ahead of print]

A positive feed-forward loop associating EGR1 and PDGFA promotes proliferation
and self-renewal in glioblastoma stem cells.

Sakakini N(1), Turchi L(1), Bergon A(1), Holota H(1), Rekima S(1), Lopez F(1),
Paquis P(2), Almairac F(2), Fontaine D(2), Baeza-Kallee N(1), Van
Obberghen-Schilling E(1), Junier MP(1), Chneiweiss H(3), Figarella-Branger D(4), 
Burel-Vandenbos F(2), Imbert J(1), Virolle T(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, France; (2)CHU de NICE, France; (3)CNRS, France; (4)CHU TIMONE,
France. (5)INSERM, France; virolle@unice.fr.

Glioblastomas are the most common primary brain tumors, highly vascularized,
infiltrating and resistant to current therapies. This cancer leads to a fatal
outcome in less than 18 months. The aggressive behavior of glioblastomas,
including resistance to current treatments and tumor recurrence, has been
attributed to glioma stem-like/progenitor cells. The transcription factor Early
Growth Response 1 (EGR1), a member of a zinc-finger transcription factor family, 
has been described as tumor suppressor in gliomas when ectopically overexpressed.
Although EGR1 expression in human glioblastomas has been associated with patient 
survival, its precise location in tumor territories as well as its contribution
to GBM progression remain elusive. In the present study, we show that EGR1
expressing cells are more frequent in high-grade gliomas where the nuclear
expression of EGR1 is restricted to proliferating/progenitor cells. We show in
primary cultures of glioma stem-like cells that EGR1 contributes to stemness
marker expression and proliferation by orchestrating a PDGFA-dependent growth
stimulatory loop. In addition, we demonstrate that EGR1 acts as a positive
regulator of several important genes including SHH, GLI1, GLI2, PDGFA, previously
linked to the maintenance and proliferation of glioma stem-like cells.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 27002148  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Mol Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar;4(3):369-374. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Sonic hedgehog signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma: A pilot study.

Dugum M(1), Hanouneh I(2), McIntyre T(3), Pai R(4), Aucejo F(5), Eghtesad B(5),
Zein N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Digestive Disease Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(5)Transplantation Center, Digestive Disease Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is involved in the pathogenesis of several tumor types;
however, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has not been fully
elucidated. Biomarkers that reflect tumor aggressiveness are of potential value
in selecting HCC patients for liver transplantation (LT). The aim of the present 
study was to assess the tissue expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) biomarkers in
HCC and surrounding non-tumorous liver tissue, and to correlate this expression
with HCC recurrence following LT. Patients who underwent LT for HCC at the
Cleveland Clinic (Cleveland, OH, USA) between 2002 and 2006 were randomly
selected for analysis. Tissue samples were retrieved from the explanted tumorous 
livers. Routine immunohistochemistry was used to detect three specific Shh
pathway biomarkers: The ligand Shh, the receptor patched-1 (Ptch) and the
transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1). Computerized
quantitative analysis was used to evaluate the expression levels of these markers
in HCC and surrounding non-tumorous liver tissue. Analysis of variance was used
to compare the differential tissue expression between patients with and those
without HCC recurrence. A time-to-event analysis was performed to assess the
association of hedgehog biomarker expression with the risk of HCC recurrence
following LT. A total of 53 tissue specimens from 21 patients were analyzed. The 
mean patient age was 57±8 years and 86% of the patients were male. A total of 62%
patients had hepatitis C virus infection, 14% had hepatitis B virus infection,
43% had alcoholic cirrhosis and 91% fulfilled the Milan criteria at the time of
LT. The average follow-up time after LT was 36±15 months, during which 19% of the
patients developed HCC recurrence and 29% died. Shh, Ptch and Gli1 were detected 
in the HCC tissues of all the patients. Ptch was overexpressed in HCC compared
with the surrounding non-tumorous tissue. The statistical power of this study was
unable to associate Shh pathway markers with HCC recurrence following LT. In a
proof-of-concept study, we demonstrated tissue expression of three Shh biomarkers
within HCC tumors, and also identified differences in Ptch expression between
tumor and surrounding non-tumorous tissue. Further larger studies are required to
assess the utility of these biomarkers in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4774427
PMID: 26998285  [PubMed]


7. Hum Pathol. 2016 Apr;50:153-61. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.044. Epub 2015 Dec
29.

Aberrant expression of Sonic hedgehog signaling in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.

Xu X(1), Su J(2), Li R(1), Wang Y(3), Zeng D(1), Wu B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of
Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510515, China. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Gastroenterology, Department of Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China; Department of
Gastroenterology, 534th Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Luoyang,
Henan 471000, China. (3)Division of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China. (4)Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China. Electronic
address: baopingwu@yeah.net.

The SHH signaling pathway is critical for gastrointestinal development and
organic patterning, and dysregulation of SHH pathway molecules has been detected 
in multiple gastrointestinal neoplasms. This study investigated the role of the
SHH signaling pathway in PJS. Expression of SHH, PTCH, and GLI1 was examined by
real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry in 20 normal tissues and 75 colorectal
lesions (25 PJPs, 25 adenomas, and 25 adenocarcinomas). Expression of SHH, PTCH, 
and GLI1 mRNA was higher in PJPs than in normal tissue (P < .05) and gradually
increased along the PJP-adenoma-adenocarcinoma sequence (P < .05). Immunostaining
indicated that SHH expression was present in 60% of PJPs, 72% of adenomas, and
84% of carcinomas, whereas 68% of PJPs, 72% of adenomas, and 88% of carcinomas
exhibited cytoplasmic expression of PTCH. Moreover, high GLI1 expression was
detected in 56% of PJPs, 64% of adenomas, and 80% of carcinomas; and high nuclear
expression of GLI1 was observed in 8 adenomas with atypia and 15 carcinomas.
Increased SHH, PTCH, and GLI1 protein correlated positively with tumor grade (P =
.012, P = .003, and P = .007, respectively), tumor depth (P = .024, P = .007, and
P = .01), and lymph node metastasis (P = .05, P = .015, and P = .005). This study
identified aberrant expression of SHH pathway molecules in PJS, and the findings 
may supply a novel mechanism for the development of PJ polyps.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26997450  [PubMed - in process]


8. Hum Pathol. 2016 Apr;50:43-50. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.08.026. Epub 2015 Nov 
24.

May Sonic Hedgehog proteins be markers for malignancy in uterine smooth muscle
tumors?

Garcia N(1), Bozzini N(1), Baiocchi G(2), da Cunha IW(2), Maciel GA(1), Soares JM
Junior(1), Soares FA(2), Baracat EC(1), Carvalho KC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Structural Gynecology, Disciplina de Ginecologia, 
Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao
Paulo, Brazil 01245-903. (2)CIPE, International Research Center, Hospital A C
Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil 01509-010. (3)Laboratory of Molecular
and Structural Gynecology, Disciplina de Ginecologia, Hospital das Clínicas,
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil 01245-903. 
Electronic address: carvalhokc@gmail.com.

Several studies have demonstrated that the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway (SHH)
plays an important role in tumorigenesis and cellular differentiation. We
analyzed the protein expression of SHH pathway components and evaluated whether
their profile could be useful for the diagnosis, prognosis, or prediction of the 
risk of malignancy for uterine smooth muscle tumors (USMTs). A total of 176
samples (20 myometrium, 119 variants of leiomyoma, and 37 leiomyosarcoma) were
evaluated for the protein expression of the SHH signaling components, HHIP1 (SHH 
inhibitor), and BMP4 (SHH target) by immunohistochemistry. Western blot analysis 
was performed to verify the specificity of the antibodies. We grouped leiomyoma
samples into conventional leiomyomas and unusual leiomyomas that comprise
atypical, cellular, mitotically active leiomyomas and uterine smooth muscle
tumors of uncertain malignant potential. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that
SMO, SUFU, GLI1, GLI3, and BMP4 expression gradually increased depending on to
the histologic tissue type. The protein expression of SMO, SUFU, and GLI1 was
increased in unusual leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma samples compared to normal
myometrium. The inhibitor HHIP1 showed higher expression in myometrium, whereas
only negative or basal expression of SMO, SUFU, GLI1, and GLI3 was detected in
these samples. Strong expression of SHH was associated with poorer overall
survival. Our data suggest that the expression of SHH proteins can be useful for 
evaluating the potential risk of malignancy for USMTs. Moreover, GLI1 and SMO may
serve as future therapeutic targets for women with USMTs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26997437  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Mol Pharm. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Micelle Mixtures for Co-administration of Gemcitabine and GDC-0449 to treat
Pancreatic Cancer.

Karaca M, Dutta R, Ozsoy Y, Mahato RI.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in the development and metastasis
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Although gemcitabine (GEM) has been
used as a first-line therapy for PDAC, its rapid metabolism and short plasma
half-life restrict its use as a single chemotherapy. Combination therapy with
more than one drugs is a promising approach for treating cancer. Herein, we
report the use of methoxy
poly(ethyleneglycol)-block-ploy(2-methyl-2-carboxyl-propylenecarbonate)-graft-dod
ecanol (mPEG-b-PCC-g-DC) copolymer for conjugating GEM and encapsulating an Hh
inhibitor, Vismodegib (GDC-0449) into its hydrophobic core for treating PDAC. Our
objective was to determine whether the mixed micelle formulation of these two
drugs could show better response in inhibiting Hh signaling pathway and
restraining the proliferation and metastasis of pancreatic cancer. The in vivo
stability of GEM significantly increased after conjugation, which resulted in its
increased antitumor efficacy. Almost 80 % of encapsulated GDC-0449 and 19 %
conjugated GEM were released in vitro at pH 5.5 in 48 h in a sustained manner.
The invasion, migration and colony forming features of MIA PaCa-2 cells were
significantly inhibited by micelle mixture carrying GEM and GDC-0449. Remarkable 
increase in PARP cleavage and Bax proved increased apoptosis by this combination 
formulation compared to individual micelles. This combination therapy efficiently
inhibited tumor growth, increased apoptosis and reduced Hh ligands PTCH-1, Gli1, 
and lowered EMT-activator ZEB-1 when injected to athymic nude mice bearing
subcutaneous tumor generated using MIA PaCa-2 cells compared to monotherapy as
observed from immunohistochemical analysis. In conclusion, micelle mixtures
carrying GEM and GDC-0449 have the potential to treat pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 26981724  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Hum Pathol. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S0046-8177(16)00082-4. doi:
10.1016/j.humpath.2016.02.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Translocation t(7;12) as the Sole Chromosomal Abnormality Resulting in ACTB-GLI1 
Fusion in Pediatric Gastric Pericytoma.

Castro E(1), Santiago NC(2), Ferguson LM(3), Rao PH(4), Venkatramani R(5),
López-Terrada D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor
College of Medicine, 6621 Fannin St. MC-1195, Houston, TX 77030. Electronic
address: ecastro@bcm.edu. (2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College
of Medicine, 6621 Fannin St. MC-1195, Houston, TX 77030. Electronic address:
CortesSantiago@bcm.edu. (3)Texas Children's Hospital, Department of Pathology,
Molecular Oncology Laboratory, 6621 Fannin St. AB.185.09, Houston, TX 77030.
Electronic address: lmsuare1@texaschildrens.org. (4)Department of Pediatrics,
Texas Children's Cancer and Hematology Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 6701
Fannin St., Suite 1510, Houston, TX 77030. Electronic address:
PHRAO@texaschildrens.org. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer
and Hematology Center, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine,
6701 Fannin St., Suite 1510, Houston, TX 77030. Electronic address:
venkatra@bcm.edu. (6)Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, 6621 
Fannin St. MC-1195, Houston, TX 77030. Electronic address: doloresl@bcm.edu.

We hereby report an unusual gastric tumor arising from the pyloric wall of the
stomach in a 9-year old child harboring the exceptionally rare translocation
t(7;12) resulting in ACTB-GLI1 gene fusion. This tumor has been previously
classified as pericytoma with t(7;12) and described in 6 patients, two of them
children. We discuss the challenges in recognizing this rare entity and the
importance of the molecular studies in establishing the correct diagnosis. Our
case is the first report of this type arising in the stomach of a child.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26980027  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Mar 9. pii: molcanther.0371.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

MK-4101 - a potent inhibitor of the hedgehog pathway - is highly active against
medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma.

Filocamo G(1), Brunetti M(2), Colaceci F(3), Sasso R(3), Tanori M(4), Pasquali
E(4), Alfonsi R(5), Mancuso M(4), Saran A(4), Lahm A(6), Di Marcotullio L(5),
Steinkuhler C(2), Pazzaglia S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Exiris gessica_filocamo@exiris.it. (2)Exiris. (3)IRBM Science Park.
(4)Laboratory of Biomedical Technologies, Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove
Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA) CR-Casaccia.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University La Sapienza. (6)Independent
Expert.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is implicated in the
pathogenesis of many cancers, including medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma 
(BCC). In this study, using neonatally irradiated Ptch1+/- mice as a model of
Hh-dependent tumors, we investigated the in vivo effects of MK-4101, a novel SMO 
antagonist, for treatment of medulloblastoma and BCC. Results clearly
demonstrated a robust antitumor activity of MK-4101, achieved through the
inhibition of proliferation and induction of extensive apoptosis in tumor cells. 
Of note, beside antitumor activity on transplanted tumors, MK-4101 was highly
efficacious against primary medulloblastoma and BCC developing in the cerebellum 
and skin of Ptch1+/- mice. By identifying the changes induced by MK-4101 in gene 
expression profiles in tumors, we also elucidated the mechanism of action of this
novel, orally administrable compound. MK-4101 targets the Hh pathway in tumor
cells, showing the maximum inhibitory effect on Gli1. MK-4101 also induced
deregulation of cell cycle and block of DNA replication in tumors. Members of the
IGF and Wnt signaling pathways, were among the most highly deregulated genes by
MK-4101, suggesting that the interplay among Hh, IGF and Wnt is crucial in
Hh-dependent tumorigenesis. Altogether, the results of this preclinical study
support a therapeutic opportunity for MK-4101 in the treatment of Hh-driven
cancers, also providing useful information for combination therapy with drugs
targeting pathways cooperating with Hh oncogenic activity.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26960983  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 9;12(3):e1005915. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005915.
eCollection 2016.

Anteroposterior Limb Skeletal Patterning Requires the Bifunctional Action of
SWI/SNF Chromatin Remodeling Complex in Hedgehog Pathway.

Jeon S(1), Seong RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Graded Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling governs vertebrate limb skeletal patterning
along the anteroposterior (AP) axis by regulating the activity of bifunctional
Gli transcriptional regulators. The genetic networks involved in this patterning 
are well defined, however, the epigenetic control of the process by chromatin
remodelers remains unknown. Here, we report that the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling
complex is essential for Shh-driven limb AP patterning. Specific inactivation of 
Srg3/mBaf155, a core subunit of the remodeling complex, in developing limb buds
hampered the transcriptional upregulation of Shh/Gli target genes, including the 
Shh receptor Ptch1 and its downstream effector Gli1 in the posterior limb bud. In
addition, Srg3 deficiency induced ectopic activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway
in the anterior mesenchyme, resulting in loss of progressive asymmetry. These
defects in the Hh pathway accompanied aberrant BMP activity and disruption of
chondrogenic differentiation in zeugopod and autopod primordia. Notably, our data
revealed that dual control of the Hh pathway by the SWI/SNF complex is essential 
for spatiotemporal transcriptional regulation of the BMP antagonist Gremlin1,
which affects the onset of chondrogenesis. This study uncovers the bifunctional
role of the SWI/SNF complex in the Hh pathway to determine the fate of AP
skeletal progenitors.

PMCID: PMC4784730
PMID: 26959361  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cancer Lett. 2016 May 28;375(1):190-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.053. Epub
2016 Mar 2.

PCAF inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis by inhibition of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by targeting Gli-1.

Li Q(1), Liu Z(1), Xu M(1), Xue Y(1), Yao B(1), Dou C(1), Jia Y(1), Wang Y(1), Tu
K(2), Zheng X(3), Yao Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. 
Electronic address: tks0912@foxmail.com. (3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, 
The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. 
Electronic address: xin.zheng.xjtu@gmail.com. (4)Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an
710061, China. Electronic address: yaoyingmin@sina.com.

The p300-CBP-associated factor (PCAF), other than its histone acetyltransferase
(HAT) activity, possesses an intrinsic ubiquitination activity that is involved
in various transcriptional regulators, including the transcription factor
glioma-associated oncogene 1 (Gli1), a well-known regulator of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer. In present research, we
detected that PCAF was down-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues
compared with the adjacent non-tumor tissues and significantly associated with
malignant portal vein invasion (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and poor survival (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) of HCC
patients. Moreover, functional study demonstrated that downregulation of PCAF
facilitated tumor cell migration, invasion via EMT. Further study found that Gli1
as a direct target of PCAF induced EMT and promoted tumor metastasis and
invasion.CONCLUSION: PCAF is an anti-oncogene that plays an important role in the
development of HCC by suppressing HCC cell metastasis and EMT by targeting Gli1, 
which indicates the potential therapeutic value of PCAF for suppression of
metastasis of HCC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26945969  [PubMed - in process]


14. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 2;11(3):e0149919. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149919.
eCollection 2016.

Novel Acylguanidine Derivatives Targeting Smoothened Induce Antiproliferative and
Pro-Apoptotic Effects in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Cells.

Chiarenza A(1), Manetti F(2), Petricci E(2), Ruat M(3), Naldini A(1), Taddei
M(2), Carraro F(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy. (2)Department of Biotechnology Chemistry and Pharmacy, University
of Siena, Siena, Italy. (3)CNRS, UMR-9197, Neuroscience Paris- Saclay Institute, 
Molecules Circuits Department, Signal Transduction and Developmental
Neuropharmacology Team, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. (4)Istituto Toscano Tumori,
Siena, Italy.

The most relevant therapeutic approaches to treat CML rely on the administration 
of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) like Imatinib, which are able to counteract 
the activity of Bcr-Abl protein increasing patient's life expectancy and
survival. Unfortunately, there are some issues TKIs are not able to address;
first of all TKIs are not so effective in increasing survival of patients in
blast crisis, second they are not able to eradicate leukemic stem cells (LSC)
which represent the major cause of disease relapse, and third patients often
develop resistance to TKIs due to mutations in the drug binding site. For all
these reasons it's of primary interest to find alternative strategies to treat
CML. Literature shows that Hedgehog signaling pathway is involved in LSC
maintenance, and pharmacological inhibition of Smoothened (SMO), one of the key
molecules of the pathway, has been demonstrated to reduce Bcr-Abl positive bone
marrow cells and LSC. Consequently, targeting SMO could be a promising way to
develop a new treatment strategy for CML overcoming the limitations of current
therapies. In our work we have tested some compounds able to inhibit SMO, and
among them MRT92 appears to be a very potent SMO antagonist. We found that almost
all our compounds were able to reduce Gli1 protein levels in K-562 and in KU-812 
CML cell lines. Furthermore, they were also able to increase Gli1 and SMO RNA
levels, and to reduce cell proliferation and induce apoptosis/autophagy in both
the tested cell lines. Finally, we demonstrated that our compounds were able to
modulate the expression of some miRNAs related to Hedgehog pathway such as
miR-324-5p and miR-326. Being Hedgehog pathway deeply implicated in the
mechanisms of CML we may conclude that it could be a good therapeutic target for 
CML and our compounds seem to be promising antagonists of such pathway.

PMCID: PMC4774938
PMID: 26934052  [PubMed - in process]


15. Methods Cell Biol. 2016;132:147-64. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2015.10.001. Epub 2015
Dec 24.

Assessing Smoothened-mediated Hedgehog signaling in zebrafish.

Tena TC(1), Philipp M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University, Ulm,
Germany.

Smoothened belongs to the class of atypical G protein-coupled receptors and
serves as the transducing molecule in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. Hh proteins
comprise a family of secreted, cholesterol-modified ligands, which act both as
morphogens and as signaling molecules. Binding of Hh proteins to their direct
receptor, the transmembrane protein Patched-1, relieves Smoothened from tonal
inhibition by Patched-1 and causes the translocation of Smoothened into the
cilium. Here, the Hh signaling cascade is initiated and results in
transcriptional activation of Hh target genes such as gli1 or patched-1. This
induces a plethora of physiological outcomes including normal embryonic
development, but also cancer, which is the reason why scientists aim to develop
strategies to manipulate as well as monitor Smoothened-mediated Hh signaling. The
zebrafish has emerged as a valuable tool for the assessment of
Smoothened-mediated Hh signaling. In this chapter we thus describe how
Smoothened-mediated Hh signaling can be monitored and also quantified using
zebrafish embryos.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26928543  [PubMed - in process]


16. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Feb 27;17(3). pii: E308. doi: 10.3390/ijms17030308.

Tamoxifen Treatment of Breast Cancer Cells: Impact on Hedgehog/GLI1 Signaling.

Villegas VE(1,)(2,)(3), Rondón-Lagos M(4,)(5), Annaratone L(6), Castellano I(7), 
Grismaldo A(8), Sapino A(9,)(10), Zaphiropoulos PG(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge
14183, Sweden. victoria.villegas@urosario.edu.co. (2)Doctoral Program in
Biomedical Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá 11001000, Colombia.
victoria.villegas@urosario.edu.co. (3)Faculty of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá 11001000, Colombia.
victoria.villegas@urosario.edu.co. (4)Faculty of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá 11001000, Colombia.
srondonl@unito.it. (5)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Via
Santena 7, 10126 Turin, Italy. srondonl@unito.it. (6)Department of Medical
Sciences, University of Turin, Via Santena 7, 10126 Turin, Italy.
laura.annaratone@unito.it. (7)Department of Medical Sciences, University of
Turin, Via Santena 7, 10126 Turin, Italy. isabella.castellano@unito.it.
(8)Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá
11001000, Colombia. mabel.grismaldo@urosario.edu.co. (9)Department of Medical
Sciences, University of Turin, Via Santena 7, 10126 Turin, Italy.
anna.sapino@unito.it. (10)Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment (IRCC),
Strada Provinciale 142, 10060 Candiolo, Italy. anna.sapino@unito.it.
(11)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge
14183, Sweden. peter.zaphiropoulos@ki.se.

The selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulator tamoxifen (TAM) has become the
standard therapy for the treatment of ER+ breast cancer patients. Despite the
obvious benefits of TAM, a proportion of patients acquire resistance to
treatment, and this is a significant clinical problem. Consequently, the
identification of possible mechanisms involved in TAM-resistance should help the 
development of new therapeutic targets. In this study, we present in vitro data
using a panel of different breast cancer cell lines and demonstrate the
modulatory effect of TAM on cellular proliferation and expression of Hedgehog
signaling components, including the terminal effector of the pathway, the
transcription factor GLI1. A variable pattern of expression following TAM
administration was observed, reflecting the distinctive properties of the ER+ and
ER- cell lines analyzed. Remarkably, the TAM-induced increase in the
proliferation of the ER+ ZR-75-1 and BT474 cells parallels a sustained
upregulation of GLI1 expression and its translocation to the nucleus. These
findings, implicating a TAM-GLI1 signaling cross-talk, could ultimately be
exploited not only as a means for novel prognostication markers but also in
efforts to effectively target breast cancer subtypes.

PMID: 26927093  [PubMed - in process]


17. BMC Dev Biol. 2016 Feb 24;16(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s12861-016-0106-0.

Computational prediction and experimental validation of novel Hedgehog-responsive
enhancers linked to genes of the Hedgehog pathway.

Gurdziel K(1,)(2), Vogt KR(1), Schneider G(1), Richards N(1), Gumucio DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (2)Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (3)Department 
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, 
USA. dgumucio@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, acting through three homologous 
transcription factors (GLI1, GLI2, GLI3) in vertebrates, plays multiple roles in 
embryonic organ development and adult tissue homeostasis. At the level of the
genome, GLI factors bind to specific motifs in enhancers, some of which are
hundreds of kilobases removed from the gene promoter. These enhancers integrate
the Hh signal in a context-specific manner to control the spatiotemporal pattern 
of target gene expression. Importantly, a number of genes that encode Hh pathway 
molecules are themselves targets of Hh signaling, allowing pathway regulation by 
an intricate balance of feed-back activation and inhibition. However,
surprisingly few of the critical enhancer elements that control these pathway
target genes have been identified despite the fact that such elements are central
determinants of Hh signaling activity. Recently, ChIP studies have been carried
out in multiple tissue contexts using mouse models carrying FLAG-tagged GLI
proteins (GLI(FLAG)). Using these datasets, we tested whether a meta-analysis of 
GLI binding sites, coupled with a machine learning approach, could reveal genomic
features that could be used to empirically identify Hh-regulated enhancers linked
to loci of the Hh signaling pathway.
RESULTS: A meta-analysis of four existing GLI(FLAG) datasets revealed a library
of GLI binding motifs that was substantially more restricted than the potential
sites predicted by previous in vitro binding studies. A machine learning method
(kmer-SVM) was then applied to these datasets and enriched k-mers were identified
that, when applied to the mouse genome, predicted as many as 37,000 potential Hh 
enhancers. For functional analysis, we selected nine regions which were annotated
to putative Hh pathway molecules and found that seven exhibited GLI-dependent
activity, indicating that they are directly regulated by Hh signaling (78 %
success rate).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that Hh enhancer regions share common sequence
features. The kmer-SVM machine learning approach identifies those features and
can successfully predict functional Hh regulatory regions in genomic DNA
surrounding Hh pathway molecules and likely, other Hh targets. Additionally, the 
library of enriched GLI binding motifs that we have identified may allow improved
identification of functional GLI binding sites.

PMCID: PMC4765071
PMID: 26912062  [PubMed - in process]


18. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 22;6:22184. doi: 10.1038/srep22184.

Prognostic role of Gli1 expression in solid malignancies: a meta-analysis.

Cheng J(1), Gao J(2), Tao K(2), Yu P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400038 China. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, 430022 China.

Gli1 is a downstream transcriptional factor of Sonic hedgehog pathway in
mammalians, and has been recognized as a proliferative indicator of
carcinogenesis. However, its actual role in prognosis among solid malignancies
remains unclear. Therefore we performed this meta-analysis aiming to discover the
correlation between Gli1 positivity and clinical prognosis in patients suffering 
from diverse carcinomas. A total of 39 studies containing 4496 cases were
selected into our quantitative analysis via electronic database search. Original 
data of 3-year, 5-year, 10-year overall survival and disease-free survival were
extracted and calculated using odds ratio and Mantel-Haenszel model. Subgroup
analysis was also conducted to clarify the possible confounding factors. P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05
was considered significant in statistics. Gli1 redundancy was associated with
worse 3-year, 5-year, 10-year overall survival and disease-free survival in solid
malignancies. Different source regions, sample-size, mean-age and detection
approaches had no impact on the negative prognostic effect of Gli1
over-expression. Nevertheless, stratified by cancer type and subcellular
localization, cytoplasmic Gli1 expression and Gli1 positivity in intracranial
tumors was not correlated to poorer 3-year and 5-year prognosis. The
over-expression of Gli1 is a credible indicator of poorer prognosis in most of
solid malignancies, irrespective of intracranial tumors.

PMCID: PMC4762019
PMID: 26899488  [PubMed - in process]


19. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Nov 15;8(11):21379-85. eCollection 2015.

Dysregulation of hedgehog signaling pathway related components in the evolution
of colonic carcinogenesis.

Zhang X(1), Zhang SS(2), Wei GJ(1), Deng ZM(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Huzhou First People's Hospital Huzhou 313000, 
Zhejiang Province, P. R. China. (2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Huzhou First People's Hospital Huzhou 313000, Zhejiang Province, P. R. China.

Previous studies report controversial role of Hedgehog (HH) signaling in the
progression of colon cancer. This study aimed to investigate the expressions of
smoothened (SMO) and downstream glioma-associated oncogene homology-1 (GLI1) in
colon cancer, colonic adenoma and normal tissues. Colon cancer and normal tissue 
samples were collected from 49 patients with colon cancer while colonic adenoma
tissue samples were obtained from 34 patients with colonic adenoma. Then the
expressions of SMO and GLI1 were investigated using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
For the detection of SMO and GLI1 expression, IHC staining results indicated that
SMO was mainly expressed on the membrane while GLI1 was mainly expressed in the
cytoplasm. The positive rates of SMO and GLI1 protein expressions were
significantly increased in colon cancer tissue and colonic adenoma tissue when
compared with normal colon tissue. In contrast, the significant difference was
not found in the positive rates of SMO and GLI1 protein expressions between colon
cancer tissue and colonic adenoma tissue. More importantly, it was found that SMO
and GLI1 expressions possibly increased gradually from the normal colon to
colonic adenoma to the colon cancer. Furthermore, no distinct correlations were
detected between the expression levels of SMO and GLI1 and clinicopathological
parameters, including age, gender, differentiation and Dukes stage. The present
results provided some new information to the possible role of HH signaling in
colon cancer progression. SMO and GLI1 maybe suggested asbiomarkers to identify
colon cancerous, precancerous and normal tissues as well astherapeutic targets
for colon cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4723925
PMID: 26885080  [PubMed]


20. Neurochem Res. 2016 Feb;41(1-2):450-62. doi: 10.1007/s11064-016-1861-9. Epub 2016
Feb 11.

Keratan Sulfate Regulates the Switch from Motor Neuron to Oligodendrocyte
Generation During Development of the Mouse Spinal Cord.

Hashimoto H(1), Ishino Y(1), Jiang W(1,)(2), Yoshimura T(1,)(2), Takeda-Uchimura 
Y(3), Uchimura K(3), Kadomatsu K(3), Ikenaka K(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. (2)Department of
Physiological Sciences, School of Life Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Hayama, Kanagawa, 240-0193, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Aichi, 466-8550, Japan. (4)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics,
National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan.
ikenaka@nips.ac.jp. (5)Department of Physiological Sciences, School of Life
Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Hayama,
Kanagawa, 240-0193, Japan. ikenaka@nips.ac.jp.

Keratan sulfate (KS) is a sulfated glycosaminoglycan and has been shown to bind
to sonic hedgehog (Shh), which act as a morphogen to regulate the embryonic
spinal cord development. We found highly sulfated KS was present in the floor
plate (including lateral floor plate) and the notochord . This expression
colocalized with Shh expression. To understand the roles of KS, we analyzed the
embryonic spinal cord of GlcNAc6ST-1, KS chain synthesizing enzyme, knock-out
(KO) mice. At E12.5, the pMN domain, whose formation is controlled by Shh
signaling, became shifted ventrally in GlcNAc6ST-1 KO mice. In addition, the
expression patterns of Patched1 and Gli1, two Shh signaling reporter genes,
differed between wild type (WT) and GlcNAc6ST-1 KO mice at E12.5. Next, we
focused on cell types generated from the pMN domain; namely, motor neurons and
subsequently oligodendrocytes. The number of PDGFRa(+) [a marker for
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs)] cells was low in the E12.5 mutant spinal 
cord, while motor neuron production was increased. Thus the switch from motor
neuron generation to OPC generation was delayed in the pMN domain. Furthermore,
we investigated the cause for this delayed switch in the pMN domain. The number
of Olig2, Nkx2.2 double-positive cells was less in GlcNAc6ST-1 KO mice than in WT
mice. In contrast, the number of Olig2, Neurogenin2 (Ngn2) double-positive cells 
related to the motor neuron specification was significantly greater in the KO
mice. These results indicate that KS is important for the late phase Shh
signaling and contributes to motor neuron to OPC generation switch.

PMID: 26869039  [PubMed - in process]


21. Cell Death Differ. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.175. [Epub ahead of print]

A genome scale RNAi screen identifies GLI1 as a novel gene regulating vorinostat 
sensitivity.

Falkenberg KJ(1), Newbold A(1), Gould CM(2), Luu J(2), Trapani JA(3,)(4),
Matthews GM(1,)(4), Simpson KJ(2,)(4), Johnstone RW(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Program, The Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St Andrews
Place, East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia. (2)Victorian Centre for Functional
Genomics, The Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St Andrews Place, East Melbourne,
VIC 3002, Australia. (3)Cancer Immunology Program, The Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, St Andrews Place, East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia. (4)Sir Peter
MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC
3052, Australia.

Vorinostat is an FDA-approved histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) that has
proven clinical success in some patients; however, it remains unclear why certain
patients remain unresponsive to this agent and other HDACis. Constitutive STAT
(signal transducer and activator of transcription) activation, overexpression of 
prosurvival Bcl-2 proteins and loss of HR23B have been identified as potential
biomarkers of HDACi resistance; however, none have yet been used to aid the
clinical utility of HDACi. Herein, we aimed to further elucidate
vorinostat-resistance mechanisms through a functional genomics screen to identify
novel genes that when knocked down by RNA interference (RNAi) sensitized cells to
vorinostat-induced apoptosis. A synthetic lethal functional screen using a
whole-genome protein-coding RNAi library was used to identify genes that when
knocked down cooperated with vorinostat to induce tumor cell apoptosis in
otherwise resistant cells. Through iterative screening, we identified 10
vorinostat-resistance candidate genes that sensitized specifically to vorinostat.
One of these vorinostat-resistance genes was GLI1, an oncogene not previously
known to regulate the activity of HDACi. Treatment of vorinostat-resistant cells 
with the GLI1 small-molecule inhibitor, GANT61, phenocopied the effect of GLI1
knockdown. The mechanism by which GLI1 loss of function sensitized tumor cells to
vorinostat-induced apoptosis is at least in part through interactions with
vorinostat to alter gene expression in a manner that favored apoptosis. Upon GLI1
knockdown and vorinostat treatment, BCL2L1 expression was repressed and
overexpression of BCL2L1 inhibited GLI1-knockdown-mediated vorinostat
sensitization. Taken together, we present the identification and characterization
of GLI1 as a new HDACi resistance gene, providing a strong rationale for
development of GLI1 inhibitors for clinical use in combination with HDACi
therapy.Cell Death and Differentiation advance online publication, 12 February
2016; doi:10.1038/cdd.2015.175.

PMID: 26868908  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Orthop Traumatol Surg Res. 2016 Feb;102(1):91-7. doi: 10.1016/j.otsr.2015.11.004.
Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Side-to-side variation in normal femoral morphology: 3D CT analysis of
122 femurs.

Dimitriou D(1), Tsai TY(1), Yue B(2), Rubash HE(1), Kwon YM(1), Li G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering laboratory, department of orthopaedic surgery, Massachusetts
general hospital/Harvard medical school of Boston, 55, Fruit Street, GRJ 1215,
Boston, Massachusetts MA 02114, USA. (2)Department of orthopedics, Ninth People's
hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong university school of medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Bioengineering laboratory, department of orthopaedic surgery, Massachusetts
general hospital/Harvard medical school of Boston, 55, Fruit Street, GRJ 1215,
Boston, Massachusetts MA 02114, USA. Electronic address: gli1@mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: The contralateral femur is often used as reference for reconstruction
in unilateral hip joint pathology. The objective of this study was to quantify
the side-to-side variation in proximal femur. We hypothesized that significant
side-to-side differences exist between left and right femur with implications for
preoperative planning and leg length discrepancy following hip arthroplasty.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CT-based 3D femoral models were reconstructed for
122 paired femurs in 61 young healthy subjects (46.9±6.8 years) with no history
of hip pathology. Side-to-side differences of several femoral morphologic
parameters, including femoral head diameter, femoral anteversion, horizontal
offset and femoral head center location, were compared and correlated with
demographic factors using multiple linear regression.
RESULTS: Significant side-to-side differences (P<0.01) were found in femoral
anteversion (4.3±3.8°; range: 0.2° to 17.3°), horizontal offset (2.5±2.1mm;
range: 0.1 to 10.3mm), and femoral head center location (7.1±3.8mm; range: 0.5 to
19.4mm). The difference in femoral anteversion was strongly correlated with the
difference in neck diameter (R(2)=0.79), whereas the difference in horizontal
femoral offset was highly correlated with the head diameter difference
(R(2)=0.72). Femoral head center difference was correlated with the femoral
anteversion, horizontal offset and neck-shaft-angle difference (R(2)=0.82).
DISCUSSION: Relying on the anatomic landmarks of the contralateral femur during
hip arthroplasty may not necessarily result in restoration of native anatomy and 
leg-length. Knowledge of the baseline side-to-side asymmetry could provide a
range of error that would be tolerable following hip reconstruction.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV.
TYPE OF STUDY: Retrospective observational study.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26867707  [PubMed - in process]


23. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 7. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7228. [Epub ahead of print]

The sonic hedgehog signaling pathway stimulates anaplastic thyroid cancer cell
motility and invasiveness by activating Akt and c-Met.

Williamson AJ(1), Doscas ME(2), Ye J(2), Heiden KB(3), Xing M(4), Li Y(5), Prinz 
RA(6), Xu X(7,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rush Medical College, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Rush University Medical Center,
Chicago, IL, USA. (3)Department of General Surgery, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department
of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center and Department of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (6)Department of Surgery, 
NorthShore University Health System, Evanston, IL, USA. (7)Center for Comparative
Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 
Province, China.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is highly activated in thyroid neoplasms and
promotes thyroid cancer stem-like cell phenotype, but whether the Shh pathway
regulates thyroid tumor cell motility and invasiveness remains unknown. Here, we 
report that the motility and invasiveness of two anaplastic thyroid tumor cell
lines, KAT-18 and SW1736, were inhibited by two inhibitors of the Shh pathway
(cyclopamine and GANT61). Consistently, the cell motility and invasiveness was
decreased by Shh and Gli1 knockdown, and was increased by Gli1 overexpression in 
KAT-18 cells. Mechanistic studies revealed that Akt and c-Met phosphorylation was
decreased by a Gli1 inhibitor and by Shh and Gli1 knockdown, but was increased by
Gli1 overexpression. LY294002, a PI-3 kinase inhibitor, and a c-Met inhibitor
inhibited the motility and invasiveness of Gli1-transfected KAT-18 cells more
effectively than the vector-transfected cells. Knockdown of Snail, a
transcription factor regulated by the Shh pathway, led to decreased cell motility
and invasiveness in KAT-18 and SW1736 cells. However, key
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers including E-cadherin and
vimentin as well as Slug were not affected by cyclopamine and GANT61 in either
SW1736 or WRO82, a well differentiated follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line.
Our data suggest that the Shh pathway-stimulated thyroid tumor cell motility and 
invasiveness is largely mediated by AKT and c-Met activation with little
involvement of EMT.

PMID: 26859575  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb 6. doi: 10.1002/stem.2311. [Epub ahead of print]

Peribiliary Glands as a Niche of Extra-Pancreatic Precursors Yielding
Insulin-Producing Cells in Experimental and Human Diabetes.

Carpino G(1), Puca R(2), Cardinale V(2), Renzi A(3), Scafetta G(2), Nevi L(2),
Rossi M(4), Berloco PB(4), Ginanni Corradini S(5), Reid LM(6), Maroder M(2),
Gaudio E(3), Alvaro D(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome "Foro
Italico", Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and
Biotechnologies, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (3)Department of
Anatomical, Histological, Forensic Medicine and Orthopedics Sciences, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of General Surgery and Organ
Transplantation, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of
Clinical Medicine, Gastroenterology Division, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy. (6)Departments of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Program in Molecular
Biology and Biotechnology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine,
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, US. (7)Eleonora Lorillard Spencer-Cenci Foundation, Rome,
00100, Italy.

Peribiliary glands (PBGs) are niches in the biliary tree and containing
heterogeneous endodermal stem/progenitors cells that can differentiate, in vitro 
and in vivo, towards pancreatic islets. The aim of this study was to evaluate, in
experimental and human diabetes, proliferation of cells in PBGs and
differentiation of the biliary tree stem/progenitor cells (BTSCs) towards
insulin-producing cells. Diabetes was generated in mice by intraperitoneal
injection of a single dose of 200 mg/kg (N=12) or 120 mg/kg (N=12) of
streptozotocin. Liver, pancreas and extrahepatic biliary trees were en bloc
dissected and examined. Cells in PBGs proliferated in experimental diabetes, and 
their proliferation was greatest in the PBGs of the hepato-pancreatic ampulla,
and inversely correlated with the pancreatic islet area. In rodents, the cell
proliferation in PBGs was characterized by the expansion of Sox9-positive
stem/progenitor cells that gave rise to insulin-producing cells.
Insulin-producing cells were located mostly in PBGs in the portion of the biliary
tree closest to the duodenum, and their appearance was associated with
up-regulation of MafA and Gli1 gene expression. In patients with type 2 diabetes,
PBGs at the level of the hepato-pancreatic ampulla contained cells showing signs 
of proliferation and pancreatic fate commitment. In vitro, high glucose
concentrations induced the differentiation of human BTSCs cultures towards
pancreatic beta cell fates. The cells in PBGs respond to diabetes with
proliferation and differentiation towards insulin-producing cells indicating that
PBG niches may rescue pancreatic islet impairment in diabetes. These findings
offer important implications for the patho-physiology and complications of this
disease. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26850087  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 5;6:20600. doi: 10.1038/srep20600.

Nanoquinacrine induced apoptosis in cervical cancer stem cells through the
inhibition of hedgehog-GLI1 cascade: Role of GLI-1.

Nayak A(1), Satapathy SR(1), Das D(1), Siddharth S(1), Tripathi N(2), Bharatam
PV(2,)(3), Kundu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Division, KIIT School of Biotechnology, KIIT University,
Campus-11, Patia, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, 751024, India. (2)Department of
Pharmacoinformatics, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(NIPER), Sector 67, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali, Punjab 160062, India. (3)Department of 
Medicinal Chemistry, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(NIPER), Sector 67, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali, Punjab 160062, India.

To improve the pharmacokinetics and to study the anti-cervical cancer and
anti-stem cells (CSCs) mechanism of Quinacrine (QC), a spherical nano particle of
QC (i.e. NQC) was prepared and characterized. QC and NQC showed higher
cytotoxicity in multiple cancer cells than the normal epithelial cells. NQC
exhibited more toxicity in cervical cancer cells and its CSCs than QC. A
dose-dependent decreased expression of Hedgehog-GLI (HH-GLI) components were
noted in NQC treated HeLa cells and its CSCs. NQC increased the expressions of
negatively regulated HH-GLI components (GSK3ß, PTEN) and caused apoptosis in
CSCs. Reduction of GLI1 at mRNA and promoter level were noted after NQC exposure.
The expressions of HH-GLI components, GLI1 promoter activity and apoptosis were
unaltered in NQC treated GLI1-knockdown cells. In silico, cell based and in vitro
reconstitution assay revealed that NQC inhibit HH-GLI cascade by binding to the
consensus sequence (5'GACCACCCA3') of GLI1 in GLI-DNA complex through
destabilizing DNA-GLI1 complex. NQC reduced the tumors size and proliferation
marker Ki-67 in an in vivo xenograft mice model. Thus, NQC induced apoptosis in
cancers through inhibition of HH-GLI cascade by GLI1. Detail interaction of
QC-DNA-GLI complex can pave path for anticancer drug design.

PMCID: PMC4742869
PMID: 26846872  [PubMed - in process]


26. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 29. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7070. [Epub ahead of print]

The energy sensor AMPK regulates Hedgehog signaling in human cells through a
unique Gli1 metabolic checkpoint.

Di Magno L(1), Basile A(2), Coni S(2), Manni S(2), Sdruscia G(1), D'Amico D(2),
Antonucci L(2), Infante P(1), De Smaele E(3), Cucchi D(3), Ferretti E(3), Di
Marcotullio L(2,)(1,)(4), Screpanti I(2,)(1,)(4), Canettieri G(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Life Nano Science@Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 00161 
Roma, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome,
00161 Rome, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of
Rome, 00161 Rome, Italy. (4)Istituto Pasteur, Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti,
Sapienza University of Rome, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog signaling controls proliferation of cerebellar granule cell precursors
(GCPs) and its aberrant activation is a leading cause of Medulloblastoma, the
most frequent pediatric brain tumor. We show here that the energy sensor AMPK
inhibits Hh signaling by phosphorylating a single residue of human Gli1 that is
not conserved in other species.Studies with selective agonists and genetic
deletion have revealed that AMPK activation inhibits canonical Hh signaling in
human, but not in mouse cells. Indeed we show that AMPK phosphorylates Gli1 at
the unique residue Ser408, which is conserved only in primates but not in other
species. Once phosphorylated, Gli1 is targeted for proteasomal degradation.
Notably, we show that selective AMPK activation inhibits Gli1-driven
proliferation and that this effect is linked to Ser408 phosphorylation, which
represents a key metabolic checkpoint for Hh signaling.Collectively, this data
unveil a novel mechanism of inhibition of Gli1 function, which is exclusive for
human cells and may be exploited for the treatment of Medulloblastoma or other
Gli1 driven tumors.

PMID: 26843621  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7062. [Epub ahead of print]

In vitro and in vivo inhibition of breast cancer cell growth by targeting the
Hedgehog/GLI pathway with SMO (GDC-0449) or GLI (GANT-61) inhibitors.

Benvenuto M(1), Masuelli L(2), De Smaele E(2), Fantini M(1), Mattera R(1,)(3),
Cucchi D(3), Bonanno E(4), Di Stefano E(2), Frajese GV(5), Orlandi A(4),
Screpanti I(3), Gulino A(3), Modesti A(1), Bei R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of Rome
"Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of
Rome "Sapienza", Rome, Italy. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of 
Rome "Sapienza", Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention,
University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Physical
Education, Human Sciences and Health, University of Rome "Foro Italico", Rome,
Italy.

Aberrant Hedgehog (Hh)/glioma-associated oncogene (GLI) signaling has been
implicated in cancer progression. Here, we analyzed GLI1, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)
and NF-<U+03BA>B expression in 51 breast cancer (ductal carcinoma) tissues using
immunohistochemistry. We found a positive correlation between nuclear GLI1
expression and tumor grade in ductal carcinoma cases. Cytoplasmic Shh staining
significantly correlated with a lower tumor grade. Next, the in vitro effects of 
two Hh signaling pathway inhibitors on breast cancer cell lines were evaluated
using the Smoothened (SMO) antagonist GDC-0449 and the direct GLI1 inhibitor
GANT-61. GDC-0449 and GANT-61 exhibited the following effects: a) inhibited
breast cancer cell survival; b) induced apoptosis; c) inhibited Hh pathway
activity by decreasing the mRNA expression levels of GLI1 and Ptch and inhibiting
the nuclear translocation of GLI1; d) increased/decreased EGFR and ErbB2 protein 
expression, reduced p21-Ras and ERK1/ERK2 MAPK activities and inhibited AKT
activation; and e) decreased the nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B. However, GANT-61
exerted these effects more effectively than GDC-0449. The in vivo antitumor
activities of GDC-0449 and GANT-61 were analyzed in BALB/c mice that were
subcutaneously inoculated with mouse breast cancer (TUBO) cells. GDC-0449 and
GANT-61 suppressed tumor growth of TUBO cells in BALB/c mice to different
extents. These findings suggest that targeting the Hh pathway using antagonists
that act downstream of SMO is a more efficient strategy than using antagonists
that act upstream of SMO for interrupting Hh signaling in breast cancer.

PMID: 26843616  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2016;2016:1013045. doi: 10.1155/2016/1013045. Epub 2015 
Dec 29.

CD44, Sonic Hedgehog, and Gli1 Expression Are Prognostic Biomarkers in Gastric
Cancer Patients after Radical Resection.

Jian-Hui C(1), Er-Tao Z(1), Si-Le C(1), Hui W(1), Kai-Ming W(1), Xin-Hua Z(1),
Chuang-Qi C(1), Shi-Rong C(1), Yu-Long H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastrointestinal Surgery Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China; Gastric Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

Aim. CD44 and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling are important for gastric cancer
(GC). However, the clinical impact, survival, and recurrence outcome of CD44,
Shh, and Gli1 expressions in GC patients following radical resection have not
been elucidated. Patients and Methods. CD44, Shh, and Gli1 protein levels were
quantified by immunohistochemistry (IHC). The association between CD44, Shh, and 
Gli1 expression and clinicopathological features or prognosis of GC patients was 
determined. The biomarker risk score was calculated by the IHC staining score of 
CD44, Shh, and Gli1 protein. Results. The IHC positive staining of CD44, Shh, and
Gli1 proteins was correlated with larger tumour size, worse gross type and
histological type, and advanced TNM stage, which also predicted shorter overall
survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) after radical resection.
Multivariate analysis indicated the Gli1 protein and Gli1, CD44 proteins were
predictive biomarkers for OS and DFS, respectively. If biomarker risk score was
taken into analysis, it was the independent prognostic factor for OS and DFS.
Conclusions. CD44 and Shh signaling are important biomarkers for tumour
aggressiveness, survival, and recurrence in GC.

PMCID: PMC4709647
PMID: 26839535  [PubMed]


29. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Feb 2. pii: molcanther.0583.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Antagonizing the Hedgehog Pathway with Vismodegib Impairs Malignant Pleural
Mesothelioma Growth In Vivo by Affecting Stroma.

Meerang M(1), Bérard K(1), Felley-Bosco E(2), Lauk O(1), Vrugt B(3), Boss A(4),
Kenkel D(4), Broggini-Tenzer A(5), Stahel RA(6), Arni S(1), Weder W(1), Opitz
I(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zürich. (2)Laboratory of
Molecular Oncology, University Hospital Zürich. (3)Institute of Surgical
Pathology, University Hospital Zürich. (4)Institute of Diagnostic and
Interventional Radiology, University Hospital Zürich. (5)Clinic for Oncology,
University Hospital Zürich. (6)Clinic for Oncology, University Hospital Zurich.
(7)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Zürich
Isabelle.Schmitt-Opitz@usz.ch.

An autocrine driven upregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been 
described in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM), in which the ligand, desert
hedgehog (DHH), was produced from tumor cells. However, our investigation
revealed that the Hh pathway is activated in both tumor and stroma of MPM tumor
specimens and an orthotopic immunocompetent rat MPM model. This was demonstrated 
by positive immunohistochemical staining of Glioma associated oncogene 1 (GLI1)
and Patched1 (PTCH1) in both tumor and stromal fractions. DHH was predominantly
expressed in the tumor fractions. To further investigate the role of the Hh
pathway in MPM stroma, we antagonized Hh signaling in the rat model of MPM using 
a Hh antagonist, vismodegib, (100 mg/kg peroral). Daily treatment with vismodegib
efficiently downregulated Hh target genes, Gli1, Hedgehog Interacting Protein
(Hhip) and Ptch1, and caused a significant reduction of tumor volume, and tumor
growth delay. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed that vismodegib treatment
primarily down regulated GLI1 and HHIP in the stromal compartment along with a
reduced expression of previously described fibroblast Hh responsive genes such as
Fibronectin (Fn1) and Vegf. Primary cells isolated from the rat model cultured in
3%O2 continued to express Dhh but did not respond to vismodegib in vitro.
However, culture supernatant from these cells stimulated Gli1, Ptch1, and Fn1
expression in mouse embryonic fibroblasts which was suppressed by vismodegib. Our
study provides new evidence regarding the role of Hh signaling in MPM stroma in
the maintenance of tumor growth, emphasizing Hh signaling as a treatment target
for MPM.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26839306  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Cancer Biomark. 2016 Jan 18;16(1):71-9. doi: 10.3233/CBM-150542.

Prognostic value of hedgehog signaling pathway in digestive system cancers: A
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Wang Y(1), Peng Q(2), Jia H(1), Du X(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has recently been reported to be 
associated with the prognosis of digestive system cancers. However, the results
are inconsistent.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the association between Hh pathway
components and survival outcomes in patients with digestive system cancers.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive retrieval in PubMed, EMBASE and Cochrane
library for relevant literatures until May 1st, 2015. The pooled hazard ratios
(HRs) for overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) with 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to clarify the prognostic value of Hh 
pathway components, including Shh, Gli1, Gli2, Smo and Ptch1.
RESULTS: A total of 16 eligible articles with 3222 patients were included in the 
meta-analysis. Pooled HR suggested that over-expression of Shh and Gli1 were both
associated with poor OS (HR = 1.87, 95% CI: 1.14-3.07 and HR = 1.96, 95% CI:
1.66-2.32, respectively) and DFS (HR = 2.37, 95% CI: 1.19-4.72 and HR = 2.18, 95%
CI: 1.61-2.96, respectively). In addition, over-expression of Smo was associated 
with poor DFS (HR = 1.38, 95% CI: 1.08-1.75).
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that over-expressed Hh pathway components,
including Shh, Gli1 and Smo, are associated with poor prognosis in digestive
system cancer patients. Hh signaling pathway may become a potential therapeutic
target in digestive system cancers.

PMID: 26835707  [PubMed - in process]


31. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 27. [Epub ahead of print]

SHh-Gli1 signaling pathway promotes cell survival by mediating baculoviral IAP
repeat-containing 3 (BIRC3) gene in pancreatic cancer cells.

Gan H(1,)(2), Liu H(3), Zhang H(3), Li Y(3), Xu X(3), Xu X(4), Xu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, 230032, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, the First
Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, the Tenth People's Hospital of Shanghai,
Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China. (4)Department of Gastroenterology,
the Tenth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072,
China. shuanfusky@aliyun.com. (5)Department of Gastroenterology, the First
Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, China.
xjm1017@yahoo.com.cn.

The abnormally activated hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in the
regulation of proliferation and apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells, while its
exact molecular mechanism is not clear. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the regulatory effect of Hh signaling pathway on the transcription of
BIRC3 gene and its underlying mechanism in pancreatic cancer cells, as well as
the relationship between the Gli1-dependent BIRC3 transcription and cell
survival. Firstly, we examined the effect of knockdown or overexpression of Hh on
BIRC3 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression by real-time RT-PCR. Then, the regulatory
mechanism of Gli1 to BIRC3 gene transcription was investigated by XChIP-PCR and
luciferase assays. Finally, the cell survival mediated by the Gli1-dependent
BIRC3 transcription was studied by MTT and annexin V-FITC/propidiumiodide (PI)
assays. We found that the expression level of BIRC3 mRNA was positively
correlated to SHh/Gli1 signaling activation in three pancreatic cancer cell
lines. The XChIP-PCR and luciferase assays data showed that the transcription
factor Gli1 bound to some enhancers within the promoter regions of BIRC3 gene and
promoted gene transcription. The cell proliferation was increased significantly
by SHh/Gli1 expression while the apoptotic rate was reduced under the same
condition. Moreover, BIRC3 knockdown inhibited cell proliferation and survival
induced by SHh overexpression. Our study reveals that Gli1 promoted transcription
of BIRC3 gene via cis-acting elements and the SHh-Gli1 signaling pathway
maintained cell survival partially through this Gli1-dependent BIRC3 model in
pancreatic cancer cells.

PMID: 26815504  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. J Biomech. 2016 Feb 8;49(3):371-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2015.12.029. Epub 2015
Dec 29.

Sagittal plane rotation center of lower lumbar spine during a dynamic
weight-lifting activity.

Liu Z(1), Tsai TY(2), Wang S(2), Wu M(3), Zhong W(2), Li JS(2), Cha T(2), Wood
K(2), Li G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Provincial Key
Laboratory of Biomechanical Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan
610065, China. (2)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(3)The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130041, China.
(4)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic
address: gli1@mgh.harvard.edu.

This study investigated the center of rotation (COR) of the intervertebral
segments of the lower lumbar spine (L4-L5 and L5-S1 segments) in sagittal plane
during a weight-lifting (3.6kg in each hand) extension activity performed with
the pelvis constrained. Seven healthy subjects were studied using a dual
fluoroscopic imaging technique. Using the non-weightbearing, supine position
during MRI scan as a reference, the average intervertebral flexion angles of the 
L4-L5 and L5-S1 were 6.6° and 5.3° at flexion position of the body, respectively,
and were -1.8° and -3.5° at extension position of the body, respectively. The
CORs of the lower lumbar spine were found segment-dependent and changed with the 
body postures. The CORs of the L4-L5 segment were at the location about 75%
posterior from the anterior edge of the disc at flexion positions of the body,
and moved to about 92% of the posterior portion of the disc at extension
positions of the body. The CORs of the L5-S1 segment were at 95% posterior
portion of the disc at flexion positions of the body, and moved outside of the
posterior edge of the disc by about 12% of the disc length at extension positions
of the body. These results could help understand the physiological motion
characters of the lower lumbar spine. The data could also provide important
insights for future improvement of artificial disc designs and surgical
implantation of the discs that are aimed to reproduce normal spinal functions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4761462 [Available on 2017-02-08]
PMID: 26805460  [PubMed - in process]


33. Cancer Lett. 2016 Apr 28;374(1):44-53. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.12.013. Epub
2016 Jan 12.

CD24 suppresses malignant phenotype by downregulation of SHH transcription
through STAT1 inhibition in breast cancer cells.

Suyama K(1), Onishi H(2), Imaizumi A(3), Shinkai K(1), Umebayashi M(4), Kubo
M(5), Mizuuchi Y(6), Oda Y(6), Tanaka M(5), Nakamura M(5), Katano M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Cancer Therapy and 
Research, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
Electronic address: ohnishi@surg1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (3)Shukoukai Inc., Tokyo,
Japan. (4)Fukuoka General Cancer Clinic, Fukuoka, Japan. (5)Department of Surgery
and Oncology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan. (6)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been found to be activated in breast cancer stem
cells (BCSCs). However, the precise role of the BCSCs marker, CD24, remains
unclear. Here, we describe a relationship between CD24 and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), 
and reveal a role for this relationship in the induction of a malignant phenotype
of breast cancer. CD24 siRNA-transfected breast cancer cells (BCCs) demonstrated 
higher expression of SHH and GLI1, increased anchorage-independent proliferation,
and enhanced invasiveness and superior tumorigenicity compared with control.
Conversely, CD24 forced-expressing BCCs possessed decreased SHH and GLI1
expression, anchorage-independent proliferation, and invasiveness. Suppression of
SHH decreased invasiveness through inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2
expression, GLI1 expression, anchorage-independent proliferation, tumorigenicity,
and tumor volume in vivo in CD24 siRNA transfected BCCs. DNA microarray analysis 
identified STAT1 as a relationship between CD24 and SHH. CD24 siRNA-transfected
BCCs with concurrent STAT1 inhibition exhibited decreased SHH expression,
invasiveness, anchorage-independent proliferation, tumorigenicity, and tumor
volume in vivo. These results suggest that CD24 suppresses development of a
malignant phenotype by down-regulating SHH transcription through STAT1
inhibition. CD24 gene transfer or STAT1 inhibition may represent new effective
therapeutic strategies to target refractory breast cancer.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26797459  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 25;291(13):7171-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.714857. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

The Pluripotency Factor NANOG Binds to GLI Proteins and Represses
Hedgehog-mediated Transcription.

Li Q(1), Lex RK(1), Chung H(1), Giovanetti SM(1), Ji Z(2), Ji H(2), Person MD(3),
Kim J(1), Vokes SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and
Molecular Biology, and. (2)Department of Biostatistics, The Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21205. (3)Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, and Proteomics Facility, The University of Texas,
Austin, Texas 78712 and. (4)From the Department of Molecular Biosciences,
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, and svokes@austin.utexas.edu.

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is essential for the maintenance and response
of several types of stem cells. To study the transcriptional response of stem
cells to HH signaling, we searched for proteins binding to GLI proteins, the
transcriptional effectors of the HH pathway in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.
We found that both GLI3 and GLI1 bind to the pluripotency factor NANOG. The
ectopic expression of NANOG inhibits GLI1-mediated transcriptional responses in a
dose-dependent fashion. In differentiating ES cells, the presence of NANOG
reduces the transcriptional response of cells to HH. Finally, we found
thatGli1andNanogare co-expressed in ES cells at high levels. We propose that
NANOG acts as a negative feedback component that provides stem cell-specific
regulation of the HH pathway.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4807297 [Available on 2017-03-25]
PMID: 26797124  [PubMed - in process]


35. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 21. [Epub ahead of print]

The sonic hedgehog signaling pathway contributes to the development of salivary
gland neoplasms regardless of perineural infiltration.

Vidal MT(1), Lourenço SV(2), Soares FA(2), Gurgel CA(1), Studart EJ(3), Valverde 
LF(1), Araújo IB(1,)(3), Ramos EA(1), Xavier FC(4), Dos Santos JN(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Program in Human Pathology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Salvador,
Bahia, Brazil. (2)A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of
Pathology and Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine, Federal University of Bahia,
Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. (4)Laboratory of Oral Surgical Pathology, School of
Dentistry, Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. (5)Postgraduate 
Program in Human Pathology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil.
jeanunes@ufba.br. (6)Laboratory of Oral Surgical Pathology, School of Dentistry, 
Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. jeanunes@ufba.br.
(7)Laboratório de Patologia Cirúrgica, UFBA, Avenida Araújo Pinho, 62, Canela,
Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, 40110-150. jeanunes@ufba.br.

The pleomorphic adenoma (PA), mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC), and adenoid cystic 
carcinoma (ACC) are common tumors arising from salivary glands whose
histopathology is heterogeneous. The sonic hedgehog signaling pathway (Hh) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) play important roles
in cell proliferation, favoring tumor growth. The aim of this investigation was
to study components of the Hh pathway, as well as STAT3 in salivary gland
neoplasms in an attempt to add information about the biological characteristics
of these neoplasms. We used 9 cases of PA, 17 cases of ACC, and 20 cases of MEC. 
Using immunohistochemistry, SHH, GLI1, SUFU, HHIP, and STAT3 were investigated.
For comparative purposes, MCM3 (cellular proliferation marker) was also included.
In PA, there was high expression of cytoplasmic SHH and SUFU and low expression
of STAT3 and MCM3. In the ACC, there was high expression of GLI1, HHIP, and STAT3
and low expression of SHH, SUFU, and MCM3. In the MEC, we observed high
expression of SHH, GLI1, SUFU, and HHIP and low expression of STAT3 and MCM3.
There was a statistically significant difference between SHH (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0064), STAT3 
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0003), and MCM3 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0257) when all tumors were compared and a higher
expression in parenchyma for all tumors when stroma and parenchyma were compared 
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). These findings suggests a possible role of Hh pathway in the
development and maintenance of the cytoarchitectural pattern of PA, ACC, and MEC,
as well as the participation of STAT3 in the development of ACC, irrespective
perineural infiltration.

PMID: 26790448  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):7134-48. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6910.

DYRK1B as therapeutic target in Hedgehog/GLI-dependent cancer cells with
Smoothened inhibitor resistance.

Gruber W(1), Hutzinger M(1), Elmer DP(1), Parigger T(1), Sternberg C(1),
Cegielkowski L(1), Zaja M(2), Leban J(3), Michel S(2), Hamm S(2), Vitt D(2,)(4), 
Aberger F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cluster Salzburg, Department of Molecular Biology, University of
Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria. (2)4SC Discovery GmbH, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)4SC AG, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

A wide range of human malignancies displays aberrant activation of Hedgehog
(HH)/GLI signaling, including cancers of the skin, brain, gastrointestinal tract 
and hematopoietic system. Targeting oncogenic HH/GLI signaling with small
molecule inhibitors of the essential pathway effector Smoothened (SMO) has shown 
remarkable therapeutic effects in patients with advanced and metastatic basal
cell carcinoma. However, acquired and de novo resistance to SMO inhibitors poses 
severe limitations to the use of SMO antagonists and urgently calls for the
identification of novel targets and compounds.Here we report on the
identification of the Dual-Specificity-Tyrosine-Phosphorylation-Regulated Kinase 
1B (DYRK1B) as critical positive regulator of HH/GLI signaling downstream of SMO.
Genetic and chemical inhibition of DYRK1B in human and mouse cancer cells
resulted in marked repression of HH signaling and GLI1 expression, respectively. 
Importantly, DYRK1B inhibition profoundly impaired GLI1 expression in both
SMO-inhibitor sensitive and resistant settings. We further introduce a novel
small molecule DYRK1B inhibitor, DYRKi, with suitable pharmacologic properties to
impair SMO-dependent and SMO-independent oncogenic GLI activity. The results
support the use of DYRK1B antagonists for the treatment of HH/GLI-associated
cancers where SMO inhibitors fail to demonstrate therapeutic efficacy.

PMID: 26784250  [PubMed - in process]


37. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Mar;77(3):495-505. doi:
10.1007/s00280-016-2962-5. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Targeting hedgehog signaling pathway in pediatric tumors: in vitro evaluation of 
SMO and GLI inhibitors.

Arnhold V(1), Boos J(2), Lanvers-Kaminsky C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology/BMT, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin, Germany. viktor.arnhold@charite.de.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

PURPOSE: The successful use of SMO inhibitors in tumors with activating mutations
in hedgehog signaling raised interests in their exploitation against other
malignancies. The role of hedgehog signaling in pediatric malignancies remains
unclear.
METHODS: We investigated the hedgehog signaling and its inhibition in a panel of 
18 tumor cell lines derived from six of the most common and highly aggressive
pediatric tumor types. None of the cell lines was known to stem from tumors with 
activating hedgehog mutations. Tetrazolium-based assays (MTT and MTS) and BrdU
assays were used to analyze cell viability and proliferation after exposure to
SANT1 and GANT61. Expression analysis of hedgehog signaling members and cyclins
was performed by quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot.
RESULTS: Key members of hedgehog signaling (SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2 and SUFU)
were expressed in all cell lines. In 50 % of the cell lines viability was
significantly increased by SHH exposure. Stimulation was not restricted to
distinct tumor types, but related to cell lines with higher mRNA levels of PTCH1,
SMO, GLI1 and GLI2. SMO inhibition by SANT1 moderately decreased cell viability
with GI50s between 28 and 93 µmol/l. Sensitivity to SANT1 was not related to
distinct tumor types. The GLI inhibitor GANT61 inhibited cell viability and
proliferation more effectively than SANT1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preclinical data provide evidence that hedgehog signaling is
active and can be stimulated by PTCH1 ligands in various pediatric tumors. We
suggest further evaluation of GLI inhibitors as inhibitors of hedgehog signaling 
for the treatment of the investigated tumor types.

PMID: 26781311  [PubMed - in process]


38. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Jan 14;7:e2048. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.389.

Survivin, a novel target of the Hedgehog/GLI signaling pathway in human tumor
cells.

Vlcková K(1), Ondruová L(1), Vachtenheim J(1), Réda J(1), Dundr P(2), Zadinová
M(3), áková P(1), Poucková P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcription and Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical
Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Charles University in Prague, 1st
Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Institute of Pathology, Charles
University in Prague, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital in 
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (3)Institute of Biophysics and Informatics,
Charles University in Prague, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.

Survivin, an important antiapoptotic protein, is expressed in tumors, whereas in 
normal tissues the expression of this protein is extremely low, defining a role
for survivin as a cancer gene. Survivin exhibits multifunctional activity in
tumor cells. However, why survivin expression is sharply and invariably
restricted to tumor tissue remains unclear. Here, we identified 11 putative
consensus binding sites for GLI transcription factors in the survivin promoter
and characterized the promoter activity. Inhibitors of the Hedgehog/GLI pathway, 
cyclopamine and GANT61, decreased the promoter activity in reporter assays.
<U+0394>NGLI2 (which lacks the repressor domain) was the most potent vector in
activating the survivin promoter-reporter. Moreover, GANT61, a GLI1/2 inhibitor, 
repressed endogenous survivin protein and mRNA expression in most cells across a 
large panel of tumor cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed GLI2
binding to the survivin promoter. The ectopic GLI2-evoked expression of
endogenous survivin was observed in normal human fibroblasts. GANT61 decreased
survivin level in nude mice tumors, mimicking the activity of GANT61 in cultured 
cells. The immunohistochemistry and double immunofluorescence of human tumors
revealed a correlation between the tissue regions showing high GLI2 and survivin 
positivity. Thus, these results demonstrated that survivin is a classical
transcriptional target of GLI2, a Hedgehog pathway signaling effector. This
potentially reflects the high expression of survivin in human tumor cells. As the
Hedgehog pathway is upregulated in virtually all types of cancer cells, these
findings substantially contribute to the explanation of uniform survivin
expression in tumors as a potential target for the development of a more
effective treatment of cancers through the inhibition of GLI2 to restrain
survivin activity.

PMID: 26775700  [PubMed - in process]


39. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 5;423:30-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.01.005. Epub
2016 Jan 7.

Sonic hedgehog improves ischemia-induced neovascularization by enhancing
endothelial progenitor cell function in type 1 diabetes.

Qin Y(1), He YH(1), Hou N(2), Zhang GS(2), Cai Y(1), Zhang GP(2), Xiao Q(2), He
LS(2), Li SJ(2), Yi Q(2), Luo JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Venoms, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510182,
China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou
510182, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou 510182, China. Electronic address: jiandongluo@hotmail.com.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is downregulated in type 1 diabetes, and it has 
been reported that augmentation of this pathway may alleviate diabetic
complications. However, the cellular mechanisms underlying these protective
effects are poorly understood. Recent studies indicate that impaired function of 
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) may contribute to cardiovascular problems in 
diabetes. We hypothesized that impaired Shh signaling contribute to endothelial
progenitor cell dysfunction and that activating the Shh signaling pathway may
rescue EPC function and promote diabetic neovascularization. Adult male C57/B6
mice and streptozotocin (STZ)-induced type 1 diabetic mice were used. Gli1 and
Ptc1 protein levels were reduced in EPCs from diabetic mice, indicating
inhibition of the Shh signaling pathway. EPC migration, tube formation ability,
and mobilization were impaired in diabetic mice compared with non-diabetic
controls (p < 0.05 vs control), and all were improved by in vivo administration
of the Shh pathway receptor agonist SAG (p < 0.05 vs diabetes). SAG significantly
increased capillary density and blood perfusion in the ischemic hindlimbs of
diabetic mice (p < 0.05 vs diabetes). The AKT activity was lower in EPCs from
diabetic mice than those from non-diabetic controls (p < 0.05 vs control). This
decreased AKT activity led to an increased GSK-3ß activity and degradation of the
Shh pathway transcription factor Gli1/Gli2. SAG significantly increased the
activity of AKT in EPCs. Our data clearly demonstrate that an impaired Shh
pathway mediated by the AKT/GSK-3ß pathway can contribute to EPC dysfunction in
diabetes and thus activating the Shh signaling pathway can restore both the
number and function of EPCs and increase neovascularization in type 1 diabetic
mice.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26773732  [PubMed - in process]


40. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 11;291(11):5611-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.700336. Epub 2016
Jan 14.

Glioma-associated Oncogene 2 Is Essential for Trophoblastic Fusion by Forming a
Transcriptional Complex with Glial Cell Missing-a.

Tang C(1), Tang L(2), Wu X(3), Xiong W(2), Ruan H(3), Hussain M(3), Wu J(4), Zou 
C(5), Wu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou 310058, China, the Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 1130033, Japan, and. (2)the Children's Hospital and.
(3)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou 310058, China. (4)First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310006, China. (5)the Children's Hospital and
zcc14@zju.edu.cn. (6)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China, xiwu@zju.edu.cn.

Cell-cell fusion of human villous trophoblasts, referred to as a process of
syncytialization, acts as a prerequisite for the proper development and
functional maintenance of the human placenta. Given the fact that the main
components of the Hedgehog signaling pathway are expressed predominantly in the
syncytial layer of human placental villi, in this study, we investigated the
potential roles and underlying mechanisms of Hedgehog signaling in trophoblastic 
fusion. Activation of Hedgehog signaling by a variety of approaches robustly
induced cell fusion and the expression of syncytial markers, whereas suppression 
of Hedgehog signaling significantly attenuated cell fusion and the expression of 
syncytial markers in both human primary cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like
BeWo cells. Moreover, among glioma-associated oncogene (GLI) family
transcriptional factors in Hedgehog signaling, knockdown of GLI2 but not GLI1 and
GLI3 significantly attenuated Hedgehog-induced cell fusion, whereas
overexpression of the GLI2 activator alone was sufficient to induce cell fusion. 
Finally, GLI2 not only stabilized glial cell missing-a, a pivotal transcriptional
factor for trophoblastic syncytialization, but also formed a transcriptional
heterodimer with glial cell missing-a to transactivate syncytin-1, a
trophoblastic fusogen, and promote trophoblastic syncytialization. Taken
together, this study uncovered a so far uncharacterized role of Hedgehog/GLI2
signaling in trophoblastic fusion, implicating that Hedgehog signaling, through
GLI2, could be required for human placental development and pregnancy
maintenance.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4786702 [Available on 2017-03-11]
PMID: 26769961  [PubMed - in process]


41. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6890. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of stem-like cells and clinical significance of candidate stem
cell markers in gastric cancer.

Zhang X(1,)(2), Hua R(3), Wang X(1,)(2), Huang M(1,)(2), Gan L(1,)(2), Wu
Z(1,)(2), Zhang J(1,)(2), Wang H(4), Cheng Y(1,)(2), Li J(1,)(2), Guo W(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Cancer Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department
of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (4)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy Center,
Zhoushan Hospital, Zhejiang, China.

The existence of gastric cancer stem cells (CSCs) has not been definitively
proven and specific cell surface markers for identifying gastric CSCs have
largely not been identified. Our research aimed to isolate potential gastric CSCs
and clarify their clinical significance, while defining markers for GCSC
identification and verification. Here, we report that spheroid cells possess stem
cell-like properties, and overexpress certain stem cell markers. CD133 or
CD44-positive cells also exhibit properties of CSCs. The expression of Oct4,
Sox2, Gli1, CD44, CD133, p-AKT, and p-ERK was significantly higher in metastatic 
lesions compared to that in primary lesions. Elevated expression of some of these
proteins was correlated with a more aggressive phenotype and poorer prognosis,
including Oct4, Sox2, Gli1, CD44, and p-ERK. Multivariate Cox proportional
hazards model analysis showed that only CD44 is an independent factor. Knockdown 
of CD44 down-regulated the stem cell-like properties, which was accompanied by
the down-regulation of p-ERK and Oct4. Oct4 overexpression could reverse the
decreased CSCs properties induced by CD44 knockdown. Taken together, our research
revealed that spheroid cell culture, and CD133 or CD44-labeled FACS methods can
be used to isolate gastric CSCs. Some CSC markers have clinical significance in
predicting the prognosis. CD44 is an independent prognostic factor and maintains 
the properties of CSCs in CD44-p-ERK-Oct4 positive feedback loop.

PMID: 26769843  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Macrophages and endothelial cells orchestrate tumor-associated angiogenesis in
oral cancer via hedgehog pathway activation.

Valverde LF(1), Pereira TA(2), Dias RB(1), Guimarães VS(1), Ramos EA(1), Santos
JN(3), Gurgel Rocha CA(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology and Molecular Biology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation,
Gonçalo Moniz Research Center, R. Waldemar Falcão, 121, Candeal, Salvador, Bahia,
CEP: 40296-710, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, Oswaldo Cruz
Foundation, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. (3)Laboratory of Oral Surgical Pathology,
School of Dentistry of the Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. 
(4)Laboratory of Pathology and Molecular Biology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation,
Gonçalo Moniz Research Center, R. Waldemar Falcão, 121, Candeal, Salvador, Bahia,
CEP: 40296-710, Brazil. gurgel.clarissa@gmail.com. (5)Laboratory of Oral Surgical
Pathology, School of Dentistry of the Federal University of Bahia, Salvador,
Bahia, Brazil. gurgel.clarissa@gmail.com.

The present study aimed to evaluate the role of Hedgehog (Hh) molecule expression
in association with the clinical aspects of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), 
as well as angiogenesis and CD163+ macrophages. Twenty-eight cases of OSCC, nine 
cases of tumor-free resection margins (TM), and four cases of non-neoplastic oral
mucosa (NNM) were submitted to immunohistochemistry to detect proteins Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH), Indian Hedgehog (IHH), GLI1, CD163, and CD105. Protein
colocalization with respect to SHH/CD163, IHH/CD163, GLI1/CD163, and GLI1/CD105
was assessed by immunohistochemical double staining. In tumor parenchyma, SHH and
IHH were present in the cytoplasm of neoplastic cells, while GLI1 was observed in
cytoplasm and nucleus. Endothelial cells were found to express SHH, IHH, and GLI1
within CD105+ vessels, and a positive correlation between infiltrating macrophage
density (IMD) and microvascular density (MVD) was observed in cases of OSCC and
TM. When compared to TM and NNM, the OSCC cases demonstrated higher
immunoreactivity for SHH (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01), IHH (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.39), GLI1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03), IMD
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002), and MVD (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002). Our results suggest the participation of the 
Hh pathway in OSCC by way of autocrine and paracrine signaling, in addition to
the participation of both SHH and IHH ligands. Endothelial cells were also found 
to exhibit positivity with respect to Hh pathway components and we surmise that
these molecules may play a role in tumor angiogenesis. CD163+ macrophages were
also observed to express IHH, a ligand of this pathway, in addition to being
associated with tumor neovascularization.

PMID: 26768620  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. JAMA Dermatol. 2016 Jan 13:1-5. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.5473. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Effects of Combined Treatment With Arsenic Trioxide and Itraconazole in Patients 
With Refractory Metastatic Basal Cell Carcinoma.

Ally MS(1), Ransohoff K(2), Sarin K(1), Atwood SX(3), Rezaee M(1), Bailey-Healy
I(1), Kim J(3), Beachy PA(3), Chang AL(1), Oro A(2), Tang JY(1), Colevas AD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California2Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Stanford University,
Stanford, California. (3)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, California. (4)Cancer Center, Stanford University,
Stanford, California.

Importance: Tumor resistance is an emerging problem for Smoothened (SMO)
inhibitor-treated metastatic basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Arsenic trioxide and
itraconazole antagonize the hedgehog (HH) pathway at sites distinct from those
treated by SMO inhibitors.
Objective: To determine whether administration of intravenous arsenic trioxide
and oral itraconazole in patients with metastatic BCC is associated with a
reduction in GLI1 messenger RNA expression in tumor and/or normal skin biopsy
samples.
Design, Setting, and Participants: Five men with metastatic BCC who experienced
relapse after SMO inhibitor treatment underwent intravenous arsenic trioxide
treatment for 5 days, every 28 days, and oral itraconazole treatment on days 6 to
28. Data were collected from April 10 to November 14, 2013. Follow-up was
completed on October 3, 2015, and data were analyzed from June 5 to October 6,
2015.
Main Outcomes and Measures: The primary outcome was the change in messenger RNA
levels of the GLI family zinc finger 1 (GLI1) gene (HH-pathway target gene) in
biopsy specimens of normal skin or BCC before and after treatment. Secondary
objectives were evaluation of tumor response and tolerability.
Results: Of the 5 patients (mean [SD] age, 52 [9] years; age range, 43-62 years),
3 completed 3 cycles of treatment and 2 discontinued treatment early owing to
disease progression or adverse events. Adverse effects included grade 2
transaminitis and grade 4 leukopenia with a grade 3 infection. Overall, arsenic
trioxide and itraconazole reduced GLI1 messenger RNA levels by 75% from baseline 
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>.001). The best overall response after 3 treatment cycles was stable disease
in 3 patients.
Conclusions and Relevance: Targeting the HH pathway with sequential arsenic
trioxide and itraconazole treatment is a feasible treatment for metastatic BCC.
Although some patients experienced stable disease for 3 months, none had tumor
shrinkage, which may be owing to transient GLI1 suppression with sequential
dosing. Continuous dosing may be required to fully inhibit the HH pathway and
achieve clinical response.

PMID: 26765315  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Dec 17. pii: S1525-7304(15)00301-0. doi:
10.1016/j.cllc.2015.12.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Sonic Hedgehog Pathway Activation Is Associated With Resistance to Platinum-Based
Chemotherapy in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Carcinoma.

Giroux Leprieur E(1), Vieira T(2), Antoine M(3), Rozensztajn N(4), Rabbe N(2),
Ruppert AM(2), Lavole A(4), Cadranel J(2), Wislez M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Theranoscan, UPMC University of Paris VI, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France;
Service de Pneumologie et Oncologie Thoracique, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, EA 4340 Biomarqueurs en Cancérologie et
Onco-Hématologie, Université Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. (2)Theranoscan, UPMC University of Paris VI,
Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France; Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. (3)Theranoscan, UPMC
University of Paris VI, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France; Service d'Anatomie
Pathologique, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,
France. (4)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Paris, France. (5)Theranoscan, UPMC University of Paris VI, Sorbonne
Universités, Paris, France; Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. Electronic address:
marie.wislez@tnn.aphp.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Chemoresistance is a major challenge in the treatment of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Because the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is
reactivated in NSCLC, we investigated an association between chemoresistance and 
Shh activation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From a cohort of 178 patients with advanced NSCLC treated
with platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line treatment, we selected all
surgical tumor samples at diagnosis (n = 36). Shh activation was evaluated
through Gli1 and Gli2 expression using immunohistochemistry (quantitative score).
In vitro treatment studies with cisplatin or vismodegib (Shh pathway inhibitor), 
or both, were performed on NSCLC cell lines (H322 and A549) and primary cultures 
from patients with sarcomatoid carcinoma (n = 4).
RESULTS: Of the 36 patients, 12 had NSCLC refractory to chemotherapy (R-patients,
33.3%) and 24 had controlled disease (C-patients). Gli1 expression did not differ
between the R- and C-patients (P = .35). Gli2 expression was more often positive 
in the R-patients (41.7% vs. 8.3%; P = .02). Progression-free survival (PFS) and 
overall survival (OS) in patients with a Gli2-positive score was 2.1 and 8.0
months, respectively, compared with 6.7 and 18.0 months for patients with a
Gli2-negative score (P = .03 and P = .002, respectively). On multivariate
analysis, the Gli2 score correlated independently with PFS (hazard ratio [HR],
2.64; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.05-6.63; P = .04) and OS (HR, 4.36; 95% CI,
1.67-11.36; P = .003). The sarcomatoid carcinoma cell lines were more resistant
to cisplatin than were the H838 and A549 cell lines. The cisplatin-vismodegib
combination displayed a synergistic cytotoxic effect in the most chemoresistant
cells in vitro.
CONCLUSION: The Shh pathway is associated with resistance to platinum-based
chemotherapy in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26762562  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


45. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 interacts with Gli1 and regulates its
transcriptional activity.

Zhou W(1), Qin W(2), Qiao F(1), Xu Z(3), Yuan Y(1), Chen H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, 168 of Changhai Road, Shanghai, 200433, China. (2)Department 
of Medical Oncology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, 415
of Fengyang Road, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery,
Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, 168 of Changhai Road,
Shanghai, 200433, China. xuzhiyun1107@sina.com. (4)Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, 168 of Changhai
Road, Shanghai, 200433, China. chenhezhong1107@163.com.

Protein arginine methylation, which is mediated by the protein arginine
methyltransferases (PRMTs), is associated with numerous fundamental cellular
processes. Our previous studies have shown that PRMT1 activated Hedgehog
signaling in the esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells and promoted the
growth and migration of cancer cells. However, the detailed mechanisms are
unknown. In this study, it was found that PRMT1 interacted with the
transcriptional factor Gli1 (glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1) in ESCC cells.
The DNA-binding domain (DBD) of Gli1 is responsible for its interaction with
PRMT1. Moreover, PRMT1 promoted the methylation of Gli1, and knocking down the
expression of PRMT1 impaired the transcriptional activity as well as the
biological functions of Gli1. Taken together, our study demonstrated that PRMT1
is a positive regulator of Hedgehog signaling, and PRMT1 might be a therapeutic
target for ESCC.

PMID: 26762411  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. Neuro Oncol. 2016 Jan 10. pii: nov264. [Epub ahead of print]

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors-current concepts, advances in biology, and
potential future therapies.

Frühwald MC(1), Biegel JA(1), Bourdeaut F(1), Roberts CW(1), Chi SN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Swabian Children's Cancer Center, Augsburg, Germany
(M.C.F.); Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California (J.A.B.); INSERM U830, Laboratory of
Genetics and Biology of Cancers, and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Curie
Institute, Paris, France (F.B.); Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of
Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee (C.W.M.R.);
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts (S.N.C.); Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts (S.N.C.); Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts (S.N.C.).

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is the most common malignant CNS tumor
of children below 6 months of age. The majority of AT/RTs demonstrate genomic
alterations in SMARCB1 (INI1, SNF5, BAF47) or, to a lesser extent, SMARCA4 (BRG1)
of the SWItch/sucrose nonfermentable chromatin remodeling complex. Recent
transcription and methylation profiling studies suggest the existence of
molecular subgroups. Thus, at the root of these seemingly enigmatic tumors lies a
network of factors related to epigenetic regulation, which is not yet completely 
understood. While conventional-type chemotherapy may have significant survival
benefit for certain patients, it remains to be determined which patients will
eventually prove resistant to chemotherapy and thus need novel therapeutic
strategies. Elucidation of the molecular consequences of a disturbed epigenome
has led to the identification of a series of transduction cascades, which may be 
targeted for therapy. Among these are the pathways of cyclin D1/cyclin-dependent 
kinases 4 and 6, Hedgehog/GLI1, Wnt/ß-catenin, enhancer of zeste homolog 2, and
aurora kinase A, among others. Compounds specifically targeting these pathways or
agents that alter the epigenetic state of the cell are currently being evaluated 
in preclinical settings and in experimental clinical trials for AT/RT.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26755072  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 2;7(5):5690-701. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6788.

Down-regulation of the zinc-finger homeobox protein TSHZ2 releases GLI1 from the 
nuclear repressor complex to restore its transcriptional activity during mammary 
tumorigenesis.

Riku M(1), Inaguma S(1), Ito H(1), Tsunoda T(1), Ikeda H(1), Kasai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

Although breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies, the molecular
mechanisms underlying its development and progression are not fully understood.
To identify key molecules involved, we screened publicly available microarray
datasets for genes differentially expressed between breast cancers and normal
mammary glands. We found that three of the genes predicted in this analysis were 
differentially expressed among human mammary tissues and cell lines. Of these
genes, we focused on the role of the zinc-finger homeobox protein TSHZ2, which is
down-regulated in breast cancer cells. We found that TSHZ2 is a nuclear protein
harboring a bipartite nuclear localization signal, and we confirmed its function 
as a C-terminal binding protein (CtBP)-dependent transcriptional repressor.
Through comprehensive screening, we identified TSHZ2-suppressing genes such as
AEBP1 and CXCR4, which are conversely up-regulated by GLI1, the downstream
transcription factor of Hedgehog signaling. We found that GLI1 forms a ternary
complex with CtBP2 in the presence of TSHZ2 and that the transcriptional activity
of GLI1 is suppressed by TSHZ2 in a CtBP-dependent manner. Indeed, knockdown of
TSHZ2 increases the expression of AEBP1 and CXCR4 in TSHZ2-expressing
immortalized mammary duct epithelium. Concordantly, immunohistochemical staining 
of mammary glands revealed that normal duct cells expresses GLI1 in the nucleus
along with TSHZ2 and CtBP2, whereas invasive ductal carcinoma cells, which does
not express TSHZ2, show the increase in the expression of AEBP1 and CXCR4 and in 
the cytoplasmic localization of GLI1. Thus, we propose that down-regulation of
TSHZ2 is crucial for mammary tumorigenesis via the activation of GLI1.

PMID: 26744317  [PubMed - in process]


48. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):12820-8. eCollection 2015.

Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling attenuates oxidized low-density
lipoprotein-stimulated brain microvascular endothelial cells dysfunction in
vitro.

Jiang XL(1), Chen T(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Provincial Clinic College of Fujian Medical
University, Fujian Provincial Hospital Fuzhou 350001, China.

The study was performed to investigate the role of sonic hedgehog (SHH) in the
oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL)-induced blood-brain barrier (BBB)
disruption. The primary mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells (MBMECs) were
exposed to oxLDL. The results indicated that treatment of MBMECs with oxLDL
decreased the cell viability, and oxidative stress was involved in oxLDL-induce
MBMECs dysfunction with increasing intracellular ROS and MDA formation as well as
decreasing NO release and eNOS mRNA expression. In addition, SHH signaling
components, such as SHH, Smo and Gli1, mRNA and protein levels were significantly
decreased after incubation with increasing concentrations of oxLDL. Treatment
with oxLDL alone or SHH loss-of-function significantly increased the permeability
of MBMECs, and overexpression of SHH attenuated oxLDL-induced elevation of
permeability in MBMECs. Furthermore, SHH gain-of-function could reverse
oxLDL-induced apoptosis through inhibition caspase3 and caspase8 levels in
MBMECs. Taken together, these results demonstrated that the suppression of SHH in
MBMECs might contribute to the oxLDL-induced disruption of endothelial barrier.
However, the overexpression of SHH could reverse oxLDL-induced endothelial cells 
dysfunction in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4680417
PMID: 26722472  [PubMed - in process]


49. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):12464-72. eCollection 2015.

Activation of SHH signaling pathway promotes vasculogenesis in post-myocardial
ischemic-reperfusion injury.

Guo W(1), Yi X(2), Ren F(3), Liu L(4), Wu S(4), Yang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Qingdao University Qingdao 266000, Shandong Province, China ; Department of
Geratology, Jining NO. 1 People's Hospital Jining 272011, Shandong Province,
China. (2)Department of Laboratory, Jining NO. 1 People's Hospital Jining 272011,
Shandong Province, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Yantai
Yuhuangding Hospital, Medical College of Qingdao University Yantai 264000,
Shandong Province, China. (4)Department of Geratology, Jining NO. 1 People's
Hospital Jining 272011, Shandong Province, China.

This study aimed to investigate the potential roles of sonic Hedgehog (SHH)
expression in vasculogenesis in post-myocardial ischemic-reperfusion injury
(MIRI) and its underlying mechanism. Cardiac microvascular endothelial cells
(CMECs) isolated from the SD rat hearts tissues were used to construct the MIRI
model. mRNA level of SHH in control cells and MIRI cells was detected using
RT-PCR analysis. Furthermore, effects of SHH expression on CMECs viability and
apoptosis were analyzed using MTT assay and Annexin-V-FITC kit respectively.
Moreover, effects of SHH expression on the pathway signal proteins expression was
analyzed using ELISA and western blotting. mRNA level of SHH was significantly
decreased compared to the controls (P<0.05). Besides, CMECs viability was
significantly increased while cell apoptosis was decreased by SHH application
compared with the controls (P<0.05). Vasculogenesis-related factors including
VEGF, FGF and Ang were significantly increased by SHH application, as well as the
SHH signal proteins including Patch-1, Gli1, Gli2 and SMO (P<0.05). However,
these effects of SHH application on biological factors levels were reversed by
the SHH inhibitor application. This study suggested that SHH over expression may 
play a pivotal contribute role in vasculogenesis through activating the SHH
signals in post-MIRI.

PMCID: PMC4680378
PMID: 26722433  [PubMed - in process]


50. Anticancer Res. 2016 Jan;36(1):149-53.

Expression of Hedgehog Signals and Growth Inhibition by Itraconazole in
Endometrial Cancer.

Inoue K(1), Tsubamoto H(2), Sakata K(1), Sakane R(1), Hao H(3), Hirota S(3),
Sonoda T(4), Shibahara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Mukogawa, 
Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hyogo
College of Medicine, Mukogawa, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan Department of Medical
Oncology, Meiwa Hospital, Agenaruo, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan
tsuba@hyo-med.ac.jp. (3)Department of Surgical Pathology, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Mukogawa, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
Meiwa Hospital, Agenaruo, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: There exist limited therapeutic opportunities for the treatment of
endometrial cancer (EC). Itraconazole, a common anti-fungal agent and a potent
inhibitor of the Hedgehog pathway, has been shown to be clinically effective for 
various types of cancers, but its clinical efficacy for EC is unknown. Herein, we
evaluated the efficacy of itraconazole in treating EC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed immunohistochemistry on EC tumour samples
including serous endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma (SEIC). We further
evaluated the in vitro efficacy of itraconazole for inhibiting proliferation and 
migration of EC cell lines.
RESULTS: Sonic Hedgehog and glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) were
expressed in SEIC and endometrioid adenocarcinoma. We found that itraconazole
significantly inhibited tumour cell growth in both dose-dependent and
time-dependent manners and inhibited migration of HEC-1A cells.
CONCLUSION: Hedgehog signaling plays a role in carcinogenesis and malignant
progression in EC. Itraconazole at a physiological dose may suppress progression 
of EC.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26722038  [PubMed - in process]


51. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 31;10(12):e0145691. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145691.
eCollection 2015.

Inflammatory PAF Receptor Signaling Initiates Hedgehog Signaling and Kidney
Fibrogenesis During Ethanol Consumption.

Latchoumycandane C(1), Hanouneh M(2), Nagy LE(3), McIntyre TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of
America. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio,
United States of America. (3)Department of Pathobiology, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United
States of America.

Acute inflammation either resolves or proceeds to fibrotic repair that replaces
functional tissue. Pro-fibrotic hedgehog signaling and induction of its Gli
transcription factor in pericytes induces fibrosis in kidney, but molecular
instructions connecting inflammation to fibrosis are opaque. We show acute kidney
inflammation resulting from chronic ingestion of the common xenobiotic ethanol
initiates Gli1 transcription and hedgehog synthesis in kidney pericytes, and
promotes renal fibrosis. Ethanol ingestion stimulated transcription of TGF-ß,
collagens I and IV, and alpha-smooth muscle actin with accumulation of these
proteins. This was accompanied by deposition of extracellular fibrils. Ethanol
catabolism by CYP2E1 in kidney generates local reactive oxygen species that
oxidize cellular phospholipids to phospholipid products that activate the
Platelet-activating Factor receptor (PTAFR) for inflammatory phospholipids.
Genetically deleting this ptafr locus abolished accumulation of mRNA for TGF-ß,
collagen IV, and a-smooth muscle actin. Loss of PTAFR also abolished
ethanol-stimulated Sonic (Shh) and Indian hedgehog (Ihh) expression, and
abolished transcription and accumulation of Gli1. Shh induced in pericytes and
Ihh in tubules escaped to urine of ethanol-fed mice. Neutrophil myeloperoxidase
(MPO) is required for ethanol-induced kidney inflammation, and Shh was not
present in kidney or urine of mpo-/- mice. Shh also was present in urine of
patients with acute kidney injury, but not in normal individuals or those with
fibrotic liver cirrhosis We conclude neither endogenous PTAFR signaling nor
CYP2E1-generated radicals alone are sufficient to initiate hedgehog signaling,
but instead PTAFR-dependent neutrophil infiltration with myeloperoxidase
activation is necessary to initiate ethanol-induced fibrosis in kidney. We also
show fibrogenic mediators escape to urine, defining a new class of urinary
mechanistic biomarkers of fibrogenesis for an organ not commonly biopsied.

PMCID: PMC4697844
PMID: 26720402  [PubMed - in process]


52. Oncol Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):1204-12. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4437. Epub 2015 Nov 18.

Tripartite motif 16 suppresses breast cancer stem cell properties through
regulation of Gli-1 degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Yao J(1), Xu T(2), Tian T(3), Fu X(3), Wang W(3), Li S(4), Shi T(3), Suo A(3),
Ruan Z(3), Guo H(3), Yao Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Integrated Department of TCM and Western Medicine, Shaanxi Provincial
Tumor Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China. (2)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, The Center Hospital of Xi'an, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China. (4)Department of Oncology, Shaanxi
Provincial Tumor Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are responsible for cancer progression and patient
prognosis. Tripartite motif 16 (TRIM16) is a proteasome coactivator that
regulates proteolytic activity in eukaryotic cells. Abundant evidence has shown
that TRIM16 is lowly expressed in a number of human carcinomas. In a previous
study, we demonstrated that TRIM16 suppressed cancer malignancy and that TRIM16
expression levels were associated with favorable prognostic parameters of
patients with cancer. However, the precise role of this motif in the pathogenesis
of breast cancer remains unknown. In the present study, we examined 29 human
breast cancer specimens, and found that TRIM16 was lowly expressed in breast
cancers; thus, TRIM16 expression is negatively correlated with metastasis in
breast cancer patients. Moreover, we showed that TRIM16 suppressed CSC properties
in a population of breast cancer cells. TRIM16 depletion resulted in an increased
proportion of CSCs relative to breast cancer cells when several assays were used 
to assess CSC properties. Finally, we demonstrated that TRIM16 directly regulated
the degradation of Gli-1 protein via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In
conclusion, we propose that inhibition of CSC properties may be one of the
functions of TRIM16 as a suppressor of breast cancer progression.

PMID: 26718507  [PubMed - in process]


53. Oncol Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):912-22. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4434. Epub 2015 Nov 17.

Salinomycin induces selective cytotoxicity to MCF-7 mammosphere cells through
targeting the Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Fu YZ(1), Yan YY(1), He M(1), Xiao QH(1), Yao WF(1), Zhao L(1), Wu HZ(1), Yu
ZJ(1), Zhou MY(1), Lv MT(1), Zhang SS(1), Chen JJ(2), Wei MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) are believed to be responsible for tumor
chemoresistance, recurrence, and metastasis formation. Salinomycin (SAL), a
carboxylic polyether ionophore, has been reported to act as a selective breast
CSC inhibitor. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying SAL-induced
cytotoxicity on BCSCs remain unclear. The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays
an important role in CSC maintenance and carcinogenesis. Here, we investigated
whether SAL induces cytotoxicity on BCSCs through targeting Hh pathway. In the
present study, we cultured breast cancer MCF-7 cells in suspension in serum-free 
medium to obtain breast CSC-enriched MCF-7 mammospheres (MCF-7 MS). MCF-7 MS
cells possessed typical BCSC properties, such as CD44+CD24-/low phenotype, high
expression of OCT4 (a stem cell marker), increased colony-forming ability, strong
migration and invasion capabilities, differentiation potential, and strong
tumorigenicity in xenografted mice. SAL exhibited selective cytotoxicity to
MCF-7 MS cells relative to MCF-7 cells. The Hh pathway was highly activated in
BCSC-enriched MCF-7 MS cells and SAL inhibited Hh signaling activation by
downregulating the expression of critical components of the Hh pathway such as
PTCH, SMO, Gli1, and Gli2, and subsequently repressing the expression of their
essential downstream targets including C-myc, Bcl-2, and Snail (but not
cyclin D1). Conversely, Shh-induced Hh signaling activation could largely reverse
SAL-mediated inhibitory effects. These findings suggest that SAL-induced
selective cytotoxicity against MCF-7 MS cells is associated with the inhibition
of Hh signaling activation and the expression of downstream targets and the Hh
pathway is an important player and a possible drug target in the pathogenesis of 
BCSCs.

PMID: 26718029  [PubMed - in process]


54. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 28;10(12):e0145507. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145507.
eCollection 2015.

Inhibition of Hedgehog-Signaling Driven Genes in Prostate Cancer Cells by
Sutherlandia frutescens Extract.

Lu Y(1,)(2,)(3), Starkey N(1,)(2), Lei W(2,)(4), Li J(2,)(5,)(6), Cheng
J(2,)(5,)(6), Folk WR(1,)(2), Lubahn DB(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, United
States of America. (2)MU Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, United States of America. (3)Xiphophorus Genetic
Stock Center, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX 78666, United States of
America. (4)Division of Animal Science, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211, United States of America. (5)Computer Science Department, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, United States of America. (6)Informatics Institute,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, United States of America.

Sutherlandia frutescens (L) R. Br. (Sutherlandia) is a South African botanical
that is traditionally used to treat a variety of health conditions, infections
and diseases, including cancer. We hypothesized Sutherlandia might act through
Gli/ Hedgehog (Hh)-signaling in prostate cancer cells and used RNA-Seq
transcription profiling to profile gene expression in TRAMPC2 murine prostate
cancer cells with or without Sutherlandia extracts. We found 50% of Hh-responsive
genes can be repressed by Sutherlandia ethanol extract, including the canonical
Hh-responsive genes Gli1 and Ptch1 as well as newly distinguished Hh-responsive
genes Hsd11b1 and Penk.

PMCID: PMC4694108
PMID: 26710108  [PubMed - in process]


55. Oncol Rep. 2016 Mar;35(3):1718-26. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4504. Epub 2015 Dec 22.

Resveratrol inhibits hypoxia-driven ROS-induced invasive and migratory ability of
pancreatic cancer cells via suppression of the Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Li W(1), Cao L(2), Chen X(1), Lei J(1), Ma Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health 
Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

A hypoxic microenvironment is commonly found in the central region of solid
tumors, including pancreatic cancer. Our previous study revealed that resveratrol
plays an important role in suppressing the proliferation and EMT of pancreatic
cancer cells. However, whether resveratrol could suppress hypoxia-induced cancer 
progression and the underlying mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. The aim
of the present study was to evaluate whether resveratrol affects hypoxia-induced 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and the activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) 
signaling pathway as well as the invasion of pancreatic cancer. The human
pancreatic cancer cell lines, BxPC-3 and Panc-1, were subjected to a hypoxic
condition and three different concentrations of resveratrol. The intracellular
ROS were determined using 2,7-dichlorodihydrofluorecein diacetate. Wound healing 
and Transwell invasion assays were used to detect the migratory and invasive
potential of the cancer cells. Metastatic-related and Hh signaling-related
factors were detected by qRT-PCR and western blot analysis. Immunofluorescence
staining was used to test the nuclear translocation of GLI1. The results showed
that the hypoxia-induced production of ROS was decreased by resveratrol in a
concentration-dependent manner. Resveratrol significantly inhibited the
hypoxia-stimulated invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer cells. Resveratrol
inhibited hypoxia-induced HIF-1a protein expression. Resveratrol also suppressed 
hypoxia-induced expression of metastatic-related factors, uPA and MMP2. In
addition, resveratrol markedly inhibited hypoxia-mediated activation of the Hh
signaling pathway. Furthermore, the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC)
significantly suppressed the invasive and migratory ability of pancreatic cancer 
cells during hypoxia. Taken together, these data indicate that resveratrol plays 
an important role in suppressing hypoxia-driven ROS-induced pancreatic cancer
progression by inhibiting the Hh signaling pathway, providing evidence that
resveratrol may be a potential candidate for the chemoprevention of cancer.

PMID: 26707376  [PubMed - in process]


56. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015 Dec 24;17(1):373. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0891-z.

Hedgehog signalling does not stimulate cartilage catabolism and is inhibited by
Interleukin-1ß.

Thompson CL(1), Patel R(2), Kelly TA(3,)(4), Wann AK(5,)(6), Hung CT(7), Chapple 
JP(8), Knight MM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering and School of Engineering and Material Sciences,
Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK.
clare.l.thompson@qmul.ac.uk. (2)Institute of Bioengineering and School of
Engineering and Material Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End
Road, London, E1 4NS, UK. r.patel@smd11.qmul.ac.uk. (3)Institute of
Bioengineering and School of Engineering and Material Sciences, Queen Mary
University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK. t.a.kelly@qmul.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 
t.a.kelly@qmul.ac.uk. (5)Institute of Bioengineering and School of Engineering
and Material Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1
4NS, UK. angus.wann@kennedy.ox.ac.uk. (6)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. angus.wann@kennedy.ox.ac.uk. (7)Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
cth6@columbia.edu. (8)Center for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research
Institute, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London,
London, UK. j.p.chapple@qmul.ac.uk. (9)Institute of Bioengineering and School of 
Engineering and Material Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End
Road, London, E1 4NS, UK. m.m.knight@qmul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: In osteoarthritis, chondrocytes adopt an abnormal hypertrophic
morphology and upregulate the expression of the extracellular matrix-degrading
enzymes, MMP-13 and ADAMTS-5. The activation of the hedgehog signalling pathway
has been established in osteoarthritis and is thought to influence both of these 
processes. However, the role of this pathway in the initiation and progression of
osteoarthritis is unclear as previous studies have been unable to isolate the
effects of hedgehog pathway activation from other pathological processes. In this
study we test the hypothesis that hedgehog pathway activation causes cartilage
degradation in healthy cartilage and in an in vitro model of inflammatory
arthritis.
METHODS: Isolated articular chondrocytes from the bovine metacarpal-phalangeal
joint were stimulated for up to 24 hours with the agonist, recombinant Indian
hedgehog (r-Ihh). ADAMTS-5 and MMP-13 gene expression was quantified by real-time
PCR. In addition, healthy bovine cartilage explants were treated with r-Ihh or
the hedgehog antagonist, cyclopamine, and sGAG release into the media was
measured over 72 hours. Studies were repeated using chondrocytes and cartilage
explants from human knee joint. Finally, studies were conducted to determine the 
effect of hedgehog pathway activation on matrix catabolism in the presence of the
pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL-1ß.
RESULTS: Addition of r-Ihh activated hedgehog signalling, confirmed by
upregulation of Gli1 and Ptch1 expression, but did not increase ADAMTS-5 or
MMP-13 expression in bovine or human chondrocytes. Furthermore, r-Ihh did not
induce sGAG release in healthy bovine or human cartilage explants. IL-1ß
treatment induced sGAG release, but this response was not altered by the
stimulation or inhibition of hedgehog signalling. Hedgehog pathway activation was
downregulated by IL-1ß. Conversely, r-Ihh weakly suppressed IL-1ß-induced
ADAMTS-5 expression.
CONCLUSION: Our results show for the first time that Indian hedgehog does not
cause extracellular matrix degradation in healthy ex vivo cartilage or in the
presence of IL-1ß and that IL-1ß downregulates Indian hedgehog induced
signalling. Thus, we suggest reported hedgehog induced matrix catabolism in
osteoarthritis must be due to its interaction with pathological factors other
than IL-1ß. Hence, hedgehog signalling and its downstream effects are highly
context-dependent.

PMCID: PMC4718026
PMID: 26705100  [PubMed - in process]


57. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jun;44(6):395-8.

[Inhibitory effect of salinomycin on human breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231
proliferation through Hedgehog signaling pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu Y(1), Zhang C(1), Li Q(1), Mao J(1), Ma W(1), Yu X(1), Hou Z(1), Li L(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Tumor Stem Cell Research of Liaoning Province, Dalian
Medical University, Dalian 116044, China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Tumor Stem
Cell Research of Liaoning Province, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044,
China; E-mail: lilianhong9177@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the inhibitory effect of salinomycin on human breast
cancer cells in vitro, and to explore the related molecular mechanism.
METHODS: Human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with salinomycin at
different concentrations and at various time points. The effect of salinomycin on
MDA-MB-231 cells proliferation was studied by CCK-8 method. The cell cycle status
was examined by flow cytometry. RT-PCR and Western blot were used to detect the
expression of Shh, Smo and Gli1 in the Hedgehog pathway at mRNA and protein
levels.
RESULTS: Proliferation of MDA-MB-231 cells treated with salinomycin was markedly 
inhibited in a concentration and time dependent manner. Salinomycin at
concentrations of 0, 0.4, 0.8 and 1.6 µmol/L inhibited the growth at the rates of
11.18%, 25.88%, 50.03%, 92.65%, respectively. Salinomycin prevented MDA-MB-231
cells from G1 into S phase. Salinomycin at concentrations of 0, 0.8 and 1.6
µmol/L resulted in S-phase percentage of 25.03%, 11.85% and 35.21%, respectively 
(P < 0.05). RT-PCR and Western blot showed that the expression of key elements
Shh, Smo and Gli1 in the Hedgehog pathway was inhibited by salinomycin in a
concentration dependent manner (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Salinomycin prevents breast cancer cell transition from G1 to S phase
through downregulation of the target genes of Hedgehog signaling pathway, leading
to an effective inhibition of MDA-MB-231 cells.

PMID: 26704834  [PubMed - in process]


58. Eur J Cancer. 2016 Jan;52:188-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.10.003. Epub 2015 Dec 
12.

Nicotine induces self-renewal of pancreatic cancer stem cells via
neurotransmitter-driven activation of sonic hedgehog signalling.

Al-Wadei MH(1), Banerjee J(1), Al-Wadei HA(1), Schuller HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical & Diagnostic
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN,
USA. (2)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical & Diagnostic
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN,
USA. Electronic address: hmsch@utk.edu.

A small subpopulation of pancreatic cancer cells with characteristics of stem
cells drive tumour initiation, progression and metastasis. A better understanding
of the regulation of cancer stem cells may lead to more effective cancer
prevention and therapy. We have shown that the proliferation and migration of
pancreatic cancer cell lines is activated by the nicotinic receptor-mediated
release of stress neurotransmitters, responses reversed by <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid
(GABA). However, the observed cancer inhibiting effects of GABA will only succeed
clinically if GABA inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSCs) in addition to
the more differentiated cancer cells that comprise the majority of cancer tissues
and cell lines. Using PCSCs isolated from two pancreatic cancer patients by cell 
sorting and by spheroid formation assay from pancreatic cancer cell line Panc-1, 
we tested the hypothesis that nicotine induces the self-renewal of PCSCs.
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) a3, a4, a5 and a7 were expressed and
chronic exposure to nicotine increased the protein expression of these receptors.
Immunoassays showed that PCSCs produced the stress neurotransmitters epinephrine 
and norepinephrine and the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. Chronic nicotine
significantly increased the production of stress neurotransmitters and sonic
hedgehog (SHH) while inducing Gli1 protein and decreasing GABA. GABA treatment
inhibited the induction of SHH and Gli1. Spheroid formation and
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide assays showed
significant nicotine-induced increases in self renewal and cell proliferation,
responses blocked by GABA. Our data suggest that nicotine increases the
SHH-mediated malignant potential of PCSCs and that GABA prevents these effects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4698183 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26689865  [PubMed - in process]


59. Spine J. 2015 Dec 8. pii: S1529-9430(15)01759-3. doi:
10.1016/j.spinee.2015.11.052. [Epub ahead of print]

Dimensional changes of the neuroforamina in subaxial cervical spine during in
vivo dynamic flexion-extension.

Mao H(1), Driscoll SJ(2), Li JS(2), Li G(3), Wood KB(2), Cha TD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard Medical 
School/Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St-GRJ 1215, Boston 02114, MA,
USA; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, No. 188, Shizi Road, Gusu District, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215006, China.
(2)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard Medical 
School/Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St-GRJ 1215, Boston 02114, MA,
USA. (3)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard
Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St-GRJ 1215, Boston
02114, MA, USA. Electronic address: GLI1@mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Neuroforaminal stenosis is one of the key factors causing
clinical symptoms in patients with cervical radiculopathy. Previous quantitative 
studies on the neuroforaminal dimensions have focused on measurements in a static
position. Little is known about dimensional changes of the neuroforamina in the
cervical spine during functional dynamic neck motion under physiological loading 
conditions.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to investigate the in vivo dimensional changes of the
neuroforamina in human cervical spine (C3-C7) during dynamic flexion-extension
neck motion.
STUDY DESIGN: A case-control study was carried out.
METHODS: Ten asymptomatic subjects were recruited for this study. The cervical
spine of each subject underwent magnetic resonance image scanning for
construction of three-dimensional (3-D) vertebrae models from C3 to C7. The
cervical spine was then imaged using a dual fluoroscopic system while the subject
performed a dynamic flexion-extension neck motion in a sitting position. The 3-D 
vertebral models and the fluoroscopic images were used to reproduce the in vivo
vertebral motion. The dimensions (area, height, and width) were measured for each
cervical neuroforamen (C3/C4, C4/C5, C5/C6, and C6/C7) in the following
functional positions: neutral position, maximal flexion, and maximal extension.
Repeated measures analysis of variance and post hoc analysis were used to examine
the differences between levels and positions.
RESULTS: Compared with the neutral position, almost all dimensional parameters
(area, height, and width) of the subaxial cervical neuroforamina decreased in
extension and increased in flexion, except the neuroforaminal area at C5/C6
(p=.07), and the neuroforaminal height at C6/C7 (p=.05) remained relatively
constant from neutral to extension. When comparisons of the overall change
fromextension to flexion were made between segments, the overall changes of the
neuroforaminal area and height revealed no significant differences between
segments, and the width overall change of the upper levels (C3/C4 and C4/C5) was 
significantly greater than the lower levels (C5/C6 and C6/C7) (p<.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The dimensional changes of the cervical neuroforamina showed
segment-dependent characteristics during the dynamic flexion-extension. These
data may have implications for diagnosis and treatment of patients with cervical 
radiculopathy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26681352  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


60. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb;13(2):1434-40. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4677. Epub 2015 Dec
11.

Reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis of the SGC-7901 gastric cancer cell
line on exposure to GDC-0449.

Wu C(1), Cheng J(1), Hu S(2), Deng R(1), Muangu YW(1), Shi L(3), Wu K(1), Zhang
P(1), Chang W(1), Wang G(1), Tao K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R.
China. (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R.
China.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is known to be vital in embryonic development
and cancer propagation due to its irreplaceable role in cell proliferation and
differentiation. GDC-0449, a basal cell skin cancer target drug approved by the
Food and Drugs Administration, is a smoothened (Smo)-specific antagonist.
Although it has been clinically verified as a valid drug for the treatment of
skin and pancreatic cancer, the application of GDC-0449 in gastric cancer
requires further investigation. In the present study, high-glucose Dulbecco's
modified Eagle's medium with 10% fetal bovine serum was used for routine SGC-7901
cell line culture. A Cell Counting Kit-8 assay was employed for determination of 
the reproductive rate of the cells. Flow cytometry was performed to determine the
apoptosis status of the SGC-7901 cell line through Q4 analysis. Reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analyses
were used as target molecule detection vehicles. As expected, GDC-0449 reduced
the expression levels of Shh-associated molecules, including Smo and gli1,
compared with the blank group. The rate of cell proliferation was markedly
limited and was accompanied by an increase in the apoptotic rate following
GDC-0449 exposure. In addition, further investigations confirmed B cell
lmyphoma-2 (Bcl-2) as the downstream molecular mechanism of GDC-0449 efficacy. Of
note, representatives of the cancer stem cell (CSC) surface marker, CD44 and
CD133, demonstrated a similar trend to the Smo restriction observed. By
repressing the expression of Bcl-2, GDC-0449 inhibited the normal proliferation
of SGC-7901 cells, and accelerated the apoptotic rate of the cells. It may also
alter CSC properties due to the reduction in the expression of surface markers.

PMID: 26676867  [PubMed - in process]


61. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):4265-78. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6559.

Metformin increases antitumor activity of MEK inhibitors through GLI1
downregulation in LKB1 positive human NSCLC cancer cells.

Della Corte CM(1), Ciaramella V(1), Di Mauro C(2), Castellone MD(3), Papaccio
F(1), Fasano M(1), Sasso FC(4), Martinelli E(1), Troiani T(1), De Vita F(1),
Orditura M(1), Bianco R(2), Ciardiello F(1), Morgillo F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e
Sperimentale "F. Magrassi e A. Lanzara", Seconda Università degli Studi di
Napoli, Naples, Italy. (2)Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e
Chirurgia, Università degli studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale "G. Salvatore" (IEOS), University of
Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy. (4)Medicina Interna, Dipartimento
Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale "F. Magrassi e A.
Lanzara", Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy.

PURPOSE: Metformin, widely used as antidiabetic drug, showed antitumoral effects 
expecially in combination with chemotherapy. Our group recently has demonstrated 
that metformin and gefitinib are synergistic in LKB1-wild-type NSCLC cells. In
these models, metformin as single agent induced an activation and phosphorylation
of mitogen-activated-protein-kinase (MAPK) through an increased C-RAF/B-RAF
heterodimerization.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Since single agent metformin enhances proliferating signals 
through the RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway, and several MEK inhibitors (MEK-I) demonstrated
clinical efficacy in combination with other agents in NSCLC, we tested the
effects of metformin plus MEK-I (selumetinib or pimasertib) on proliferation,
invasiveness, migration abilities in vitro and in vivo in LKB1 positive NSCLC
models harboring KRAS wild type and mutated gene.
RESULTS: The combination of metformin with MEK-I showed a strong
anti-proliferative and proapoptotic effect in Calu-3, H1299, H358 and H1975 human
NSCLC cell lines, independently from the KRAS mutational status. The combination 
reduced the metastatic behaviour of NSCLC cells, via a downregulation of GLI1
trascritional activity, thus affecting the transition from an epithelial to a
mesenchymal phenotype. Metformin and MEK-Is combinations also decreased the
production and activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9 by reducing the NF-jB (p65) binding to
MMP-2 and MMP-9 promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: Metformin potentiates the antitumor activity of MEK-Is in human
LKB1-wild-type NSCLC cell lines, independently from the KRAS mutational status,
through GLI1 downregulation and by reducing the NF-jB (p65)-mediated
transcription of MMP-2 and MMP-9.

PMID: 26673006  [PubMed - in process]


62. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 2016 Apr;26(4):529-35. doi: 10.1517/13543776.2016.1132309. 
Epub 2016 Feb 16.

Evaluation of WO2014207069 A1: Multitarget Hedgehog pathway inhibitors and uses
thereof.

Manetti F(1), Petricci E(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Dipartimento di Biotecnologie , Chimica e Farmacia, Università di Siena ,
Siena , Italy.

In recent years, the involvement of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway in
various human diseases and dysfunctions has been clearly demonstrated. Smoothened
(Smo), one of the upstream signal transducers, has been the most druggable target
of the Hh pathway. However, the emergence of resistance to Smo inhibitors and the
identification of Smo-independent activation of the Hh pathway led to the need to
find new chemical entities able to interfere with downstream components, such as 
Gli. For this purpose, two different computational approaches have been applied
to a small-sized library of natural compounds. As a result, an isoflavone
derivative that showed ability to inhibit both Smo and Gli1 has been identified; 
namely, Glabrescione B. A new synthetic approach has been planned for this
compound and its derivatives. Biological evaluation demonstrated the mechanism of
action and showed a promising preclinical profile.

PMID: 26666870  [PubMed - in process]


63. J Neurosci. 2015 Dec 9;35(49):16126-41. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1360-15.2015.

Dendrosomatic Sonic Hedgehog Signaling in Hippocampal Neurons Regulates Axon
Elongation.

Yao PJ(1), Petralia RS(2), Ott C(3), Wang YX(2), Lippincott-Schwartz J(3),
Mattson MP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging-National Institutes
of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, yaopa@grc.nia.nih.gov. (2)Advanced Imaging 
Core, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
(NIDCD)-National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, and. (3)Cell
Biology and Metabolism Program, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development-National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(4)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging-National Institutes
of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224.

The presence of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and its signaling components in the neurons 
of the hippocampus raises a question about what role the Shh signaling pathway
may play in these neurons. We show here that activation of the Shh signaling
pathway stimulates axon elongation in rat hippocampal neurons. This Shh-induced
effect depends on the pathway transducer Smoothened (Smo) and the transcription
factor Gli1. The axon itself does not respond directly to Shh; instead, the Shh
signal transduction originates from the somatodendritic region of the neurons and
occurs in neurons with and without detectable primary cilia. Upon Shh
stimulation, Smo localization to dendrites increases significantly. Shh pathway
activation results in increased levels of profilin1 (Pfn1), an actin-binding
protein. Mutations in Pfn1's actin-binding sites or reduction of Pfn1 eliminate
the Shh-induced axon elongation. These findings indicate that Shh can regulate
axon growth, which may be critical for development of hippocampal
neurons.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Although numerous signaling mechanisms have been 
identified that act directly on axons to regulate their outgrowth, it is not
known whether signals transduced in dendrites may also affect axon outgrowth. We 
describe here a transcellular signaling pathway in embryonic hippocampal neurons 
in which activation of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) receptors in dendrites stimulates
axon growth. The pathway involves the dendritic-membrane-associated Shh signal
transducer Smoothened (Smo) and the transcription factor Gli, which induces the
expression of the gene encoding the actin-binding protein profilin 1. Our
findings suggest scenarios in which stimulation of Shh in dendrites results in
accelerated outgrowth of the axon, which therefore reaches its presumptive
postsynaptic target cell more quickly. By this mechanism, Shh may play critical
roles in the development of hippocampal neuronal circuits.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3516126-16$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4682780 [Available on 2016-06-09]
PMID: 26658865  [PubMed - in process]


64. Cancer Lett. 2016 Feb 28;371(2):143-50. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.11.012. Epub
2015 Nov 30.

Hypoxia but not normoxia promotes Smoothened transcription through upregulation
of RBPJ and Mastermind-like 3 in pancreatic cancer.

Onishi H(1), Yamasaki A(2), Kawamoto M(2), Imaizumi A(3), Katano M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address:
ohnishi@surg1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan; Shukoukai Inc., Tokyo, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is activated under
hypoxia through upregulation of transcription of Smoothened (SMO) gene. However, 
the mechanism of hypoxia-induced activation of SMO transcription remains unclear.
In the analysis of altered expressions of genes related to Hh signaling between
under normoxia and hypoxia by DNA microarray analysis, we picked up 2 genes, a
transcriptional regulator, recombination signal binding protein for
immunoglobulin-kappa-J region (RBPJ) and a transcriptional co-activator,
Mastermind-like 3 (MAML3). Expressions of SMO, MAML3 and RBPJ were increased
under hypoxia in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells (PDAC). RBPJ and MAML3
inhibition under hypoxia led to decreased SMO and GLI1 expressions, whereas SMO
expression in MAML3-inhibited and RBPJ-inhibited cells under normoxia showed no
change. However, overexpression of RBPJ under normoxia led to increased SMO
expression. Additionally, cells knocked down for MAML3 and RBPJ inhibition under 
hypoxia showed decreased invasiveness through matrix metalloproteinase-2
suppression and decreased proliferation. Xenograft mouse models showed that MAML3
and RBPJ knockdown inhibited tumorigenicity and tumor volume. Our results suggest
that hypoxia promotes SMO transcription through upregulation of MAML3 and RBPJ to
induce proliferation, invasiveness and tumorigenesis in pancreatic cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26655998  [PubMed - in process]


65. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;31(12):1602-5.

[Up-regulating effect of leptin on Hedgehog signaling pathway in the process of
adipocyte differentiation and maturity].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Y(1), Meng H(2), Chi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xijing Hospital, Xi' an 710032, China. (2)PLA Clinic Center, Xijing
Hospital, Xi' an 710032, China. (3)Department of Physiology, College of Basic
Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xijing Hospital, Xi' an 710032,
China. *Corresponding author, E-mail: chxinli@fmmu.edu.cn.

To study the regulating effect of leptin on Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway.
Methods 3T3-L1 cells were used to induce adipocyte differentiation. Real-time
quantitative PCR and Western blotting were performed to detect the mRNA and
protein levels of Gli, the key molecule in Hh signaling pathway, and investigate 
the effect of leptin on the levels in the process of adipocyte differentiation.
Results At 0, 4, 7, 10 days of adipose differentiation, mRNA and protein
expressions of Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 in Hh signaling pathway were gradually
restrained and the down-regulation of Gli1 mRNA was the most significant.
However, 100 ng/mL leptin promoted the mRNA and protein expressions of Gli1, Gli2
and Gli3 during adipose differentiation. Conclusion In the process of adipocyte
differentiation and maturity, there is an interaction between leptin and Hh
signaling pathway. Leptin can upregulate the expression of Gli in Hh pathway, and
leptin may play a role in the inhibition of adipogenesis through activating Hh
signaling pathway.

PMID: 26648290  [PubMed - in process]


66. Skeletal Radiol. 2016 Mar;45(3):393-400. doi: 10.1007/s00256-015-2307-1. Epub
2015 Dec 7.

In-vivo T2-relaxation times of asymptomatic cervical intervertebral discs.

Driscoll SJ(1), Zhong W(1,)(2), Torriani M(3), Mao H(1), Wood KB(4), Cha TD(4),
Li G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA,
02114, USA. (2)Department of Spinal Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital and Central 
South University, 139 Middle Renmin Road, Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of
China. (3)Musculoskeletal Imaging and Intervention, Department of Radiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, YAW 6E,
Boston, MA, 02114, USA. (4)Spine Service, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, YAW 3A,
Boston, MA, 02114, USA. (5)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, 
GRJ 1215, Boston, MA, 02114, USA. gli1@mgh.harvard.edu.

Limited research exists on T2-mapping techniques for cervical intervertebral
discs and its potential clinical utility. The objective of this research was to
investigate the in-vivo T2-relaxation times of cervical discs, including C2-C3
through C7-T1. Ten asymptomatic subjects were imaged using a 3.0 T MR scanner and
a sagittal multi-slice multi-echo sequence. Using the mid-sagittal image,
intervertebral discs were divided into five regions-of-interest (ROIs), centered 
along the mid-line of the disc. Average T2 relaxation time values were calculated
for each ROI using a mono-exponential fit. Differences in T2 values between disc 
levels and across ROIs of the same disc were examined. For a given ROI, the
results showed a trend of increasing relaxation times moving down the spinal
column, particularly in the middle regions (ROIs 2, 3 and 4). The C6-C7 and C7-T1
discs had significantly greater T2 values compared to superior discs (discs
between C2 and C6). The results also showed spatial homogeneity of T2 values in
the C3-C4, C4-C5, and C5-C6 discs, while C2-C3, C6-C7, and C7-T1 showed
significant differences between ROIs. The findings indicate there may be inherent
differences in T2-relaxation time properties between different cervical discs.
Clinical evaluations utilizing T2-mapping techniques in the cervical spine may
need to be level-dependent.

PMCID: PMC4718756 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26643385  [PubMed - in process]


67. Cancers (Basel). 2015 Nov 27;7(4):2330-51. doi: 10.3390/cancers7040894.

Aberrant GLI1 Activation in DNA Damage Response, Carcinogenesis and
Chemoresistance.

Palle K(1), Mani C(2), Tripathi K(3), Athar M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of
South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.
kpalle@health.southalabama.edu. (2)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell
Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue, Mobile, AL
36604, USA. cmani@health.southalabama.edu. (3)Department of Oncologic Sciences,
Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue,
Mobile, AL 36604, USA. ktripathi@health.southalabama.edu. (4)Department of
Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1530 3rd Avenue South,
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. mathar@uab.edu.

The canonical hedgehog (HH) pathway is a multicomponent signaling cascade (HH,
protein patched homolog 1 (PTCH1), smoothened (SMO)) that plays a pivotal role
during embryonic development through activation of downstream effector molecules,
namely glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), GLI2 and GLI3. Activation of 
GLIs must be tightly regulated as they modulate target genes which control tissue
patterning, stem cell maintenance, and differentiation during development.
However, dysregulation or mutations in HH signaling leads to genomic instability 
(GI) and various cancers, for example, germline mutation in PTCH1 lead to Gorlin 
syndrome, a condition where patients develop numerous basal cell carcinomas and
rarely rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Activating mutations in SMO have also been
recognized in sporadic cases of medulloblastoma and SMO is overexpressed in many 
other cancers. Recently, studies in several human cancers have shown that GLI1
expression is independent from HH ligand and canonical intracellular signaling
through PTCH and SMO. In fact, this aberrantly regulated GLI1 has been linked to 
several non-canonical oncogenic growth signals such as Kirsten rat sarcoma viral 
oncogene homolog (KRAS), avian myelocytomatosis virus oncogene cellular homolog
(C-MYC), transforming growth factor ß (TGFß), wingless-type MMTV integration site
family (WNT) and ß-catenin. Recent studies from our lab and other independent
studies demonstrate that aberrantly expressed GLI1 influences the integrity of
several DNA damage response and repair signals, and if altered, these networks
can contribute to GI and impact tumor response to chemo- and radiation therapies.
Furthermore, the ineffectiveness of SMO inhibitors in clinical studies argues for
the development of GLI1-specific inhibitors in order to develop effective
therapeutic modalities to treat these tumors. In this review, we focus on
summarizing current understanding of the molecular, biochemical and cellular
basis for aberrant GLI1 expression and discuss GLI1-mediated HH signaling on DNA 
damage responses, carcinogenesis and chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4695894
PMID: 26633513  [PubMed]


68. Neurosci Lett. 2016 Jan 12;611:94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.10.076. Epub
2015 Nov 24.

Expression pattern of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in pituitary adenomas.

Yavropoulou MP(1), Maladaki A(2), Topouridou K(2), Kotoula V(3), Poulios C(3),
Daskalaki E(3), Foroglou N(4), Karkavelas G(3), Yovos JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Clinical Endocrinology, 1st Department of Internal
Medicine, AHEPA Univ. Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.
Electronic address: margia@med.auth.gr. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and Clinical
Endocrinology, 1st Department of Internal Medicine, AHEPA Univ. Hospital,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. (3)Pathology Department, Faculty of
Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, AHEPA Univ. Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.

Several studies have demonstrated the role of Wnt and Notch signaling in the
pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas, but data are scarce regarding the role of
Hedgehog signaling. In this study we investigated the differential expression of 
gene targets of the Hedgehog signaling pathway. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
specimens from adult patients who underwent transphenoidal resection and normal
human pituitary tissues that were obtained from autopsies were used. Clinical
information and data from pre-operative MRI scan (extracellular tumor extension, 
tumor size, displacement of the optic chiasm) were retrieved from the Hospital's 
database. We used a customized RT(2) Profiler PCR Array, to investigate the
expression of genes related to Notch and Hedgehog signaling pathways (PTCH1,
PTCH2, GLI1, GLI3, NOTCH3, JAG1, HES1, and HIP). A total of 52 pituitary adenomas
(32 non-functioning adenomas, 15 somatotropinomas and 5 prolactinomas) were used 
in the final analysis. In non-functioning pituitary adenomas there was a
significant decrease (approximately 75%) in expression of all Hedgehog related
genes that were tested, while Notch3 and Jagged-1 expression was found
significantly increased, compared with normal pituitary tissue controls. In
contrast, somatotropinomas demonstrated a significant increase in expression of
all Hedgehog related genes and a decrease in the expression of Notch3 and
Jagged-1. There was no significant difference in the expression of Hedgehog and
Notch related genes between prolactinomas and healthy pituitary tissues. Hedgehog
signalling appears to be activated in somatotropinomas but not in non-functioning
pituitary adenomas in contrast to the expression pattern of Notch signalling
pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26620835  [PubMed - in process]


69. Oncogenesis. 2015 Nov 30;4:e176. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.38.

A positive feedback loop between Gli1 and tyrosine kinase Hck amplifies shh
signaling activities in medulloblastoma.

Shi X(1), Zhan X(1), Wu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is critical during normal development, and the
abnormal activation of the Shh pathway is involved in many human cancers. As a
target gene of the Shh pathway and as a transcription activator downstream of Shh
signaling, Gli1 autoregulates and increases Shh signaling output. Gli1 is one of 
the key oncogenic factors in Shh-induced tumors such as medulloblastoma. Gli1 is 
posttranslationally modified, but the nature of the active form of Gli1 was
unclear. Here we identified a Src family kinase Hck as a novel activator of Gli1.
In Shh-responsive NIH3T3 cells, Hck interacts with Gli1 and phosphorylates
multiple tyrosine residues in Gli1. Gli1-mediated target gene activation was
significantly enhanced by Hck with both kinase activity-dependent and
-independent mechanisms. We provide evidence showing that Hck disrupts the
interaction between Gli1 and its inhibitor Sufu. In both NIH3T3 cells and
cerebellum granule neuron precursors, the Hck gene is also a direct target of
Gli1. Therefore, Gli1 and Hck form a positive feedback loop that amplifies Shh
signaling transcription outcomes. In Shh-induced medulloblastoma, Hck is highly
expressed and Gli1 is tyrosine phosphorylated, which may enhance the tumorigenic 
effects of the Gli1 oncogene. RNAi-mediated inhibition of Hck expression
significantly repressed medulloblastoma cell growth. In summary, a novel positive
feedback loop contributes to maximal Gli1 oncogenic activities in Shh-induced
tumors such as medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4670963
PMID: 26619401  [PubMed]


70. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):10092-101. eCollection 2015.

Inhibition of SALL4 suppresses carcinogenesis of colorectal cancer via regulating
Gli1 expression.

Cheng J(1), Deng R(1), Wu C(1), Zhang P(1), Wu K(1), Shi L(1), Liu X(1), Bai
J(1), Deng M(1), Gao J(1), Shuai X(1), Wang G(1), Tao K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 1277 Jiefang Avenue,
Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.

BACKGROUND: SALL4 is a novel oncogene mediating tumorigenesis in multiple
carcinomas. However, its actual role and mechanisms participating in the
development of colorectal cancer remains unclear.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining and Western blot were conducted to detect
the expression of SALL4 and other molecules. siRNA of SALL4 was transfected to
silence SALL4 expression in Caco-2 cell line. Flow cytometry was used for cell
cycle and apoptosis analysis. Wound healing and transwell assay were used for
invasion test. CCK-8 test was employed for cell proliferation and drug
sensitivity assessment.
RESULTS: By inhibition of SALL4 expression, the proliferation, invasiveness and
drug resistance were dramatically reduced while apoptosis rate was up-regulated. 
Gli1 was found to decrease its expression in SALL4 silencing cells. Moreover, the
inhibition on tumorigenesis of Caco-2 by SALL4 silencing was antagonized by Gli1 
up-regulation, suggesting Gli1 as a downstream target of SALL4 in cancer
development.
CONCLUSION: SALL4 inhibition limited oncogenesis on colorectal cancer by reducing
Gli1 expression.

PMCID: PMC4637531
PMID: 26617716  [PubMed - in process]


71. Blood. 2016 Feb 4;127(5):605-15. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-07-658781. Epub 2015 Nov
24.

Active IKKß promotes the stability of GLI1 oncogene in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

Agarwal NK(1), Kim CH(1), Kunkalla K(1), Konno H(2), Tjendra Y(1), Kwon D(3),
Blonska M(4), Kozloski GA(4), Moy VT(5), Verdun RE(6), Barber GN(2), Lossos
IS(7), Vega F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology. (2)Department of Cell
Biology. (3)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Core. (4)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine. (5)Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami,
FL; (6)Division of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL; and. (7)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL. (8)Division of Hematopathology,
Department of Pathology, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine.

GLI1 oncogene has been implicated in the pathobiology of several neoplasms
including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). However, mechanisms underlying
GLI1-increased activity in DLBCL are poorly characterized. Herein, we demonstrate
that IKKß phosphorylates GLI1 in DLBCL. IKKß activation increased GLI1 protein
levels and transcriptional activity, whereas IKKß silencing decreased GLI1 levels
and transcriptional activity. Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa) mediated IKKß
activation-impaired GLI1 binding with the E3 ubiquitin ligase-ITCH, leading to
decreased K48-linked ubiquitination/degradation of GLI1. We found 8
IKKß-dependent phosphorylation sites that mediate GLI1 stability. Mutating or
deleting these residues facilitated GLI1-ITCH interaction and decreased the
protective effect of TNFa on GLI1 stability. IKKß-GLI1 crosstalk is significant
because combined inhibition of both molecules resulted in synergistic suppression
of DLBCL viability in vivo and in vitro. By linking IKKß-mediated nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B activity with GLI1, we identified a crosstalk between these 2 pathways 
that can inform the design of novel therapeutic strategies in DLBCL.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4742548 [Available on 2017-02-04]
PMID: 26603838  [PubMed - in process]


72. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 22;291(4):1933-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.691972. Epub 2015 
Nov 24.

Nuclear Factor of Activated T Cells-dependent Down-regulation of the
Transcription Factor Glioma-associated Protein 1 (GLI1) Underlies the Growth
Inhibitory Properties of Arachidonic Acid.

Comba A(1), Almada LL(2), Tolosa EJ(2), Iguchi E(2), Marks DL(2), Vara Messler
M(3), Silva R(3), Fernandez-Barrena MG(2), Enriquez-Hesles E(2), Vrabel AL(2),
Botta B(4), Di Marcotulio L(5), Ellenrieder V(6), Eynard AR(3), Pasqualini ME(3),
Fernandez-Zapico ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, Instituto de Investigaciones en Ciencias
de la Salud, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas and
Facultad de Ciencias Médicas-Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad
Universitaria, 5000 Córdoba, Argentina. (2)From the Schulze Center for Novel
Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55905. (3)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ciencias de la Salud, Consejo Nacional 
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas and Facultad de Ciencias
Médicas-Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad Universitaria, 5000 Córdoba,
Argentina. (4)Dipartimento di Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, Sapienza
University, Center for Life Nano Science at Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, 00161 Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza
University, Pasteur Institute/Cenci-Bolognetti Foundation, 00161 Rome, Italy,
and. (6)Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Oncology, University Medical Center
Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany. (7)From the Schulze Center for Novel
Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55905, fernandezzapico.martin@mayo.edu.

Numerous reports have demonstrated a tumor inhibitory effect of polyunsaturated
fatty acids (PUFAs). However, the molecular mechanisms modulating this phenomenon
are in part poorly understood. Here, we provide evidence of a novel antitumoral
mechanism of the PUFA arachidonic acid (AA). In vivo and in vitro experiments
showed that AA treatment decreased tumor growth and metastasis and increased
apoptosis. Molecular analysis of this effect showed significantly reduced
expression of a subset of antiapoptotic proteins, including BCL2, BFL1/A1, and
4-1BB, in AA-treated cells. We demonstrated that down-regulation of the
transcription factor glioma-associated protein 1 (GLI1) in AA-treated cells is
the underlying mechanism controlling BCL2, BFL1/A1, and 4-1BB expression. Using
luciferase reporters, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and expression studies, we
found that GLI1 binds to the promoter of these antiapoptotic molecules and
regulates their expression and promoter activity. We provide evidence that
AA-induced apoptosis and down-regulation of antiapoptotic genes can be inhibited 
by overexpressing GLI1 in AA-sensitive cells. Conversely, inhibition of GLI1
mimics AA treatments, leading to decreased tumor growth, cell viability, and
expression of antiapoptotic molecules. Further characterization showed that AA
represses GLI1 expression by stimulating nuclear translocation of NFATc1, which
then binds the GLI1 promoter and represses its transcription. AA was shown to
increase reactive oxygen species. Treatment with antioxidants impaired the
AA-induced apoptosis and down-regulation of GLI1 and NFATc1 activation,
indicating that NFATc1 activation and GLI1 repression require the generation of
reactive oxygen species. Collectively, these results define a novel mechanism
underlying AA antitumoral functions that may serve as a foundation for future
PUFA-based therapeutic approaches.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4722469 [Available on 2017-01-22]
PMID: 26601952  [PubMed - in process]


73. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 20;10(11):e0143591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143591.
eCollection 2015.

SOX18 Is a Novel Target Gene of Hedgehog Signaling in Cervical Carcinoma Cell
Lines.

Petrovic I(1), Milivojevic M(1), Popovic J(1), Schwirtlich M(1), Rankovic B(1),
Stevanovic M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Genetics and
Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, P.O.BOX 23, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

Although there is much evidence showing functional relationship between Hedgehog 
pathway, in particular Sonic hedgehog, and SOX transcription factors during
embryonic development, scarce data are available regarding their crosstalk in
cancer cells. SOX18 protein plays an important role in promoting tumor
angiogenesis and therefore emerged as a promising potential target in
antiangiogenic tumor therapy. Recently it became evident that expression of SOX18
gene in tumors is not restricted to endothelium of accompanying blood and
lymphatic vessels, but in tumor cells as well.In this paper we have identified
human SOX18 gene as a novel target gene of Hedgehog signaling in cervical
carcinoma cell lines. We have presented data showing that expression of SOX18
gene is regulated by GLI1 and GLI2 transcription factors, final effectors of
Hedgehog signaling, and that modulation of Hedgehog signaling activity in
considerably influence SOX18 expression. We consider important that Hedgehog
pathway inhibitors reduced SOX18 expression, thus showing, for the first time,
possibility for manipulationwith SOX18 gene expression. In addition, we analyzed 
the role of SOX18 in malignant potential of cervical carcinoma cell line, and
showed that its overexpression has no influence on cells proliferation and
viability, but substantially promotes migration and invasion of cells in vitro.
Pro-migratory effect of SOX18 suggests its role in promoting malignant spreading,
possibly in response to Hedgehog activation.

PMCID: PMC4654472
PMID: 26588701  [PubMed - in process]


74. Cancer Lett. 2016 Jan 28;370(2):313-23. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.11.006. Epub
2015 Nov 11.

Non-canonical GLI1/2 activation by PI3K/AKT signaling in renal cell carcinoma: A 
novel potential therapeutic target.

Zhou J(1), Zhu G(1), Huang J(1), Li L(1), Du Y(1), Gao Y(1), Wu D(1), Wang X(1), 
Hsieh JT(2), He D(3), Wu K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an 710061, China. (2)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (3)Department of Urology, First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. Electronic address:
dalinhe@yahoo.com. (4)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. Electronic address: kaijie_wu@163.com.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most lethal urologic malignancy; however, the
molecular events supporting RCC carcinogenesis and progression remain poorly
understood. In this study, based on the analysis of gene expression profile data 
from human clear cell RCC (ccRCC) and the corresponding normal tissues, we
discovered that Hedgehog (HH) pathway component genes GLI1 and GLI2 were
significantly elevated in ccRCC. Survival analysis of a large cohort of ccRCC
samples demonstrated that the expression of GLI1 and GLI2 was negatively
correlated with patient overall survival. Clinical sample-based VHL mutation and 
cell model-based VHL manipulation studies all indicated that the activation of
GLI1 and GLI2 was not affected by VHL status. Further signaling pathway
dissections demonstrated that GLI1 and GLI2 were activated by the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway, but not mediated by the canonical
HH/SMO/GLI signaling. Up-regulation of GLI1 and GLI2 promoted RCC proliferation
and clonogenic ability, whereas, a combination of GLIs inhibitor Gant61 and AKT
inhibitor Perifosine synergistically suppressed RCC growth and induced apoptosis 
in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, this study identifies that GLI1 and GLI2 are
critical for RCC carcinogenesis, and also provides an alternative therapeutic
strategy for RCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26577809  [PubMed - in process]


75. Biol Open. 2015 Nov 6;4(12):1660-70. doi: 10.1242/bio.013425.

N-docosahexaenoylethanolamine regulates Hedgehog signaling and promotes growth of
cortical axons.

Kharebava G(1), Rashid MA(1), Lee JW(1), Sarkar S(1), Kevala K(1), Kim HY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, Division of Intramural Clinical and
Biological Research, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA. (2)Laboratory of Molecular
Signaling, Division of Intramural Clinical and Biological Research, National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20852, USA hykim@nih.gov.

Axonogenesis, a process for the establishment of neuron connectivity, is central 
to brain function. The role of metabolites derived from docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA, 22:6n-3) that is specifically enriched in the brain, has not been addressed
in axon development. In this study, we tested if synaptamide
(N-docosahexaenoylethanolamine), an endogenous metabolite of DHA, affects axon
growth in cultured cortical neurons. We found that synaptamide increased the
average axon length, inhibited GLI family zinc finger 1 (GLI1) transcription and 
sonic hedgehog (Shh) target gene expression while inducing cAMP elevation.
Similar effects were produced by cyclopamine, a regulator of the Shh pathway.
Conversely, Shh antagonized elevation of cAMP and blocked synaptamide-mediated
increase in axon length. Activation of Shh pathway by a smoothened (SMO) agonist 
(SAG) or overexpression of SMO did not inhibit axon growth mediated by
synaptamide or cyclopamine. Instead, adenylate cyclase inhibitor SQ22536
abolished synaptamide-mediated axon growth indicating requirement of cAMP
elevation for this process. Our findings establish that synaptamide promotes axon
growth while Shh antagonizes synaptamide-mediated cAMP elevation and axon growth 
by a SMO-independent, non-canonical pathway.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4736029
PMID: 26545965  [PubMed]


76. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 6;10(11):e0140886. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140886.
eCollection 2015.

Sonic Hedgehog Signaling: Evidence for Its Protective Role in Endotoxin Induced
Acute Lung Injury in Mouse Model.

Chen X(1), Jin Y(2), Hou X(1), Liu F(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, Shandong, The People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, The
People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective role of the sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signaling associated with a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury
(ALI) in a mouse model.
METHODS: Male BALB/c mice were randomly divided into four groups: control, LPS,
LPS-cyclopamine group and cyclopamine group. ALI was induced by LPS ip injection 
(5 mg/kg). The sonic hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine (50 mg/kg) was given to the
LPS-cyclopamine group at 30 min after LPS injection as well as normal mice as
control. Lung injury was observed histologically in hematoxylin and eosin (HE)
stained tissue sections, semi-quantified by lung tissue injury score, and the
lung tissue mass alteration was measured by wet to dry weight ratio (W/D). mRNA
expression levels of TNF-a, SHH, Patched (PTC) and GLI1 in lung tissue were
studied with real time quantitative PCR (RT-PCR), while the protein expression of
SHH and GLI1 was determined by western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Lung tissue injury score, thickness of alveolar septa, W/D, and TNF-a
mRNA expression levels were significantly higher in the ALI mice than the normal 
mice (P<0.05). The mRNA expression levels of SHH, PTC, and GLI1 in the ALI mice
were significantly higher at 12h and 24h after LPS injection, but not at the 6h
time point. Protein production of SHH and GLI1 at 6h, 12h, and 24h in the lungs
of ALI mice significantly increased, in a time-dependent manner, compared with
that in normal mice. Cyclopamine alone has no effect on pathological changes in
normal mice. Intervention with cyclopamine in ALI mice led to a reduction in mRNA
levels of SHH, PTC, and GLI1 as well as SHH and GLI1 protein levels; meanwhile,
the pathological injury scores of lung tissues, thickness of alveolar septa, W/D,
and mRNA expression levels of TNF-a increased compared with mice receiving LPS
only.
CONCLUSION: The SHH signaling pathway was activated in response to LPS-induced
ALI, and up-regulation of SHH expression could alleviate lung injury and be
involved in the repair of injured lung tissue.

PMCID: PMC4636314
PMID: 26545089  [PubMed - in process]


77. Histol Histopathol. 2016 Mar;31(3):329-37. doi: 10.14670/HH-11-682. Epub 2015 Nov
6.

GLI1 expression is an important prognostic factor that contributes to the poor
prognosis of rhabdomyosarcoma.

Wang Y(1), Sun C(2), Jiang J(1), Xie Y(1), Li B(1), Cui X(3), Chen Y(3), Liu
C(4), Li F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine and Key
Laboratory for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Chinese Ministry of
Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Shihezi
University School of Medicine and Key Laboratory for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic 
Diseases, Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang and Department of
Medical Oncology, Shanxi Province People's Hospital, Xian, Shanxi, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine and Key
Laboratory for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Chinese Ministry of
Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang and Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Shihezi University School of Medicine, Shihezi, Xinjiang, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine and Key
Laboratory for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Chinese Ministry of
Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang and Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Shihezi University School of Medicine, Shihezi, Xinjiang, China.
liuliu2239@sina.com. (5)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of
Medicine and Key Laboratory for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Chinese
Ministry of Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang and Department of Pathology, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Shihezi University School of Medicine, Shihezi, Xinjiang,
China. lifeng7855@126.com.

The GLI1 and MDM2 genes are amplified or exhibit copy number gains in
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Here, we used immunohistochemistry to determine the
relationships between GLI1 and MDM2 protein expression and several
clinicopathological variables of RMS. GLI1 and MDM2-positivity rates were 61.36% 
and 13.64%, respectively. GLI1 expression correlated with presence of the
PAX3-FOXO1 fusion gene (P=0.040) and lymph node metastasis (P=0.034), and a
significant association was found between GLI1 expression and overall survival
(OS) (P=0.008). However, there was no association between MDM2 expression and any
of the clinicopathological parameters or OS. Thus, GLI1 may be a biomarker of
poor prognosis in RMS patients, and could itself be a therapeutic target. This
contrasts with the apparent lack of clinical importance of MDM2 in RMS pathology,
at least in the cohorts we examined.

PMID: 26544916  [PubMed - in process]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):E6476-85. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1520110112. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Screening for tumor suppressors: Loss of ephrin receptor A2 cooperates with
oncogenic KRas in promoting lung adenocarcinoma.

Yeddula N(1), Xia Y(1), Ke E(1), Beumer J(2), Verma IM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA 92037; (2)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
La Jolla, CA 92037; Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Laboratory
of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037;
verma@salk.edu.

Lung adenocarcinoma, a major form of non-small cell lung cancer, is the leading
cause of cancer deaths. The Cancer Genome Atlas analysis of lung adenocarcinoma
has identified a large number of previously unknown copy number alterations and
mutations, requiring experimental validation before use in therapeutics. Here, we
describe an shRNA-mediated high-throughput approach to test a set of genes for
their ability to function as tumor suppressors in the background of mutant KRas
and WT Tp53. We identified several candidate genes from tumors originated from
lentiviral delivery of shRNAs along with Cre recombinase into lungs of
Loxp-stop-Loxp-KRas mice. Ephrin receptorA2 (EphA2) is among the top candidate
genes and was reconfirmed by two distinct shRNAs. By generating knockdown,
inducible knockdown and knockout cell lines for loss of EphA2, we showed that
negating its expression activates a transcriptional program for cell
proliferation. Loss of EPHA2 releases feedback inhibition of KRAS, resulting in
activation of ERK1/2 MAP kinase signaling, leading to enhanced cell
proliferation. Intriguingly, loss of EPHA2 induces activation of GLI1
transcription factor and hedgehog signaling that further contributes to cell
proliferation. Small molecules targeting MEK1/2 and Smoothened hamper
proliferation in EphA2-deficient cells. Additionally, in EphA2 WT cells,
activation of EPHA2 by its ligand, EFNA1, affects KRAS-RAF interaction, leading
to inhibition of the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway and cell proliferation. Together,
our studies have identified that (i) EphA2 acts as a KRas cooperative tumor
suppressor by in vivo screen and (ii) reactivation of the EphA2 signal may serve 
as a potential therapeutic for KRas-induced human lung cancers.

PMCID: PMC4664320 [Available on 2016-05-24]
PMID: 26542681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1672-5. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.10.023. Epub
2015 Oct 23.

Hirschsprung Disease and Activation of Hedgehog Signaling via GLI1-3 Mutations.

Young HM(1), Stamp LA(1), Hofstra RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University of Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (2)Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Rotterdam, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
r.hofstra@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1837-1848.e5.

PMID: 26526715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Tumour Biol. 2015 Nov 2. [Epub ahead of print]

Nuclear Gli1 expression is associated with pathological complete response and
event-free survival in HER2-positive breast cancer treated with trastuzumab-based
neoadjuvant therapy.

Liu S(1), Duan X(2), Xu L(1), Ye J(1), Cheng Y(1), Liu Q(1), Zhang H(3), Zhang
S(3), Zhu S(4), Li T(3), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Disease Center, Peking University First Hospital, No. 8, Xishiku
Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, People's Republic of China. (2)Breast 
Disease Center, Peking University First Hospital, No. 8, Xishiku Street, Xicheng 
District, Beijing, 100034, People's Republic of China. 18600441365@163.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, No. 8, Xishiku
Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Medical Statistics, Peking University First Hospital, No. 8,
Xishiku Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, 100034, People's Republic of China.

Aberrant activation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has shown predictive
significance for treatment response and prognostic effect for survival in human
tumors. However, the associations of the Hh signaling pathway with response to
neoadjuvant therapy (NAT) and survival after NAT in breast cancer are unknown.
Therefore, we investigated the correlation of pretherapeutic nuclear expression
of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1), a key transcriptional factor of
the Hh signaling pathway, with pathological complete response (pCR) and
event-free survival (EFS) in HER2-positive breast cancer treated with
trastuzumab-based NAT. High nuclear Gli1 expression (OR 0.19; 95 % CI 0.07-0.54; 
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) and positive hormone receptor (HR) status (OR 0.36; 95 % CI 0.14-0.90;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028) were independent and negative predictors of pCR in multivariate
analysis. High nuclear Gli1 expression was significantly associated with lower
pCR rates in both HR-positive and HR-negative tumors (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014 and 0.024,
respectively). For survival analyses, multivariate analysis indicated that high
nuclear Gli1 expression was the only independent predictor of poorer EFS in both 
the entire population (hazard ratio 2.97; 95 % CI 1.18-7.44; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020) and
patients with non-pCR (hazard ratio 3.98; 95 % CI 1.35-11.68; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012). Our
study is the first to demonstrate the associations of high nuclear Gli1
expression with resistance to trastuzumab-based NAT and subsequent worse
prognosis in HER2-positive disease. These findings suggest that the nuclear Gli1 
protein may be a novel target of NAT for HER2-positive breast cancer.

PMID: 26526577  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


81. Cancers (Basel). 2015 Oct 23;7(4):2110-23. doi: 10.3390/cancers7040880.

Targeting the Hedgehog Pathway in Pediatric Medulloblastoma.

Huang SY(1), Yang JY(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. syhuangpcr@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Basic Medical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47906, USA. jyyang@purdue.edu. (3)Center for Cancer Research,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA. jyyang@purdue.edu.

Medulloblastoma (MB), a primitive neuroectomal tumor of the cerebellum, is the
most common malignant pediatric brain tumor. The cause of MB is largely unknown, 
but aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is responsible for ~30% of MB.
Despite aggressive treatment with surgical resection, radiation and chemotherapy,
70%-80% of pediatric medulloblastoma cases can be controlled, but most treated
patients suffer devastating side effects. Therefore, developing a new effective
treatment strategy is urgently needed. Hh signaling controls transcription of
target genes by regulating activities of the three Glioma-associated oncogene
(Gli1-3) transcription factors. In this review, we will focus on current clinical
treatment options of MB and discuss mechanisms of drug resistance. In addition,
we will describe current known molecular pathways which crosstalk with the
Hedgehog pathway both in the context of medulloblastoma and non-medulloblastoma
cancer development. Finally, we will introduce post-translational modifications
that modulate Gli1 activity and summarize the positive and negative regulations
of the Hh/Gli1 pathway. Towards developing novel combination therapies for
medulloblastoma treatment, current information on interacting pathways and direct
regulation of Hh signaling should prove critical.

PMCID: PMC4695880
PMID: 26512695  [PubMed]


82. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2016 Feb;52(2):144-8. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9964-1. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Caspases and osteogenic markers-in vitro screening of inhibition impact.

Adamova E(1,)(2), Janeckova E(1,)(3), Kleparnik K(4), Matalova E(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics CAS, v.v.i., Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic. (3)Department of Experimental Biology, Faculty of
Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. (4)Institute of Analytical
Chemistry, v.v.i., Brno, Czech Republic. (5)Institute of Animal Physiology and
Genetics CAS, v.v.i., Brno, Czech Republic. matalova@iach.cz. (6)Department of
Physiology, University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Brno, Czech
Republic. matalova@iach.cz.

Caspases, well-known players in apoptosis or inflammation, appear to have roles
also in other processes such as cell differentiation. Caspase-3, in particular,
was recently demonstrated to have non-apoptotic functions in osteogenesis.
However, the molecular pathways involved are not yet known. Therefore, we used
osteogenic PCR arrays to provide a comprehensive screening of possible
interactions of caspases in general and specifically of caspase-3 in osteogenic
networks. Embryonic micromass cultures derived from mouse forelimbs were
established and pharmacological fluoromethylketone (FMK) inhibitors applied.
Alterations were observed in expression of several genes after caspase inhibition
(Bmp1, Bmp5, Bmp6, Col10a1, Col2a1, Comp, Egf, Fgfr2, Gli1, Igf1, Nog, Phex,
Sox9, Spp1). The list suggests molecular interactions of caspases and osteogenic 
molecules and creates a background for further temporospatial and functional
studies.

PMID: 26512002  [PubMed - in process]


83. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Oct 9;14(4):12323-9. doi: 10.4238/2015.October.9.21.

Gli1 expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and its clinical
significance.

Abula Y(1), Yi C(1), Wang XY(1), Wang M(2), Qin RY(2), Guo YQ(1), Lin H(1), Li
HJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei, China. (3)Second Department of General Surgery, Shenzhen Luohu
District People's Hospital, Shenzhen, China lhjunls@163.com.

The aim of this study was to explore the correlation between the expression
levels of Gli1 and p53 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and its
pathological significance. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was employed to measure the
expression level of Gli1 and p53 in 85 sets of paraffin-embedded PDAC and
corresponding para-carcinoma tissue specimens. The relationship between these
results and the respective patients' clinicopathologic parameters was analyzed.
IHC staining revealed that the expression levels of Gli1 and p53 in cancer
tissues were evidently higher than that of para-carcinoma tissues (P < 0.05);
while Gli1 expression levels correlated with the corresponding TNM stage and
tumor infiltration depth, p53 expression level correlated with the respective TNM
stage (P < 0.05). Taken together, this study demonstrates increased expression of
Gli1 and p53 in PDAC, and proves that Gli1 could be apotential biomarker for
prognostic judgment.

PMID: 26505381  [PubMed - in process]


84. J Dent Res. 2016 Mar;95(3):302-10. doi: 10.1177/0022034515610768. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

DSPP Is Essential for Normal Development of the Dental-Craniofacial Complex.

Chen Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Ramachandran A(1), George A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brodie Tooth Development Genetics and Regenerative Medicine Research
Laboratory, Department of Oral Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Brodie Tooth Development Genetics and Regenerative Medicine 
Research Laboratory, Department of Oral Biology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA anneg@uic.edu.

The craniofacial skeleton is derived from both neural crest cells and mesodermal 
cells; however, the majority of the bone, cartilage, and connective tissue is
derived from the neural crest. Dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP) is a precursor
protein that is expressed by the connective tissues of the craniofacial skeleton,
namely, bone and dentin with high expression levels in the dentin matrix. Gene
ablation studies have shown severe dental defects in DSPP-null mutant mice.
Therefore, to elucidate the role of DSPP on the developing dental-craniofacial
complex, we evaluated phenotypic changes in the structure of intramembranous bone
and dentin mineralization using 3 different age groups of DSPP-null and wild-type
mice. Results from micro-computed tomographic, radiographic, and optical
microscopic analyses showed defective dentin, alveolar and calvarial bones, and
sutures during development. The impaired mineralization of the cranial bone
correlated well with low expression levels of Runx2, Col1, and OPN identified
using calvarial cells from DSPP-null and wild-type mice in an in vitro culture
system. However, the upregulation of MMP9, MMP2, FN, and BSP was observed.
Interestingly, the null mice also displayed low serum phosphate levels, while
calcium levels remained unchanged. Alizarin red and von Kossa staining confirmed 
the dysfunction in the terminal differentiation of osteoblasts obtained from the 
developing calvaria of DSPP-null mice. Immunohistochemical analysis of the
developing molars showed changes in Runx2, Gli1, Numb, and Notch expression in
the dental pulp cells and odontoblasts of DSPP-null mice when compared with
wild-type mice. Overall, these observations provide insight into the role of DSPP
in the normal development of the calvaria, alveolar bone, and dentin-pulp
complex.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2015.

PMCID: PMC4766953 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26503913  [PubMed - in process]


85. FASEB J. 2016 Feb;30(2):716-26. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-274944. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Lithium chloride modulates chondrocyte primary cilia and inhibits Hedgehog
signaling.

Thompson CL(1), Wiles A(2), Poole CA(2), Knight MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science,
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; and Dunedin School of
Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand clare.l.thompson@qmul.ac.uk. 
(2)*Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science,
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; and Dunedin School of
Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Lithium chloride (LiCl) exhibits significant therapeutic potential as a treatment
for osteoarthritis. Hedgehog signaling is activated in osteoarthritis, where it
promotes chondrocyte hypertrophy and cartilage matrix catabolism. Hedgehog
signaling requires the primary cilium such that maintenance of this compartment
is essential for pathway activity. Here we report that LiCl (50 mM) inhibits
Hedgehog signaling in bovine articular chondrocytes such that the induction of
GLI1 and PTCH1 expression is reduced <U+200B> by 71 and 55%, respectively. Pathway
inhibition is associated with a 97% increase in primary cilia length from 2.09 ± 
0.7 µm in untreated cells to 4.06 ± 0.9 µm in LiCl-treated cells. We show that
cilia elongation disrupts trafficking within the axoneme with a 38% reduction in 
Arl13b ciliary localization at the distal region of the cilium, consistent with
the role of Arl13b in modulating Hedgehog signaling. In addition, we demonstrate 
similar increases in cilia length in human chondrocytes in vitro and after
administration of dietary lithium to Wistar rats in vivo. Our data provide new
insights into the effects of LiCl on chondrocyte primary cilia and Hedgehog
signaling and shows for the first time that pharmaceutical targeting of the
primary cilium may have therapeutic benefits in the treatment of
osteoarthritis.-Thompson, C. L., Wiles, A., Poole, C. A., Knight, M. M. Lithium
chloride modulates chondrocyte primary cilia and inhibits Hedgehog signaling.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26499268  [PubMed - in process]


86. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Dec;12(6):8121-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4452. Epub 2015 Oct 16.

MicroRNA-200a suppresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in rat hepatic
stellate cells via GLI family zinc finger 2.

Yu F(1), Zheng Y(2), Hong W(3), Chen B(3), Dong P(1), Zheng J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R. China. (2)Department of
General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University,
Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R. China. (3)Key Laboratory of Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R.
China.

Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) have an important role in liver fibrosis.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is promoted by the Hedgehog
(Hh) signaling pathway, is involved in the activation of HSCs. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs/miRs) have been reported to be involved in the progression of liver
fibrosis. A previous study indicated that the activation of HSCs was suppressed
by miR-200a via targeting transforming growth factor-ß2 and ß-catenin. However,
whether miR-200a is able to regulate the EMT in HSCs has remained elusive. The
present study revealed that miR-200a was decreased in vitro and in vivo during
liver fibrosis. Furthermore, miR-200a overexpression resulted in the inhibition
of proliferation, a-SMA expression and extracellular matrix production of
activated HSCs. Of note, miR-200a overexpression reduced myofibroblastic markers,
including a-SMA, type I collagen and desmin, and increased the epithelial cell
marker E-cadherin. These results were further confirmed by immunofluorescence
staining. Further study showed that the expression of genes associated with Hh
signaling, including Hhip, Shh and Gli1, were not affected by miR-200a. However, 
Gli2, a downstream signaling protein of the Hh pathway, was inhibited by miR-200a
and confirmed as a target of miR-200a using a dual luciferase reporter assay. In 
addition, the inhibition of the Hh pathway by miR-200a resulted in an increase of
BMP-7 and Id2 as well as a reduction of Snai1 and S100A4. Collectively, the
results of the present study demonstrated that miR-200a suppressed the EMT
process in HSCs, at least in part, via Gli2.

PMID: 26499180  [PubMed - in process]


87. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 26;6:8741. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9741.

Corrigendum: identification of a novel actin-dependent signal transducing module 
allows for the targeted degradation of GLI1.

Schneider P, Bayo-Fina JM, Singh R, Dhanyamraju PK, Holz P, Baier A, Fendrich V, 
Ramaswamy A, Baumeister S, Martinez ED, Lauth M.

Erratum for
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:8023.

PMID: 26498676  [PubMed]


88. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 19. [Epub ahead of print]

The hedgehog antagonist HHIP as a favorable prognosticator in glioblastoma.

Chang L(1), Zhang P(1), Zhao D(2,)(3), Liu H(2,)(3), Wang Q(2,)(3), Li C(1), Du
W(1), Liu X(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang Z(4,)(5), Jiang C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, 246 XueFu Road, Nangang, Harbin, 150086, China. (2)Departments of
Clinical Pharmacy and Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, 246 XueFu Road, Nangang, Harbin, 150086, China. (3)Key
Laboratories of Education Ministry for Myocardial Ischemia Mechanism and
Treatment, 246 XueFu Road, Nangang, Harbin, 150086, China. (4)Departments of
Clinical Pharmacy and Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, 246 XueFu Road, Nangang, Harbin, 150086, China.
zhirenzh@yahoo.com. (5)Key Laboratories of Education Ministry for Myocardial
Ischemia Mechanism and Treatment, 246 XueFu Road, Nangang, Harbin, 150086, China.
zhirenzh@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital
of Harbin Medical University, 246 XueFu Road, Nangang, Harbin, 150086, China.
jcl_6688@163.com.

Inactivation of hedgehog-interacting protein (HHIP) and overexpression of Gli1
play vital roles in the development of diverse human cancers. The aim of this
study is to examine the association of HHIP and Gli1 with the clinicopathologic
features and prognosis of patients with glioblastoma (GBM). The expression of
HHIP and Gli1 in 103 patients with GBM and 32 control patients was investigated
by immunohistochemistry. Statistical analysis was utilized to evaluate the
association of HHIP as well as Gli1 with clinicopathological characteristics and 
prognosis of patients. HHIP and Gli1 were dysregulated in GBM. Spearman's rank
analysis showed that HHIP and Gli1 had an inverse correlation (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.386,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000). Expression of HHIP was significantly correlated with age (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000),
gender (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), seizure (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013), resection degree (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.033), adjuvant
treatment (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.030), and O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)
methylation (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021), while Gli1 expression was significantly correlated with 
age (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002), gender (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.033), Karnofsky performance status (KPS) score
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028), resection degree (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000), adjuvant treatment (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014), and
MGMT methylation (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.030). Kaplan-Meier method showed that patients with low
Gli1 expression had longer overall survival (OS) than those with high Gli1
expression (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000) and the OS of the patients with HHIP-positive GBM was
significantly longer than that of the patients with HHIP-negative GBM
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000). Univariate and multivariate analyses confirmed that HHIP expression 
and Gli1 expression were independent prognostic factors. Our data suggested that 
expression of HHIP could be considered as significant prognostic marker for
patients with GBM.

PMID: 26482617  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


89. Pancreas. 2015 Nov;44(8):1252-8. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000000532.

Sonic Hedgehog-GLI Family Zinc Finger 1 Signaling Pathway Promotes the Growth and
Migration of Pancreatic Cancer Cells by Regulating the Transcription of
Eukaryotic Translation Initiation Factor 5A2.

Xu X(1), Liu H, Zhang H, Dai W, Guo C, Xie C, Wei S, He S, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Gastroenterology, The Tenth People's Hospital of
Shanghai, Tongji University, Shanghai; Departments of Pathology and
Gastroenterology, The Second Hospital of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
Province; and §Department of Hepato-Biliary and Pancreatic Oncology, Fudan
University Shanghai Cancer Center, Minhang Branch, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVES: The Hh (hedgehog) signaling pathway is still waiting for further
studies because its downstream molecular mechanism remains elusive. Because
EIF5A2 (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A2) gene was up-regulated upon 
Gli1 (GLI family zinc finger 1) in pancreatic cancer (PC) cells, we speculated
that this pathway might promote tumor progression through regulating EIF5A2.
METHODS: We investigated regulation effect of Hh signaling pathway to EIF5A2 gene
transcription by Gli1 knockdown or overexpression in PC cell lines first. Then,
the regulation mechanism of Gli1 to EIF5A2 gene was studied at transcription
level. Finally, we studied cancer-promoting effects of Gli1-dependent EIF5A2 in
PC cells.
RESULTS: The data showed that Gli1 up-regulated expression of EIF5A2 by promoting
transcription via cis-acting elements in PC cells. Moreover, vimentin gene was
up-regulated significantly by sonic hedgehog (SHh)/Gli1 expression increasing,
and E-cadherin was significantly reduced. The EIF5A2 knockdown partially reversed
cell proliferation and migration induced by artificial SHh overexpression and
inhibited epithelial mesenchymal transition process in PC cells with SHh
overexpression (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data establish a novel transcription mechanism of Gli1 to EIF5A2
gene in cis-regulatory manner in PC cells. Thus, EIF5A2 oncogene effect could be 
incorporated into cancer-promoting molecular network upon Hh signaling pathway.

PMID: 26465952  [PubMed - in process]


90. Cell Tissue Res. 2016 Mar;363(3):775-89. doi: 10.1007/s00441-015-2285-6. Epub
2015 Oct 9.

The pro-fibrotic properties of transforming growth factor on human fibroblasts
are counteracted by caffeic acid by inhibiting myofibroblast formation and
collagen synthesis.

Mia MM(1), Bank RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology & Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
R.A.Bank@umcg.nl.

Fibrosis is a chronic disorder affecting many organs. A universal process in
fibrosis is the formation of myofibroblasts and the subsequent collagen
deposition by these cells. Transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFß1) plays a major
role in the formation of myofibroblasts, e.g. by activating fibroblasts.
Currently, no treatments are available to circumvent fibrosis. Caffeic acid
phenethyl ester (CAPE) shows a broad spectrum of biological activities, including
anti-fibrotic properties in vivo in mice and rats. However, little is known about
the direct effects of CAPE on fibroblasts. We have tested whether CAPE is able to
suppress myofibroblast formation and collagen formation of human dermal and lung 
fibroblasts exposed to TGFß1, and found that this was indeed the case. In fact,
the formation of myofibroblasts by TGFß1 and subsequent collagen formation was
completely abolished by CAPE. The same was observed for fibronectin and tenascin 
C. The lack of myofibroblast formation is likely due to the suppression of GLI1
and GLI2 expression by CAPE because of diminished nuclear SMAD2/3 levels.
Post-treatment with CAPE after myofibroblast formation even resulted in a partial
reversal of myofibroblasts into fibroblasts and/or reduction in collagen
formation. Major discrepancies were seen between mRNA levels of collagen type I
and cells stained positive for collagen, underlining the need for protein data in
fibrosis studies to make reliable conclusions.

PMCID: PMC4761014
PMID: 26453399  [PubMed - in process]


91. J Orthop Res. 2016 Apr;34(4):641-9. doi: 10.1002/jor.23066. Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Indian hedgehog signaling and the role of graft tension in tendon-to-bone
healing: Evaluation in a rat ACL reconstruction model.

Carbone A(1), Carballo C(1), Ma R(2), Wang H(1), Deng X(1), Dahia C(1), Rodeo
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Special Surgery, 535 E. 70th Street, New York, 10021, New York.
(2)Missouri Orthopaedic Institute, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri.

The structure and composition of the native enthesis is not recapitulated
following tendon-to-bone repair. Indian Hedgehog (IHH) signaling has recently
been shown to be important in enthesis development in a mouse model but no
studies have evaluated IHH signaling in a healing model. Fourteen adult male rats
underwent ACL reconstruction using a flexor tendon graft. Rats were assigned to
two groups based on whether or not they received 0N or 10N of pre-tension of the 
graft. Specimens were evaluated at 3 and 6 weeks post-operatively using
immunohistochemistry for three different protein markers of IHH signaling.
Quantitative analysis of staining area and intensity using custom software
demonstrated that IHH signaling was active in interface tissue formed at the
healing tendon-bone interface. We also found increased staining area and
intensity of IHH signaling proteins at 3 weeks in animals that received a
pre-tensioned tendon graft. No significant differences were seen between the
3-week and 6-week time points. Our data suggests that the IHH signaling pathway
is active during the tendon-bone healing process and appears to be
mechanosensitive, as pre-tensioning of the graft at the time of surgery resulted 
in increased IHH signaling at three weeks. © 2015 Orthopaedic Research Society.
Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 34:641-649, 2016.

© 2015 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26447744  [PubMed - in process]


92. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Oct 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Sonic Hedgehog Signaling Affected by Promoter Hypermethylation Induces Aberrant
Gli2 Expression in Spina Bifida.

Lu XL(1), Wang L(2), Chang SY(1), Shangguan SF(1), Wang Z(1), Wu LH(1), Zou
JZ(3), Xiao P(3), Li R(1), Bao YH(1), Qiu ZY(1), Zhang T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital 
Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, 100020, China. (2)Beijing Municipal Key
Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, 
Beijing, 100020, China. lily_wang@yeah.net. (3)Department of Pathology, Capital
Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, 100020, China. (4)Beijing Municipal Key
Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, 
Beijing, 100020, China. zhangtingcv@126.com.

GLI2 is a key mediator of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway and plays an
important role in neural tube development during vertebrate embryogenesis;
however, the role of gli2 in human folate-related neural tube defects remains
unclear. In this study, we compared methylation status and polymorphisms of gli2 
between spina bifida patients and a control group to explore the underlying
mechanisms related to folate deficiency in spina bifida. No single nucleotide
polymorphism was found to be significantly different between the two groups,
although gli2 methylation levels were significantly increased in spina bifida
samples, accompanied by aberrant GLI2 expression. Moreover, a prominent negative 
correlation was found between the folate level in brain tissue and the gli2
methylation status (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.41, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014), and gli2 hypermethylation increased
the risk of spina bifida with an odds ratio of 12.45 (95 % confidence interval:
2.71-57.22, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). In addition, we established a cell model to illustrate
the effect of gli2 expression and the accessibility of chromatin affected by
methylation. High gli2 and gli1 mRNA expression was detected in 5-Aza-treated
cells, while gli2 hypermethylation resulted in chromatin inaccessibility and a
reduced association with nuclear proteins containing transcriptional factors.
More meaningful to the pathway, the effect gene of the Shh pathway, gli1, was
found to have a reduced level of expression along with a decreased expression of 
gli2 in our cell model. Aberrant high methylation resulted in the low expression 
of gli2 in spina bifida, which was affected by the change in chromatin status and
the capacity of transcription factor binding.

PMID: 26446020  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


93. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan;34(1):55-66. doi: 10.1002/stem.2219. Epub 2015 Nov 17.

LncRNA-Hh Strengthen Cancer Stem Cells Generation in Twist-Positive Breast Cancer
via Activation of Hedgehog Signaling Pathway.

Zhou M(1), Hou Y(1,)(2), Yang G(3), Zhang H(1), Tu G(3), Du YE(1), Wen S(1), Xu
L(1), Tang X(1), Tang S(1), Yang L(1), Cui X(4,)(5), Liu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, Chinese Ministry of
Education, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Experimental Teaching Center of Basic Medicine Science, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Endocrine and
Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Surgery Samuel Oschin
Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California, USA. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samuel Oschin
Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a subpopulation of neoplastic cells with
self-renewal capacity and limitless proliferative potential as well as high
invasion and migration capacity. These cells are commonly associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is also critical for tumor
metastasis. Recent studies illustrate a direct link between EMT and stemness of
cancer cells. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as important new
players in the regulation of multiple cellular processes in various diseases. To 
date, the role of lncRNAs in EMT-associated CSC stemness acquisition and
maintenance remains unclear. In this study, we discovered that a set of lncRNAs
were dysregulated in Twist-positive mammosphere cells using lncRNA microarray
analysis. Multiple lncRNAs-associated canonical signaling pathways were
identified via bioinformatics analysis. Especially, the Shh-GLI1 pathway
associated lncRNA-Hh, transcriptionally regulated by Twist, directly targets GAS1
to stimulate the activation of hedgehog signaling (Hh). The activated Hh
increases GLI1 expression, and enhances the expression of SOX2 and OCT4 to play a
regulatory role in CSC maintenance. Thus, the mammosphere-formation efficiency
(MFE) and the self-renewal capacity in vitro, and oncogenicity in vivo in
Twist-positive breast cancer cells are elevated. lncRNA-Hh silence in
Twist-positive breast cells attenuates the activated Shh-GLI1 signaling and
decreases the CSC-associated SOX and OCT4 levels, thus reduces the MFE and
tumorigenesis of transplanted tumor. Our results reveal that lncRNAs function as 
an important regulator endowing Twist-induced EMT cells to gain the CSC-like
stemness properties. Stem Cells 2016;34:55-66.

© 2015 The Authors STEM CELLS published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of
AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26418365  [PubMed - in process]


94. Anat Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;48(3):188-94. doi: 10.5115/acb.2015.48.3.188. Epub 2015 
Sep 22.

Nfic regulates tooth root patterning and growth.

Kim TH(1), Bae CH(1), Yang S(1), Park JC(2), Cho ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cluster for Craniofacial Development and Regeneration Research, Institute of
Oral Biosciences, School of Dentistry, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju,
Korea. (2)Department of Oral Histology-Developmental Biology, Dental Research
Institute, School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Molecular interactions between epithelium and mesenchyme are important for root
formation. Nuclear factor I-C (Nfic) has been identified as a key regulator of
root formation. However, the mechanisms of root formation and their interactions 
between Hertwig's epithelial root sheath (HERS) and mesenchyme remain unclear. In
this study, we investigated the role of Nfic in root patterning and growth during
molar root development. The molars of Nfic knockout mice exhibited an enlarged
pulp chamber and apical displacement of the pulpal floor, characteristic features
of taurodontism, due to delayed furcation formation. In developing molar roots of
mutant mice at P14, BrdU positive cells decreased in the apical mesenchyme of the
elongation region whereas those cells increased in the dental papilla of the
furcation region. Whereas cytokeratin 14 and laminin were localized in HERS cells
of mutant molars, Smoothened (Smo) and Gli1 were downregulated in
preodontoblasts. In contrast, cytokeratin 14 and Smo were localized in the cells 
of the furcation region of mutant molars. These results indicate that Nfic
regulates cell proliferation in the dental mesenchyme and affects the fate of
HERS cells in a site-specific manner. From the results, it is suggested that Nfic
is required for root patterning and growth during root morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4582161
PMID: 26417478  [PubMed]


95. Nature. 2015 Oct 15;526(7573):448-52. doi: 10.1038/nature14957. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Inhibition of Gli1 mobilizes endogenous neural stem cells for remyelination.

Samanta J(1), Grund EM(1), Silva HM(2), Lafaille JJ(2), Fishell G(1), Salzer
JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University Neuroscience Institute, Department of Neuroscience and
Physiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016,
USA. (2)The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New
York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015 Nov;16(11):646.

Enhancing repair of myelin is an important but still elusive therapeutic goal in 
many neurological disorders. In multiple sclerosis, an inflammatory demyelinating
disease, endogenous remyelination does occur but is frequently insufficient to
restore function. Both parenchymal oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and
endogenous adult neural stem cells resident within the subventricular zone are
known sources of remyelinating cells. Here we characterize the contribution to
remyelination of a subset of adult neural stem cells, identified by their
expression of Gli1, a transcriptional effector of the sonic hedgehog pathway. We 
show that these cells are recruited from the subventricular zone to populate
demyelinated lesions in the forebrain but never enter healthy, white matter
tracts. Unexpectedly, recruitment of this pool of neural stem cells, and their
differentiation into oligodendrocytes, is significantly enhanced by genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of Gli1. Importantly, complete inhibition of canonical
hedgehog signalling was ineffective, indicating that the role of Gli1 both in
augmenting hedgehog signalling and in retarding myelination is specialized.
Indeed, inhibition of Gli1 improves the functional outcome in a
relapsing/remitting model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and is
neuroprotective. Thus, endogenous neural stem cells can be mobilized for the
repair of demyelinated lesions by inhibiting Gli1, identifying a new therapeutic 
avenue for the treatment of demyelinating disorders.

PMID: 26416758  [PubMed - in process]


96. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33648-57. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5203.

GLI1 orchestrates CXCR4/CXCR7 signaling to enhance migration and metastasis of
breast cancer cells.

Inaguma S(1), Riku M(1), Ito H(1), Tsunoda T(1), Ikeda H(1), Kasai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.

The up-regulation of chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7 impacts on the distant
metastasis and prognosis of breast cancer, though knowledge about the regulatory 
mechanism of their expressions is limited. Meanwhile, the GLI transcription
factors of Hedgehog signaling have been reported to play a pivotal role in the
development and progression of many types of human cancer. In breast cancer, the 
increased expression of GLI1 correlated with metastasis and unfavorable overall
prognosis, though its molecular mechanism is also not fully understood. Based on 
our findings that GLI1 enhanced the lung metastasis of breast cancer cells in a
mouse model system, we comprehensively screened for genes up-regulated by GLI1 in
breast cancer cells, and as such identified CXCR4, CXCR7/ACKR3, and actin-binding
protein LCP1/L-PLASTIN, all of which have been reported to be involved in
CXCL12-stimulating signaling. In breast cancer cells, we found that GLI1 and GLI2
up-regulated these expressions, while treatment with GLI-specific inhibitor
GANT61 reduced the expressions. As for CXCR4, we confirmed it as a direct target 
of GLI1 through the reporter assay and the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
We also found that GLI1 enhanced CXCL12-induced ERK phosphorylation and cell
migration, both of which were blocked by either CXCR4-specific inhibitor or
knockdown of CXCR7 or LCP1. These evidences suggest an indispensable role of GLI1
in the migration and metastasis of breast cancer cells through CXCL12/CXCR4
signaling enhancement.

PMCID: PMC4741792
PMID: 26413813  [PubMed - in process]


97. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Oct 13;5(4):461-70. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.08.013.
Epub 2015 Sep 24.

A Dorsal SHH-Dependent Domain in the V-SVZ Produces Large Numbers of
Oligodendroglial Lineage Cells in the Postnatal Brain.

Tong CK(1), Fuentealba LC(1), Shah JK(1), Lindquist RA(2), Ihrie RA(3), Guinto
CD(1), Rodas-Rodriguez JL(1), Alvarez-Buylla A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery and The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of Neurological
Surgery and The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem
Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA; Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (3)Departments of Cancer Biology and Neurological
Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232-6840, USA.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery and The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Neuroscience Graduate Program,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic
address: abuylla@stemcell.ucsf.edu.

Neural stem cells in different locations of the postnatal mouse
ventricular-subventricular zone (V-SVZ) generate different subtypes of olfactory 
bulb (OB) interneurons. High Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling in the ventral V-SVZ 
regulates the production of specific subtypes of neurons destined for the OB.
Here we found a transient territory of high SHH signaling in the dorsal V-SVZ
beneath the corpus callosum (CC). Using intersectional lineage tracing in
neonates to label dorsal radial glial cells (RGCs) expressing the SHH target gene
Gli1, we demonstrate that this region produces many CC cells in the
oligodendroglial lineage and specific subtypes of neurons in the OB. The number
of oligodendroglial cells generated correlated with the levels of SHH signaling. 
This work identifies a dorsal domain of SHH signaling, which is an important
source of oligodendroglial cells for the postnatal mammalian forebrain.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4624995
PMID: 26411905  [PubMed - in process]


98. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):6867-72. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4311. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

Microarray data analysis of neuroblastoma: Expression of SOX2 downregulates the
expression of MYCN.

Bao J(1), Qin L(2), Cui L(3), Wang X(1), Meng Q(1), Zhu L(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Henan Provincial People's Hospital,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450003, P.R. China. (2)Nursing College, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, P.R. China. (3)College of Public Health, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to identify the genes directly or indirectly correlated
with the amplification of MYCN in neuroblastoma (NB). Microarray data (GSE53371) 
were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus, and included 10 NB cell lines with 
MYCN amplification and 10 NB cell lines with normal MYCN copy numbers.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using the Linear Models for
Microarray Data package, and a false discovery rate of <0.05 and |log2FC (fold
change)|>1 were selected as cut-off criteria. Hierarchical clustering analysis
and Gene Ontology analysis were respectively performed for the DEGs using the
Pheatmap package in R language and The Database for Annotation, Visualization and
Integrated Discovery. A protein-protein interaction network (PPI) was constructed
for the DEGs using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes
database. Pathway analysis was performed for the DEGs in the PPI network using
the WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit. The correlation between MYCN and the key
gene associated with MYCN was determined using Pearson's correlation coefficient.
In total, 137 downregulated and 35 upregulated DEGs were identified. Functional
enrichment analysis indicated that KCNMB4 was involved in the regulation of
action potential in neuron term, and the FOS, GLI3 and GLI1 genes were involved
in the extracellular matrix-receptor interaction pathway. The PPI network and
correlation analysis revealed that the expression of SOX2 was directly correlated
with the expression of MYCN, and the correlation coefficient of SOX2 and MYCN was
-0.83. Therefore, SOX2, KCNMB4, FOS, GLI3 and GLI1 may be involved in the
pathogenesis of NB, with the expression of SOX2 downregulating the expression of 
MYCN.

PMID: 26398570  [PubMed - in process]


99. J Nutr Biochem. 2016 Jan;27:32-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.08.016. Epub 2015 
Aug 21.

Tea polyphenols epigallocatechin gallete and theaflavin restrict mouse liver
carcinogenesis through modulation of self-renewal Wnt and hedgehog pathways.

Sur S(1), Pal D(2), Mandal S(3), Roy A(4), Panda CK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37, S.P.
Mukherjee Road, Kolkata 700 026, West Bengal, India. Electronic address:
subhayansur18@gmail.com. (2)Dept. of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata 700 026, West Bengal, India.
Electronic address: dbln.pl@gmail.com. (3)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road,
Kolkata 700 026, India. (4)North Bengal Medical College and Hospital, West
Bengal, India. (5)Dept. of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer
Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata 700 026, West Bengal, India.
Electronic address: ckpanda.cnci@gmail.com.

The aim of this study is to evaluate chemopreventive and therapeutic efficacy of 
tea polyphenols epigallocatechin gallete (EGCG) and theaflavin (TF) on
self-renewal Wnt and Hedgehog (Hh) pathways during
CCl4/N-nitosodiethylamine-induced mouse liver carcinogenesis. For this purpose,
the effect of EGCG/TF was investigated in liver lesions of different groups at
pre-, continuous and post initiation stages of carcinogenesis. Comparatively
increased body weights were evident due to EGCG/TF treatment than carcinogen
control mice. Both EGCG and TF could restrict the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma at 30th week of carcinogen application showing potential
chemoprevention in continuous treated group (mild dysplasia) followed by
pretreated (moderate dysplasia) and therapeutic efficacy in posttreated group
(mild dysplasia). This restriction was associated with significantly reduced
proliferation, increased apoptosis, decreased prevalence of hepatocyte progenitor
cell (AFP) and stem cell population (CD44) irrespective of EGCG/TF treatments.
The EGCG/TF could modulate the Wnt pathway by reducing ß-catenin and
phospho-ß-catenin-Y-654 expressions along with up-regulation of sFRP1 (secreted
frizzled-related protein 1) and adenomatosis polyposis coli during the
restriction. In case of the Hh pathway, EGCG/TF could also reduce expressions of 
glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1) and SMO (smoothened homolog) along
with up-regulation of PTCH1 (patched homolog 1). As a result, in Wnt/Hh
regulatory pathways decreased expressions of ß-catenin/Gli1 target genes like
CyclinD1, cMyc and EGFR/phospho-EGFR-Y-1173 and up-regulation of E-cadherin were 
seen during the restriction. Thus, the restriction of liver carcinogenesis by
EGCG/TF was due to reduction in hepatocyte progenitor cell/stem cell population
along with modulation of Wnt/Hh and other regulatory pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26386739  [PubMed - in process]


100. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Feb;40(2):131-42. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10544. Epub 2015 Oct 6.

Inhibition of Gli/hedgehog signaling in prostate cancer cells by "cancer bush"
Sutherlandia frutescens extract.

Lin H(1,)(2,)(3), Jackson GA(3,)(4,)(5), Lu Y(2,)(3), Drenkhahn SK(2,)(3),
Brownstein KJ(2,)(3,)(6), Starkey NJ(2,)(3), Lamberson WR(3,)(7), Fritsche
KL(3,)(7), Mossine VV(2,)(3), Besch-Williford CL(3,)(4), Folk WR(2,)(3), Zhang
Y(1), Lubahn DB(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Key Laboratory of
Animal Reproductive Physiology & Embryo Technology, Ministry of Agriculture,
Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, 65211, USA. (3)MU Center for Botanical Interaction 
Studies, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, 65211, USA. (4)Department of
Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, 65211, USA. 
(5)Department of Veterinary Technology, Nebraska College of Technical
Agriculture, Curtis, Nebraska, 69025, USA. (6)Institute of Biological Chemistry, 
Washington State University, Pullman, Washington, 99164, USA. (7)Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, 65211, USA.

Sutherlandia frutescens is a medicinal plant, traditionally used to treat various
types of human diseases, including cancer. Previous studies of several botanicals
link suppression of prostate cancer growth with inhibition of the Gli/hedgehog
(Gli/Hh) signaling pathway. Here we hypothesized the anti-cancer effect of S.
frutescens was linked to its inhibition of the Gli/Hh signaling in prostate
cancer. We found a dose- and time-dependent growth inhibition in human prostate
cancer cells, PC3 and LNCaP, and mouse prostate cancer cell, TRAMP-C2, treated
with S. frutescens methanol extract (SLE). We also observed a dose-dependent
inhibition of the Gli-reporter activity in Shh Light II and TRAMP-C2QGli cells
treated with SLE. In addition, SLE can inhibit Gli/Hh signaling by blocking Gli1 
and Ptched1 gene expression in the presence of a Gli/Hh signaling agonist (SAG). 
A diet supplemented with S. frutescens suppressed the formation of poorly
differentiated carcinoma in prostates of TRAMP mice. Finally, we found
Sutherlandioside D was the most potent compound in the crude extract that could
suppress Gli-reporter in Shh Light II cells. Together, this suggests that the S. 
frutescens extract may exert anti-cancer effect by targeting Gli/Hh signaling,
and Sutherlandioside D is one of the active compounds.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMCID: PMC4713350 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26377232  [PubMed - in process]


101. Sci Signal. 2015 Sep 15;8(394):ra92. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaa7355.

An essential role for Ga(i2) in Smoothened-stimulated epithelial cell
proliferation in the mammary gland.

Villanueva H(1), Visbal AP(1), Obeid NF(2), Ta AQ(2), Faruki AA(2), Wu MF(2),
Hilsenbeck SG(3), Shaw CA(4), Yu P(5), Plummer NW(6), Birnbaumer L(6), Lewis
MT(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Lester and Sue Smith Breast
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Department of
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, TEES-AgriLife Center for
Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843, USA. (6)Neurobiology Laboratory, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA. (7)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Department of Radiology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. mtlewis@bcm.edu.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is critical for organogenesis, tissue homeostasis, and
stem cell maintenance. The gene encoding Smoothened (SMO), the primary effector
of Hh signaling, is expressed aberrantly in human breast cancer, as well as in
other cancers. In mice that express a constitutively active form of SMO that does
not require Hh stimulation in mammary glands, the cells near the transgenic cells
proliferate and participate in hyperplasia formation. Although SMO is a
seven-transmembrane receptor like G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),
SMO-mediated activation of the Gli family of transcription factors is not known
to involve G proteins. However, data from Drosophila and mammalian cell lines
indicate that SMO functions as a GPCR that couples to heterotrimeric G proteins
of the pertussis toxin (PTX)-sensitive Gai class. Using genetically modified
mice, we demonstrated that SMO signaling through G proteins occurred in the
mammary gland in vivo. SMO-induced stimulation of proliferation was PTX-sensitive
and required Gai2, but not Gai1, Gai3, or activation of Gli1 or Gli2. Our
findings show that activated SMO functions as a GPCR to stimulate proliferation
in vivo, a finding that may have clinical importance because most SMO-targeted
agents have been selected based largely on their ability to block Gli-mediated
transcription.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26373672  [PubMed - in process]


102. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Sep 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Enhanced Expression of Hedgehog Pathway Proteins in Oral Epithelial Dysplasia.

Dias RB(1), Valverde LF, Sales CB, Guimarães VS, Cabral MG, de Aquino Xavier FC, 
Dos Santos JN, Ramos EA, Gurgel Rocha CA.

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Pathology and Molecular Biology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation
Laboratory of Oral Surgical Pathology, School of Dentistry of the Federal
University of Bahia, Bahia Department of Pathology and Oral Diagnosis, School of
Dentistry of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to characterize the profile of the proteins involved in
the Hedgehog signaling pathway to aid in the understanding of the pathogenesis of
oral epithelial dysplasia (OED). The proteins SHH, PTCH1, HHIP, SUFU, GLI1, and
cyclin D1 were evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 25 cases of OED, 4 of
non-neoplasic oral mucosa, 8 of inflammatory fibrous hyperplasia and 5 of
hyperkeratosis. SHH proteins were predominant in OED cases. Although PTCH1
protein was observed in all cases, this molecule was more highly expressed in
OED. The inhibitor protein SUFU was present in OED and HHIP protein was
overexpressed in OED. GLI1 proteins were predominantly found in the nuclei of
epithelial cells in OED. Basal and suprabasal cells in the epithelial lining were
positive for cyclin D1 only in OED. In conclusion, comparative analysis of the
proteins involved in the Hedgehog pathway suggests that enhanced expression of
these proteins can play an important role in the biological behavior of OED.

PMID: 26371433  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


103. J Cell Physiol. 2016 May;231(5):1033-44. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25192. Epub 2015 Sep
22.

HhAntag, a Hedgehog Signaling Antagonist, Suppresses Chondrogenesis and Modulates
Canonical and Non-Canonical BMP Signaling.

Mundy C(1), Bello A(2), Sgariglia F(1), Koyama E(1), Pacifici M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Program in Pediatric Orthopaedics, Division of
Orthopaedic Surgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (2)Bucknell University, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania.

Chondrogenesis subtends the development of most skeletal elements and involves
mesenchymal cell condensations differentiating into growth plate chondrocytes
that proliferate, undergo hypertrophy, and are replaced by bone. In the pediatric
disorder Hereditary Multiple Exostoses, however, chondrogenesis occurs also at
ectopic sites and causes formation of benign cartilaginous tumors-exostoses-near 
the growth plates. No treatment is currently available to prevent or reverse
exostosis formation. Here, we asked whether chondrogenesis could be stopped by
targeting the hedgehog pathway, one of its major regulators. Micromass cultures
of limb mesenchymal cells were treated with increasing amounts of the hedgehog
inhibitor HhAntag or vehicle. The drug effectively blocked chondrogenesis and did
so in a dose-dependent manner as monitored by: alcian blue-positive cartilage
nodule formation; gene expression of cartilage marker genes; and reporter
activity in Gli1-LacZ cell cultures. HhAntag blocked chondrogenesis even when the
cultures were co-treated with bone morphogenetic protein 2 (rhBMP-2), a strong
pro-chondrogenic factor. Immunoblots showed that HhAntag action included
modulation of canonical (pSmad1/5/8) and non-canonical (pp38) BMP signaling. In
cultures co-treated with HhAntag plus rhBMP-2, there was a surprising strong
up-regulation of pp38 levels. Implantation of rhBMP-2-coated beads near
metacarpal elements in cultured forelimb explants induced formation of ectopic
cartilage that however, was counteracted by HhAntag co-treatment. Collectively,
our data indicate that HhAntag inhibits not only hedgehog signaling, but also
modulates canonical and non-canonical BMP signaling and blocks basal and
rhBMP2-stimulated chondrogenesis, thus representing a potentially powerful
drug-based strategy to counter ectopic cartilage growth or induce its involution.
J. Cell. Physiol. 231: 1033-1044, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26363135  [PubMed - in process]


104. J Dent Res. 2015 Nov;94(11):1495-501. doi: 10.1177/0022034515603972. Epub 2015
Sep 8.

Stem Cells in Teeth and Craniofacial Bones.

Zhao H(1), Chai Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Center for
Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA huzhao@usc.edu ychai@usc.edu.

Stem cells are remarkable, and stem cell-based tissue engineering is an emerging 
field of biomedical science aiming to restore damaged tissue or organs. In
dentistry and reconstructive facial surgery, it is of great interest to restore
lost teeth or craniofacial bone defects using stem cell-mediated therapy. In the 
craniofacial region, various stem cell populations have been identified with
regeneration potential. In this review, we provide an overview of the current
knowledge concerning the various types of tooth- and craniofacial bone-related
stem cells and discuss their in vivo identities and regulating mechanisms.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2015.

PMCID: PMC4622324 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26350960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 2015;34(3):213-25.

Role of GLI1 and NDRG1 in Increased Resistance to Apoptosis Induction.

Wu F(1), Rom WN(2), Koshiji M(3), Mo Y(4), Hosomi Y(5), Tchou-Wong KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 
Tuxedo, New York. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, and
Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 550
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. (3)Department of Environmental Medicine,
New York University School of Medicine, Tuxedo, New York; Clinical Oncology,
Merck & Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, New Jersey. (4)Division of Pulmonary,
Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, New York University
School of Medicine, New York; Department of Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky. (5)Division of
Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, New York
University School of Medicine, New York; Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious
Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

We examined the effects of GLI1 expression in PW mouse embryo fibroblasts and
H441 lung carcinoma cells. Ectopic expression of GLI1 in PW cells induced
anchorage-independent growth and increased resistance to staurosporine-induced
apoptosis, and overexpression of GLI1 in H441 cells caused resistance to
apoptosis induced by staurosporine and etoposide. GLI1 expression in both H441
and PW cells was associated with increased expression of NDRG1, a gene known to
be downregulated by the MYC family of proteins, indicating that upregulation of
NDRG1 by GLI1 is not cell-type specific. Consistent with suppression of NDRG1 by 
c-MYC and N-MYC, increased NDRG1 expression correlated with decreased expression 
of c-MYC and N-MYC in GLI1-expressing H441 and GLI1-expressing PW cells,
respectively. Downregulation of GLI1 expression in A549 cells by siRNA
transfection increased sensitivity to etoposide-induced apoptosis, and
downregulation of NDRG1 expression in H441 cells by siRNA transfection increased 
sensitivity to etoposide-induced apoptosis. Of clinical significance, inhibition 
of GLI1 and NDRG1 expression may increase sensitivity of cancer cells to
chemotherapeutic drugs. Strategies that aim to inhibit GLI1 function and NDRG1
expression may be useful for targeted therapy of cancers induced by the SHH-GLI
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4683583
PMID: 26349604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Bone. 2015 Dec;81:524-32. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 Sep 6.

Hedgehog signaling mediates woven bone formation and vascularization during
stress fracture healing.

Kazmers NH(1), McKenzie JA(2), Shen TS(2), Long F(3), Silva MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, Campus Box 8233, 660
South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address:
nkazmers@gmail.com. (2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, 
Campus Box 8233, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, Campus Box 8233, 660 South Euclid 
Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Medicine, Washington University, 
St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University,
St. Louis, MO, USA. (4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, 
Campus Box 8233, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is critical in developmental osteogenesis, and recent
studies suggest it may also play a role in regulating osteogenic gene expression 
in the post-natal setting. However, there is a void of studies directly assessing
the effect of Hh inhibition on post-natal osteogenesis. This study utilized a
cyclic loading-induced ulnar stress fracture model to evaluate the hypothesis
that Hh signaling contributes to osteogenesis and angiogenesis during stress
fracture healing. Immediately prior to loading, adult rats were given GDC-0449
(Vismodegib - a selective Hh pathway inhibitor; 50mg/kg orally twice daily), or
vehicle. Hh signaling was upregulated in response to stress fracture at 3 days
(Ptch1, Gli1 expression), and was markedly inhibited by GDC-0449 at 1 day and 3
days in the loaded and non-loaded ulnae. GDC-0449 did not affect Hh ligand
expression (Shh, Ihh, Dhh) at 1 day, but decreased Shh expression by 37% at 3
days. GDC-0449 decreased woven bone volume (-37%) and mineral density (-17%) at 7
days. Dynamic histomorphometry revealed that the 7 day callus was composed
predominantly of woven bone in both groups. The observed reduction in woven bone 
occurred concomitantly with decreased expression of Alpl and Ibsp, but was not
associated with differences in early cellular proliferation (as determined by
callus PCNA staining at 3 days), osteoblastic differentiation (Osx expression at 
1 day and 3 days), chondrogenic gene expression (Acan, Sox9, and Col2a1
expression at 1 day and 3 days), or bone resorption metrics (callus TRAP staining
at 3 days, Rankl and Opg expression at 1 day and 3 days). To evaluate
angiogenesis, vWF immunohistochemistry showed that GDC-0449 reduced fracture
callus blood vessel density by 55% at 3 days, which was associated with increased
Hif1a gene expression (+30%). Dynamic histomorphometric analysis demonstrated
that GDC-0449 also inhibited lamellar bone formation. Lamellar bone analysis of
the loaded limb (directly adjacent to the woven bone callus) showed that GDC-0449
significantly decreased mineral apposition rate (MAR) and bone formation rate
(BFR/BS) (-17% and -20%, respectively). Lamellar BFR/BS in the non-loaded ulna
was also significantly decreased (-37%), indicating that Hh signaling was
required for normal bone modeling. In conclusion, Hh signaling plays an important
role in post-natal osteogenesis in the setting of stress fracture healing,
mediating its effects directly through regulation of bone formation and
angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4640972 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26348666  [PubMed - in process]


107. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jul 1;8(7):7762-73. eCollection 2015.

Knockdown of Gli1 by small-interfering RNA enhances the effects of BCNU on the
proliferation and apoptosis of glioma U251 cells.

Guo W(1), Tian H(2), Dong X(3), Bai J(4), Yang X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research Institute, Cancer Affiliated Hospital of
Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi 830000, P. R. China. (2)Department of
Neurosurgery, Shandong University Qingdao 266000, P. R. China. (3)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Cancer Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University 
Urumqi 830000, P. R. China. (4)Department of Orthopedics, Cancer Affiliated
Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi 830000, P. R. China. (5)Department
of General Medicine, Cancer Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University
Urumqi 830000, P. R. China.

AIMS: The present study is to investigate the effect of the combination of
small-interfering RNA (siRNA) treatment with bis-chloroethylnitrosourea (BCNU) on
the proliferation and apoptosis of glioma cells.
METHODS: According to different treatments, glioma U251 cells were randomly
divided into blank group, Lipofectamine group, siRNA-Gli1 group, BCNU group and
combination group. After treatments, the morphology of U251 cells was visualized 
under the microscope. Afterwards, semi-quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction and Western blotting were used to determine Gli1, Bcl-2, Bax and cyclin 
D1 mRNA levels and protein expression, respectively. MTT assay was used detect
the proliferation of U251 cells, while flow cytometry was performed to determine 
cell apoptosis and cell cycle.
RESULTS: The combination of siRNA-Gli1 and BCNU caused more severe damages to
U251 cell shapes compared with siRNA-Gli1 or BCNU alone. The combination of BCNU 
and siRNA-Gli1 altered mRNA level and protein expression of Bcl-2 and Bax, but
not those of Gli1 and cyclin D1. The combination of siRNA-Gli1 and BCNU promoted 
U251 cell apoptosis. The combination of siRNA-Gli1 and BCNU enhanced the
arrestment of U251 cells in G0/G1 phase. The combination of siRNA-Gli1 and BCNU
significantly inhibited U251 cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that combined treatment with
siRNA-Gli1 and BCNU significantly inhibits the proliferation and promotes the
apoptosis of glioma U251 cells, possibly by the up-regulation of Bax and the
down-regulation of Bcl-2. The combination of siRNA-Gli1 and BCNU enhances the
inhibition of cell cycles, but does not down-regulate the expression of cell
cycle protein cyclin D1.

PMCID: PMC4555669
PMID: 26339341  [PubMed - in process]


108. Oncol Rep. 2015 Nov;34(5):2461-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4224. Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Silibinin induces apoptosis through inhibition of the mTOR-GLI1-BCL2 pathway in
renal cell carcinoma.

Ma Z(1), Liu W(1), Zeng J(1), Zhou J(1), Guo P(1), Xie H(1), Yang Z(1), Zheng
L(1), Xu S(1), Wang X(1), Chang LS(1), He D(1), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

The downstream transcriptional factor of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway, GLI family
zinc finger 1 (GLI1), plays a crucial role in regulating tumor progression. In
the present study, we demonstrated that silibinin, a natural flavonoid
antioxidant isolated from extracts of the milk thistle herb, exerts its
anticancer capabilities by restraining GLI1 function in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) cells in vitro and in vivo. In the present study, we confirmed
that silibinin induced growth inhibition of RCC through caspase-dependent
apoptosis and downregulation of GLI1 and BCL2, which could be partially reversed 
by GLI1 overexpression. Moreover, we determined that the decreased GLI1
expression by silibinin was mediated by the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
pathway. The in vivo mouse xenograft study also showed that silibinin
significantly reduced RCC tumor growth and specifically targeted the
mTOR-GLI1-BCL2 signaling pathway. In conclusion, our findings demonstrated for
the first time that silibinin induces apoptosis of RCC cells through inhibition
of the mTOR-GLI1-BCL2 pathway. These findings also indicate that GLI1 is a novel 
regulator for the potential therapeutic application of silibinin against RCC.

PMID: 26323996  [PubMed - in process]


109. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):28257-68. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4960.

Addiction of pancreatic cancer cells to zinc-finger transcription factor ZIC2.

Inaguma S(1), Ito H(1), Riku M(1), Ikeda H(1), Kasai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

Activity of GLI transcription factors of Hedgehog signaling is key for various
cancer cell properties, especially in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
Zinc-finger transcriptional regulators ZIC1 to ZIC5 of ZIC gene family were
demonstrated to associate with GLI to increase the nuclear accumulation and
transcriptional activity of GLI. Notwithstanding this supportive role for
GLI-dependent transcription, it was not fully understood whether ZIC plays an
independent role in cancer cell biology. Here, we found that ZIC2 is
indispensable in the regulation of PDAC cell apoptosis. We found that human PDAC 
cell lines uniquely express ZIC2. ZIC2 knockdown induced PDAC cell apoptosis;
conversely, ZIC2 over-expression enhanced the cellular proliferation. Through a
comprehensive screening, we identified fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
(FGFR3) and ANNEXIN A8 (ANXA8) as genes up-regulated by ZIC2 in PDAC cells. The
forced expression of these two genes cooperatively rescued the apoptosis of
ZIC2-knockdown cells. Immunohistochemical analyses further supported the
correlation of ZIC2 expression and these genes in human pancreata harboring PDAC.
Intriguingly, the ZIC2-mediated up-regulation of FGFR3 and ANXA8 was indicated to
be GLI -independent. This evidence highlights the indispensable role of ZIC2 in
regulating cellular proliferation and apoptosis during PDAC development and
suggests a potential therapeutic target for PDAC.

PMCID: PMC4695058
PMID: 26318045  [PubMed - in process]


110. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 28;10(8):e0136843. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136843.
eCollection 2015.

Targeting the Sonic Hedgehog-Gli1 Pathway as a Potential New Therapeutic Strategy
for Myelodysplastic Syndromes.

Zou J(1), Zhou Z(2), Wan L(1), Tong Y(1), Qin Y(1), Wang C(1), Zhou K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First
People's Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Intensive Care Unit, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's
Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

The complex mechanistic array underlying the pathogenesis of myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) is still unclear. Although dysregulations of different signaling
pathways involved in MDS have been described, the identification of specific
biomarkers and therapy targets remains an important task in order to establish
novel therapeutic approaches. Here, we demonstrated that the Shh signaling
pathway is active in MDS and correlated it with disease progression.
Additionally, the knockdown of Gli1 significantly inhibited cell proliferation in
vitro and in vivo. Gli1 silencing also induced apoptosis and G0/G1 phase arrest. 
Furthermore, Gli1 silencing enhanced the demethylating effect of
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine on the p15 gene promoter and subsequently promoted its
expression by inhibiting DNA methyltransferase 1(DNMT1). Our findings show that
the Shh signaling pathway plays a role in the pathogenesis and disease
progression of MDS, and proceeds by modulating DNA methylation. This pathway may 
prove to be a potential therapeutic target for enhancing the therapeutic effects 
of 5-azacytidine on malignant transformation of MDS.

PMCID: PMC4552723
PMID: 26317501  [PubMed - in process]


111. Int J Oncol. 2015 Oct;47(4):1393-404. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3136. Epub 2015 Aug
27.

Multifaceted roles of 5'-regulatory region of the cancer associated gene B4GALT1 
and its comparison with the gene family.

Al-Obaide MA(1), Alobydi H(2), Abdelsalam AG(3), Zhang R(4), Srivenugopal KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA. (2)Biomedica, LLC, Sterling
Heights, MI, USA. (3)Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Physics, College
of Arts and Sciences, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar. (4)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

ß1,4-Galactosylransferases are a family of enzymes encoded by seven B4GALT genes 
and are involved in the development of anticancer drug resistance and metastasis.
Among these genes, the B4GALT1 shows significant variations in the transcript
origination sites in different cell types/tissues and encodes an interesting
dually partitioning ß-1, 4-galactosyltransferase protein. We identified at 5'-end
of B4GALT1 a 1.454 kb sequence forming a transcription regulatory region,
referred to by us as the TR1-PE1, had all characteristics of a bidirectional
promoter directing the transcription of B4GALT1 in a divergent manner along with 
its long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) antisense counterpart B4GALT1-AS1. The TR1-PE1
showed unique dinucleotide base-stacking energy values specific to transcription 
factor binding sites (TFBSs), INR and BRE, and harbored CpG Island (CGI) that
showed GC skew with potential for R-loop formation at the transcription starting 
sites (TSSs). The 5'-regulatory axis of B4GALT1 also included five more novel
TFBSs for CTCF, GLI1, TCF7L2, GATA3 and SOX5, in addition to unique (TG)18
repeats in conjunction with 22 nucleotide TG-associated sequence (TGAS). The five
lncRNA B4GALT1-AS1 transcripts showed significant complementarity with B4GALT1
mRNA. In contrast, the rest of B4GALT genes showed fewer lncRNAs, and all lacked 
the (TG)18 and TGAS. Our results are strongly supported by the FANTOM5 study
which showed tissue-specific variations in transcript origination sites for this 
gene. We suggest that the unique expression patterns for the B4GALT1 in normal
and malignant tissues are controlled by a differential usage of 5'-B4GALT1
regulatory units along with a post-transcriptional regulation by the antisense
RNA, which in turn govern the cell-matrix interactions, neoplastic progression,
anticancer drug sensitivity, and could be utilized in personalized therapy.

PMID: 26315939  [PubMed - in process]


112. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;23(4):946-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.04.007.

[Expression of Gli1 in Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia and Its Clinical
Significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Long B(1), Zhang XZ(1), Li XD(1), Long ZJ(1), Wang XZ(1), Liu JJ(1), Lin DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Sun Yat-sen Institute of Hematology, Guangzhou 510630, Guangdong
Province, China. (2)Department of Hematology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Sun Yat-sen University, Sun Yat-sen Institute of Hematology, Guangzhou 510630,
Guangdong Province, China. E-mail: lindongjun0168@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression and clinical significance of Hedgehog
signaling transcription factor Gli1 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
patients.
METHODS: The clinical specimens were obtained from 32 newly diagnosed and 6
relapsed ALL patients. Normal bone marrow cells from 15 healthy donors were used 
as controls. Real-time qPCR and Western blot were applied to detect Gli1 mRNA and
protein expression in bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMNC) of these samples
respectively. The relation of Gli1 mRNA levels with clinical parameter was also
evaluated.
RESULTS: The expression level of Gli1 mRNA in de novo and relapsed ALL patients
was significantly higher than that in the normal controls (P < 0.05). There was
no stalistically significant difference of the Gli1 mRNA expression between de
novo and relapsed ALL cases (P > 0.05). In 24 de novo ALL patients with complete 
remission (CR) after induction chemotherapy, the levels of Gli1 mRNA were
significantly reduced as compared with levels before treatment (P < 0.05).
However, in 4 ALL patients without remission, no obvious difference of Gli1 mRNA 
levels were observed as compared with levels of Gli1 before treatment (P > 0.05).
A positive correlation between the Gli1 mRNA expression level and white blood
cell count (WBC) was found in the BMMNC of ALL patients (R = 0.725, P < 0.05).
Similarly, Gli1 protein expression was significantly higher in the de novo and
relapsed ALL cases compared with normal controls. The Gli1 protein level was
down-regulated when the ALL patients was in CR.
CONCLUSION: The expression of Gli1 mRNA and protein has been found to be high in 
de novo and relapsed ALL patients, and the change of Gli1 expression maybe relate
to therapeutic efficacy and prognosis of ALL patients.

PMID: 26314423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nat Commun. 2015 Aug 27;6:8023. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9023.

Identification of a novel actin-dependent signal transducing module allows for
the targeted degradation of GLI1.

Schneider P(1), Bayo-Fina JM(2), Singh R(1), Kumar Dhanyamraju P(1), Holz P(1),
Baier A(3), Fendrich V(3), Ramaswamy A(4), Baumeister S(5), Martinez ED(2), Lauth
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Philipps University, Institute of Molecular Biology
and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology,
Hans-Meerwein-Street 3, 35043 Marburg, Germany. (2)Department of Pharmacology, UT
Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines boulevard, Dallas, Texas
75390-8593, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, Philipps University, Baldingerstraße
1, 35033 Marburg, Germany. (4)Department of Pathology, Philipps University,
Baldingerstraße 1, 35033 Marburg, Germany. (5)Department of Biology, Philipps
University, Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 8, 35043 Marburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:8741.

The Down syndrome-associated DYRK1A kinase has been reported as a stimulator of
the developmentally important Hedgehog (Hh) pathway, but cells from Down syndrome
patients paradoxically display reduced Hh signalling activity. Here we find that 
DYRK1A stimulates GLI transcription factor activity through phosphorylation of
general nuclear localization clusters. In contrast, in vivo and in vitro
experiments reveal that DYRK1A kinase can also function as an inhibitor of
endogenous Hh signalling by negatively regulating ABLIM proteins, the actin
cytoskeleton and the transcriptional co-activator MKL1 (MAL). As a final effector
of the DYRK1A-ABLIM-actin-MKL1 sequence, we identify the MKL1 interactor Jumonji 
domain demethylase 1A (JMJD1A) as a novel Hh pathway component stabilizing the
GLI1 protein in a demethylase-independent manner. Furthermore, a Jumonji-specific
small-molecule antagonist represents a novel and powerful inhibitor of Hh signal 
transduction by inducing GLI1 protein degradation in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4552080
PMID: 26310823  [PubMed - in process]


114. Neoplasia. 2015 Jul;17(7):538-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2015.07.001.

Gli1-Mediated Regulation of Sox2 Facilitates Self-Renewal of Stem-Like Cells and 
Confers Resistance to EGFR Inhibitors in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Bora-Singhal N(1), Perumal D(1), Nguyen J(1), Chellappan S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA. (2)Department of Tumor
Biology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia
Drive, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA. Electronic address:
Srikumar.Chellappan@moffitt.org.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients have very low survival rates because 
the current therapeutic strategies are not fully effective. Although EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors are effective for NSCLC patients harboring EGFR
mutations, patients invariably develop resistance to these agents. Alterations in
multiple signaling cascades have been associated with the development of
resistance to EGFR inhibitors. Sonic Hedgehog and associated Gli transcription
factors play a major role in embryonic development and have recently been found
to be reactivated in NSCLC, and elevated Gli1 levels correlate with poor
prognosis. The Hedgehog pathway has been implicated in the functions of cancer
stem cells, although the underlying molecular mechanisms are not clear. In this
context, we demonstrate that Gli1 is a strong regulator of embryonic stem cell
transcription factor Sox2. Depletion of Gli1 or inhibition of the Hedgehog
signaling significantly abrogated the self-renewal of stem-like side-population
cells from NSCLCs as well as vascular mimicry of such cells. Gli1 was found to
transcriptionally regulate Sox2 through its promoter region, and Gli1 could be
detected on the Sox2 promoter. Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling appeared to work 
cooperatively with EGFR inhibitors in markedly reducing the viability of NSCLC
cells as well as the self-renewal of stem-like cells. Thus, our study
demonstrates a cooperative functioning of the EGFR signaling and Hedgehog
pathways in governing the stem-like functions of NSCLC cancer stem cells and
presents a novel therapeutic strategy to combat NSCLC harboring EGFR mutations.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4547412
PMID: 26297432  [PubMed - in process]


115. Development. 2015 Oct 1;142(19):3374-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.127068. Epub 2015 Aug
20.

An Nfic-hedgehog signaling cascade regulates tooth root development.

Liu Y(1), Feng J(2), Li J(3), Zhao H(2), Ho TV(2), Chai Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA Department of
Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Haidian
District, Beijing 100081, People's Republic of China. (2)Center for Craniofacial 
Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (3)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow 
School of Dentistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA Molecular Laboratory for Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Beijing Key
Laboratory of Tooth Regeneration and Function Reconstruction, Capital Medical
University School of Stomatology, Beijing 100050, People's Republic of China.
(4)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA ychai@usc.edu.

Coordination between the Hertwig's epithelial root sheath (HERS) and apical
papilla (AP) is crucial for proper tooth root development. The hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway and Nfic are both involved in tooth root development; however, 
their relationship has yet to be elucidated. Here, we establish a timecourse of
mouse molar root development by histological staining of sections, and we
demonstrate that Hh signaling is active before and during root development in the
AP and HERS using Gli1 reporter mice. The proper pattern of Hh signaling activity
in the AP is crucial for the proliferation of dental mesenchymal cells, because
either inhibition with Hh inhibitors or constitutive activation of Hh signaling
activity in transgenic mice leads to decreased proliferation in the AP and
shorter roots. Moreover, Hh activity is elevated in Nfic(-/-) mice, a root defect
model, whereas RNA sequencing and in situ hybridization show that the Hh
attenuator Hhip is downregulated. ChIP and RNAscope analyses suggest that Nfic
binds to the promoter region of Hhip. Treatment of Nfic(-/-) mice with Hh
inhibitor partially restores cell proliferation, AP growth and root development. 
Taken together, our results demonstrate that an Nfic-Hhip-Hh signaling pathway is
crucial for apical papilla growth and proper root formation. This discovery
provides insight into the molecular mechanisms regulating tooth root development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4631759 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26293299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. DNA Repair (Amst). 2015 Oct;34:9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.06.006. Epub 2015
Aug 1.

p53 modulates the activity of the GLI1 oncogene through interactions with the
shared coactivator TAF9.

Yoon JW(1), Lamm M(1), Iannaccone S(1), Higashiyama N(1), Leong KF(1), Iannaccone
P(1), Walterhouse D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program of the Stanley Manne Children's Research
Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. (2)Developmental Biology Program of the Stanley Manne Children's Research
Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. Electronic address: d-walterhouse@northwestern.edu.

The GLI1 oncogene and p53 tumor suppressor gene function in an inhibitory loop
that controls stem cell and tumor cell numbers. Since GLI1 and p53 both interact 
with the coactivator TATA Binding Protein Associated Factor 9 (TAF9), we
hypothesized that competition between these transcription factors for TAF9 in
cancer cells may contribute to the inhibitory loop and directly affect GLI1
function and cellular phenotype. We showed that TAF9 interacts with the oncogenic
GLI family members GLI1 and GLI2 but not GLI3 in cell-free pull-down assays and
with GLI1 in rhabdomyosarcoma and osteosarcoma cell lines. Removal of the
TAF9-binding acidic alpha helical transactivation domain of GLI1 produced a
significant reduction in the ability of GLI1 to transform cells. We then
introduced a point mutation into GLI1 (L1052I) that eliminates TAF9 binding and a
point mutation into GLI3 (I1510L) that establishes binding. Wild-type and mutant 
GLI proteins that bind TAF9 showed enhanced transactivating and cell transforming
activity compared with those that did not. Therefore, GLI-TAF9 binding appears
important for oncogenic activity. We then determined whether wild-type p53
down-regulates GLI function by sequestering TAF9. We showed that p53 binds TAF9
with greater affinity than does GLI1 and that co-expression of p53 with GLI1 or
GLI2 down-regulated GLI-induced transactivation, which could be abrogated using
mutant forms of GLI1 or p53. This suggests that p53 sequesters TAF9 from GLI1,
which may contribute to inhibition of GLI1 activity by p53 and potentially impact
therapeutic success of agents targeting GLI-TAF9 interactions in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592456 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26282181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cancer Lett. 2015 Dec 1;369(1):124-33. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.08.005. Epub
2015 Aug 11.

Sonic hedgehog-glioma associated oncogene homolog 1 signaling enhances drug
resistance in CD44(+)/Musashi-1(+) gastric cancer stem cells.

Xu M(1), Gong A(2), Yang H(1), George SK(3), Jiao Z(4), Huang H(1), Jiang X(1),
Zhang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212001, China. (2)Department of Cell Biology, School of
Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212013, China. (3)Department of 
Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Zhenjiang Key Laboratory
of Medical Immunology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
Jiangsu 212001, China. (5)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of 
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212001, China. Electronic address:
zjyouli1957@163.com.

Drug resistance in gastric cancer largely results from the gastric cancer stem
cells (GCSCs), which could be targeted to improve the efficacy of chemotherapy.
In this study, we identified a subpopulation of GCSCs enriched in holoclones that
expressed CD44(+)/Musashi-1(+) stem cell biomarkers, capable of self-renewal and 
proliferation. Enriched CD44(+)/Musashi-1(+) GCSCs demonstrated elevated
expression of sonic hedgehog (SHH) and glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1
(GLI1), the well-known signaling pathway molecules involved in the drug
resistance. Further, CD44(+)/Musashi-1(+) cells exhibited high drug efflux bump
activity and were resistant to doxorubicin (Dox)-induced apoptosis, and
unregulated the ATP-binding cassette sub-family G member 2 (ABCG2) expression,.
The above effects on apoptosis were reversed in the presence of GLI inhibitors,
GANT61 and GDC-0449, or by the knockdown of GLI1/SHH. Upon knockdown of GLI1,
expression of ABCG2 was downregulated the antitumor effects were significantly
improved as observed in the gastric cancer xenograft. Collectively, our study
revealed that co-expression of CD44(+)/Musashi-1(+) could be used to identify
GCSCs, which also accounts for the drug resistance in gastric cancer. SHH-GLI and
its downstream effector ABCG2 could be better targeted to possibly improve the
efficacy of chemotherapy in drug-resistant gastric cancers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26276718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 13;10(8):e0135804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135804.
eCollection 2015.

A Comparison of Ci/Gli Activity as Regulated by Sufu in Drosophila and Mammalian 
Hedgehog Response.

Oh S(1), Kato M(1), Zhang C(2), Guo Y(3), Beachy PA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America;
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United
States of America. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America. (3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America. (4)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, 
United States of America; Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)/Sufu), one of the most conserved components of the
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, binds Ci/Gli transcription factors and impedes
activation of target gene expression. In Drosophila, the Su(fu) mutation has a
minimal phenotype, and we show here that Ci transcriptional activity in large
part is regulated independently of Su(fu) by other pathway components. Mutant
mice lacking Sufu in contrast show excessive pathway activity and die as embryos 
with patterning defects. Here we show that in cultured cells Hh stimulation can
augment transcriptional activity of a Gli2 variant lacking Sufu interaction and, 
surprisingly, that regulation of Hh pathway targets is nearly normal in the
neural tube of Sufu-/- mutant embryos that also lack Gli1 function. Some degree
of Hh-induced transcriptional activation of Ci/Gli thus can occur independently
of Sufu in both flies and mammals. We further note that Sufu loss can also reduce
Hh induction of high-threshold neural tube fates, such as floor plate, suggesting
a possible positive pathway role for Sufu.

PMCID: PMC4536226
PMID: 26271100  [PubMed - in process]


119. Eur J Clin Invest. 2015 Nov;45(11):1145-52. doi: 10.1111/eci.12518. Epub 2015 Sep
13.

Prognostic significance of WNT and hedgehog pathway activation markers in cancer 
of unknown primary.

Fotopoulos G(1), Gousia A(2), Bareta E(1), Koumpis E(1), Chrisafi S(3), Bobos
M(4), Malamou-Mitsi V(2), Fountzilas G(3), Pavlidis N(1), Pentheroudakis G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Medical School, University of Ioannina,
Ioannina, Greece. (2)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of
Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Medical School,
Papageorgiou Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,
Greece. (4)Department of Pathology, Medical School, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Cancer of unknown primary (CUP) possesses distinct biology and
peculiar natural history, in which the roles of the winged and hedgehog
signalling pathways are unclear.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We constructed tissue microarrays and studied the
immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of ß-catenin, smoothened (SMO) and the
transcription factors TCF, LEF, GLI1 in 87 CUP cases for prognostic significance.
RESULTS: A low rate of IHC expression of proteins was seen, the cut-off used
being any expression in = 1% of tumour cells. At univariate analysis, only
nuclear IHC SMO expression displayed a statistically significant association with
favourable outcome [median Overall survival (OS) of 19 months in SMO-positive vs.
12 months in SMO-negative cases, P = 0·01]. An activated Wnt pathway, defined as 
IHC expression of any of nuclear ß-catenin, TCF and LEF, was significantly
associated with favourable progression free survival (median 9 vs. 5 months,
P = 0·037) and OS (median 19 vs. 13 months, P = 0·04). This prognostic impact on 
OS was mainly driven by nuclear expression of TCF and/or LEF (P = 0·03). No
prognostic significance of the hedgehog pathway activation status, defined as IHC
expression of SMO or nuclear GLI1, could be established. A favourable prognostic 
impact of the concurrent activation of both pathways was observed. A trend for
association of activated Wnt with response to chemotherapy (responders 67% among 
activated Wnt cases vs. 35% among nonactivated Wnt cases, P = 0·07) was observed 
in CUP adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of the Wnt pathway was a positive prognostic factor in a 
small CUP series, possibly via enhanced chemosensitivity. Independent validation 
is warranted.

© 2015 Stichting European Society for Clinical Investigation Journal Foundation.

PMID: 26269154  [PubMed - in process]


120. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:494269. doi: 10.1155/2015/494269. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Expression Profile of Sonic Hedgehog Pathway Members in the Developing Human
Fetal Brain.

Tichy J(1), Zinke J(2), Bunz B(3), Meyermann R(3), Harter PN(2), Mittelbronn
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, University of Tuebingen, 72076
Tuebingen, Germany ; Senckenberg Institute for Neurooncology, Goethe University
Frankfurt, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany ; Edinger Institute, Institute of
Neurology, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Edinger Institute, Institute of Neurology, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60528 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology,
University of Tuebingen, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

The Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathway plays a central role in the developing mammalian
CNS. In our study, we aimed to investigate the spatiotemporal SHH pathway
expression pattern in human fetal brains. We analyzed 22 normal fetal brains for 
Shh, Patched, Smoothened, and Gli1-3 expression by immunohistochemistry. In the
telencephalon, strongest expression of Shh, Smoothened, and Gli2 was found in the
cortical plate (CP) and ventricular zone. Patched was strongly upregulated in the
ventricular zone and Gli1 in the CP. In the cerebellum, SHH pathway members were 
strongly expressed in the external granular layer (EGL). SHH pathway members
significantly decreased over time in the ventricular and subventricular zone and 
in the cerebellar EGL, while increasing levels were found in more superficial
telencephalic layers. Our findings show that SHH pathway members are strongly
expressed in areas important for proliferation and differentiation and indicate a
temporal expression gradient in telencephalic and cerebellar layers probably due 
to decreased proliferation of progenitor cells and increased differentiation. Our
data about the spatiotemporal expression of SHH pathway members in the developing
human brain serves as a base for the understanding of both normal and
pathological CNS development.

PMCID: PMC4523658
PMID: 26266257  [PubMed - in process]


121. Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1837-1848.e5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.060. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Identification of GLI Mutations in Patients With Hirschsprung Disease That
Disrupt Enteric Nervous System Development in Mice.

Liu JA(1), Lai FP(1), Gui HS(2), Sham MH(3), Tam PK(1), Garcia-Barcelo MM(1), Hui
CC(4), Ngan ES(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong; Center for Genomic
Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (4)Program in Developmental and
Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children and Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Department of
Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong. Electronic address: engan@hku.hk.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1672-5.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hirschsprung disease is characterized by a deficit in enteric 
neurons, which are derived from neural crest cells (NCCs). Aberrant hedgehog
signaling disrupts NCC differentiation and might cause Hirschsprung disease. We
performed genetic analyses to determine whether hedgehog signaling is involved in
pathogenesis.
METHODS: We performed deep-target sequencing of DNA from 20 patients with
Hirschsprung disease (16 men, 4 women), and 20 individuals without (controls),
and searched for mutation(s) in GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, SUFU, and SOX10. Biological
effects of GLI mutations were tested in luciferase reporter assays using HeLa or 
neuroblastoma cell lines. Development of the enteric nervous system was studied
in Sufu(f/f), Gli3(<U+0394>699), Wnt1-Cre, and Sox10(NGFP) mice using
immunohistochemical and whole-mount staining procedures to quantify enteric
neurons and glia and analyze axon fasciculation, respectively. NCC migration was 
studied using time-lapse imaging.
RESULTS: We identified 3 mutations in GLI in 5 patients with Hirschsprung disease
but no controls; all lead to increased transcription of SOX10 in cell lines.
SUFU, GLI, and SOX10 form a regulatory loop that controls the neuronal vs glial
lineages and migration of NCCs. Sufu mutants mice had high Gli activity, due to
loss of Sufu, disrupting the regulatory loop and migration of enteric NCCs,
leading to defective axonal fasciculation, delayed gut colonization, or
intestinal hypoganglionosis. The ratio of enteric neurons to glia correlated
inversely with Gli activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified mutations that increase GLI activity in patients with 
Hirschsprung disease. Disruption of the SUFU-GLI-SOX10 regulatory loop disrupts
migration of NCCs and development of the enteric nervous system in mice.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26261006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Front Oncol. 2015 Jul 20;5:162. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00162. eCollection 2015.

EWS/FLI1 Target Genes and Therapeutic Opportunities in Ewing Sarcoma.

Cidre-Aranaz F(1), Alonso J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Área de Genética Humana, Instituto de
Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III , Madrid ,
Spain.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive bone malignancy that affect children and young
adults. Ewing sarcoma is the second most common primary bone malignancy in
pediatric patients. Although significant progress has been made in the treatment 
of Ewing sarcoma since it was first described in the 1920s, in the last decade
survival rates have remained unacceptably invariable, thus pointing to the need
for new approaches centered in the molecular basis of the disease. Ewing sarcoma 
driving mutation, EWS-FLI1, which results from a chromosomal translocation,
encodes an aberrant transcription factor. Since its first characterization in
1990s, many molecular targets have been described to be regulated by this
chimeric transcription factor. Their contribution to orchestrate Ewing sarcoma
phenotype has been reported over the last decades. In this work, we will focus on
the description of a selection of EWS/FLI1 targets, their functional role, and
their potential clinical relevance. We will also discuss their role in other
types of cancer as well as the need for further studies to be performed in order 
to achieve a broader understanding of their particular contribution to Ewing
sarcoma development.

PMCID: PMC4507460
PMID: 26258070  [PubMed]


123. Oncol Rep. 2015 Oct;34(4):1835-44. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4152. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Effect of Rab23 on the proliferation and apoptosis in breast cancer.

Liu Y(1), Zeng C(1), Bao N(2), Zhao J(1), Hu Y(1), Li C(3), Chi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, State Key Discipline of Cell Biology, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China. (2)Team 2, Cadet 
Brigade, School of Stomatology, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China. (3)Department of Dermatology, Chinese
People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China.

Rab23, as a negative regulatory molecule of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, 
may be a new target for treating carcinoma. In the present study, we aimed to
determine whether Rab23 is expressed in breast cancer cells and whether Rab23
affects the viability and proliferation of breast cancer cells. We evaluated
Rab23 expression in several breast cancer cell lines including MDA-MB-231, Bcap37
and MCF-7 by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), western blotting and
immunofluorescence in vitro. We assessed cell growth and proliferation by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-y1)-3,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), colony
formation and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assays. The distribution of 
the cell cycle and the rate of apoptosis were assessed using flow cytometry
(FCM). In addition, we determined the mechanisms by which Rab23 regulates the Hh 
pathway by detecting the level of Gli molecules by RT-PCR. We found that Rab23
mRNA and protein levels were expressed in breast cancer cells, and the expression
of Rab23 in MDA-MB-231 cells was higher than that in the MCF-7 cells. Rab23
protein was primarily expressed and localized in the cytoplasm surrounding the
nucleus. The MTT assay showed that the absorbance value at A(490 nm) of the
Rab23-transfected group was reduced in comparison with the control group. The
number of colonies formed in the breast cancer cells was significantly reduced
and BrdU labeling was weakened in the group transfected with Rab23. The results
of FCM showed that overexpression of Rab23 protein caused cell cycle arrest in
the G1 phase and a decrease in the S phase population as well as induction of
apoptosis. Furthermore, Rab23 decreased Gli1 and Gli2 mRNA levels when compared
with the control group. Our results indicate that Rab23 is expressed in breast
cancer cells, and ectopic expression of Rab23 inhibits the growth and
proliferation as well as induces cell apoptosis in breast cancer cells. These
effects may be due to the inhibition by Rab23 of Gli1 and Gli2 mRNA expression.
These results suggest that Rab23 is a potential target for the treatment of
breast cancer.

PMID: 26238143  [PubMed - in process]


124. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2015 Sep;36(9):1099-106. doi: 10.1038/aps.2015.58. Epub 2015 
Aug 3.

JNK is required for maintaining the tumor-initiating cell-like properties of
acquired chemoresistant human cancer cells.

Liu Y(1), Zhang X(1,)(2), Wang J(1), Yang J(1), Tan WF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai
201203, China. (2)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism,
Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.

AIM: Many studies reveal an association between the acquired chemoresistant
phenotype of cancer cells and tumor-initiating cell-like properties. The aim of
this study was to determine the impact of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) on the
tumor-initiating cell-like properties of acquired chemoresistant human cancer
cells.
METHODS: Two well-established human acquired chemoresistant cancer cell lines
K562/A02 and KB/VCR, as well as their respective parental counterparts K562 and
KB were tested. The expression of relevant mRNAs and proteins was detected using 
qRT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. Sphere formation and self-renewal
assays were used to study the tumor-initiating cell-like properties. Soft agar
and colony formation assays were used to investigate tumorigenic ability.
RESULTS: We observed that suppressing JNK activity by its specific small molecule
inhibitor SP600125 or by limiting JNK1/2 expression with JNK1/2 shRNA
lentiviruses inhibited the expression of pluripotent stem cell markers such as
Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog in KB/VCR cells and K562/A02 cells as well as sphere
formation and self-renewal abilities of K562/A02 cells. Additionally, inhibition 
of JNK activity significantly inhibited the in vitro and in vivo tumor-initiating
abilities of KB/VCR cells. Furthermore, our data suggest that blocking JNK
activity abundantly inhibited the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway activity, as reflected by
reduction of Hedgehog (Hh) pathway target genes Gli1 and ptch1 at the mRNA level 
as well as Gli-luciferase activity.
CONCLUSION: JNK maintains the tumor-initiating cell-like properties of acquired
chemoresistant K562/A02 and KB/VCR cells potentially through activating the
Hedgehog pathway. Thus, disruption of tumor-initiating cell-like properties by
targeting JNK may be a new approach to combating acquired chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4561974
PMID: 26235742  [PubMed - in process]


125. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 29;16(8):17344-67. doi: 10.3390/ijms160817344.

Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase Activating Polypeptide (PACAP) Pathway Is Induced by 
Mechanical Load and Reduces the Activity of Hedgehog Signaling in Chondrogenic
Micromass Cell Cultures.

Juhász T(1), Szentléleky E(2), Somogyi CS(3), Takács R(4), Dobrosi N(5), Engler
M(6), Tamás A(7), Reglodi D(8), Zákány R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen,
Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
juhaszt@anat.med.unideb.hu. (2)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98,
H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. valaki006@gmail.com. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
somogyics@anat.med.unideb.hu. (4)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98,
H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. takacs.roland@med.unideb.hu. (5)Department of Anatomy, 
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. luysica@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen,
Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
engler.mate.janos@med.unideb.hu. (7)Department of Anatomy, MTA-PTE "Lendület"
PACAP Research Team, University of Pécs, Medical School, Szigeti út 12, H-7624
Pécs, Hungary. andreatamassz@gmail.com. (8)Department of Anatomy, MTA-PTE
"Lendület" PACAP Research Team, University of Pécs, Medical School, Szigeti út
12, H-7624 Pécs, Hungary. dora.reglodi@aok.pte.hu. (9)Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. roza@anat.med.unideb.hu.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) is a neurohormone
exerting protective function during various stress conditions either in mature or
developing tissues. Previously we proved the presence of PACAP signaling elements
in chicken limb bud-derived chondrogenic cells in micromass cell cultures. Since 
no data can be found if PACAP signaling is playing any role during mechanical
stress in any tissues, we aimed to investigate its contribution in
mechanotransduction during chondrogenesis. Expressions of the mRNAs of PACAP and 
its major receptor, PAC1 increased, while that of other receptors, VPAC1, VPAC2
decreased upon mechanical stimulus. Mechanical load enhanced the expression of
collagen type X, a marker of hypertrophic differentiation of chondrocytes and
PACAP addition attenuated this elevation. Moreover, exogenous PACAP also
prevented the mechanical load evoked activation of hedgehog signaling: protein
levels of Sonic and Indian Hedgehogs and Gli1 transcription factor were lowered
while expressions of Gli2 and Gli3 were elevated by PACAP application during
mechanical load. Our results suggest that mechanical load activates PACAP
signaling and exogenous PACAP acts against the hypertrophy inducing effect of
mechanical load.

PMCID: PMC4581197
PMID: 26230691  [PubMed - in process]


126. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Oct;22(5):793-803. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0109. Epub 2015 
Jul 28.

The role of proto-oncogene GLI1 in pituitary adenoma formation and cell survival 
regulation.

Lampichler K(1), Ferrer P(1), Vila G(1), Lutz MI(1), Wolf F(1), Knosp E(1),
Wagner L(1), Luger A(1), Baumgartner-Parzer S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and MetabolismDepartment of Internal Medicine
IIIClinical Institute of NeurologyDepartment of Biomedical Imaging and
Image-Guided TherapyDivision of NeurosurgeryDepartment of SurgeryDivision of
NephrologyDepartment of Internal Medicine III, Medical University of Vienna,
Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. (2)Division of Endocrinology
and MetabolismDepartment of Internal Medicine IIIClinical Institute of
NeurologyDepartment of Biomedical Imaging and Image-Guided TherapyDivision of
NeurosurgeryDepartment of SurgeryDivision of NephrologyDepartment of Internal
Medicine III, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090
Vienna, Austria sabina.baumgartner-parzer@meduniwien.ac.at.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is an important regulator of early tissue patterning
and stem cell propagation. It was found to be aberrantly activated in numerous
types of human cancer and might be relevant in cancer stem cells. The
identification of adult stem cells in the pituitary raised the question if
tumor-initiating cells and Hh signaling are involved in pituitary adenoma
formation. The present study aimed at the evaluation of Hh signaling in relation 
to stem cell and cell cycle markers in 30 human pituitary adenomas and in
cultured murine adenoma cells. Therefore, expression levels of components of the 
Hh pathway, stem cell marker SOX2, cell cycle regulator tumor-protein 53 (TP53), 
proliferation marker Ki67 (MKI67) and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) were
evaluated in 30 human pituitary adenomas in comparison to control tissue.
Modulation of cell function and target gene expression by the inhibition and
activation of the Hh pathway were studied in murine adenoma cells. We show that
transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) is overexpressed in 87% 
of all pituitary adenomas. The expression of GLI1 significantly correlated with
that of SOX2, TP53, MKI67 and SOD1. Inhibition of GLI1 resulted in the
downregulation of the above genes and severe cell death in mouse adenoma cells.
On the other hand, activation of the Hh pathway increased cell viability and
target gene expression. In conclusion, our findings point toward an alternative, 
ligand-independent Hh pathway activation with GLI1 playing a major role in the
cell survival of pituitary adenoma cells.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26219678  [PubMed - in process]


127. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Oct;19(10):2385-96. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12620. Epub 2015 Jul
27.

Cul4A overexpression associated with Gli1 expression in malignant pleural
mesothelioma.

Yang YL(1), Ni J(1,)(2), Hsu PC(1,)(3), Mao JH(4), Hsieh D(1), Xu A(1), Chan
G(1), Au A(5), Xu Z(1), Jablons DM(1), You L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Department of
Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (4)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. (5)Division of
Diagnostic Pathology, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Malignant pleural mesothelioma (mesothelioma) is a highly aggressive cancer
without an effective treatment. Cul4A, a scaffold protein that recruits
substrates for degradation, is amplified in several human cancers, including
mesothelioma. We have recently shown that Cul4A plays an oncogenic role in vitro 
and in a mouse model. In this study, we analysed clinical mesothelioma tumours
and found moderate to strong expression of Cul4A in 70.9% (51/72) of these
tumours, as shown by immunohistochemistry. In 72.2% mesothelioma tumours with
increased Cul4A copy number identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization
analysis, Cul4A protein expression was moderate to strong. Similarly, Cul4A was
overexpressed and Cul4A copy number was increased in human mesothelioma cell
lines. Because Gli1 is highly expressed in human mesothelioma cells, we compared 
Cul4A and Gli1 expression in mesothelioma tumours and found their expression
associated (P < 0.05, chi-square). In mesothelioma cell lines, inhibiting Cul4A
by siRNA decreased Gli1 expression, suggesting that Gli1 expression is, at least 
in part, regulated by Cul4A in mesothelioma cells. Our results suggest a linkage 
between Cul4A and Gli1 expression in human mesothelioma.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4594680
PMID: 26218750  [PubMed - in process]


128. Biomed Khim. 2015 May-Jun;61(3):332-42. doi: 10.18097/PBMC20156103332.

[Hedgehog signaling in the pathogenesis of neuro-oncology diseases].

[Article in Russian; Abstract available in Russian from the publisher]

Cherepanov SA(1), Baklaushev VP(1), Gabashvili AN(1), Shepeleva II(1), Chekhonin 
VP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russia.

The review summarizes current knowledge on the Hedgehog signaling pathway, its
role in normal embryogenesis and/or initiation and progression of
neuro-oncological diseases, especially of high-grade gliomas, the most malignant 
neuroepithelial tumors. The main proteins forming the Hedgehog signaling pathway 
include Shh, PTCH1, SMO, HHIP, SUFU and GLI1 isoforms. Effects of other signaling
pathways on the family of transcription factors GLI and other proteins are
described. The review summarizes modern data about the impact of the Hedgehog
signaling pathway on proliferation, migration activity and invasiveness, and also
on tumor neoangiogenesis and tumor cell chemoresistance. The role of the Hedgehog
signaling pathway in origin of cancer stem cells and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition is also analyzed. Some prospects for new anticancer drugs acting on
components of the Hedgehog signaling pathway inhibitors are demonstrated.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26215410  [PubMed - in process]


129. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;66:75-84. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.07.009.
Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Resveratrol and curcumin synergistically induces apoptosis in cigarette smoke
condensate transformed breast epithelial cells through a p21(Waf1/Cip1) mediated 
inhibition of Hh-Gli signaling.

Mohapatra P(1), Satapathy SR(1), Siddharth S(1), Das D(1), Nayak A(1), Kundu
CN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Division, KIIT School of Biotechnology, KIIT University,
Campus-11, Patia, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, 751024, India. (2)Cancer Biology Division,
KIIT School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Campus-11, Patia, Bhubaneswar,
Orissa, 751024, India. Electronic address: cnkundu@gmail.com.

Combination therapy using two or more small molecule inhibitors of aberrant
signaling cascade in aggressive breast cancers is a promising therapeutic
strategy over traditional monotherapeutic approaches. Here, we have studied the
synergistic mechanism of resveratrol and curcumin induced apoptosis using in
vitro (cigarette smoke condensate mediated transformed breast epithelial cell,
MCF-10A-Tr) and in vivo (tumor xenograft mice) model system. Resveratrol exposure
increased the intracellular uptake of curcumin in a dose dependent manner and
caused apoptosis in MCF-10A-Tr cells. Approximately, ten fold lower IC50 value
was noted in cells treated with the combination of resveratrol (3µM) and curcumin
(3µM) in comparison to 30µM of resveratrol or curcumin alone.
Resveratrol+curcumin combination caused apoptosis by increasing Bax/Bcl-xL ratio,
Cytochrome C release, cleaved product of PARP and caspase 3 in cells.
Interestingly, this combination unaltered the protein expressions of WNT-TCF and 
Notch signaling components, ß-catenin and cleaved notch-1 val1744, respectively. 
Furthermore, the combination also significantly decreased the intermediates of
Hedgehog-Gli cascade including SMO, SHH, Gli-1, c-MYC, Cyclin-D1, etc. and
increased the level of p21(Waf/Cip1) in vitro and in vivo. A significant
reduction of Gli- promoter activity was noted in combinational drug treated cells
in comparison to individual drug treatment. Un-alteration of the expressions of
the above proteins and Gli1 promoter activity in p21(Waf/Cip1) knockout cells
suggests this combination caused apoptosis through p21(Waf/Cip1). Thus, our
findings revealed resveratrol and curcumin synergistically caused apoptosis in
cigarette smoke induced breast cancer cells through p2(Waf/Cip1) mediated
inhibition of Hedgehog-Gli cascade.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26212257  [PubMed - in process]


130. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015 Nov;129(9):809-22. doi: 10.1042/CS20140592. Epub 2015 Jul
2.

The Hedgehog signalling pathway mediates drug response of MCF-7 mammosphere cells
in breast cancer patients.

He M(1), Fu Y(1), Yan Y(1), Xiao Q(1), Wu H(1), Yao W(1), Zhao H(1), Zhao L(1),
Jiang Q(1), Yu Z(1), Jin F(2), Mi X(3), Wang E(3), Cui Z(4), Fu L(5), Chen J(6), 
Wei M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China. (2)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province,
China. (3)Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China. (4)Center of the Laboratory Technology and
Experimental Medicine, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province,
China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (6)Department of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, U.S.A. (7)Department of Pharmacology, School of
Pharmacy, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China Institute 
of Pathology and Pathophysiology, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
Province, China weiminjiecmu@163.com.

BCSCs (breast cancer stem cells) have been shown to be resistant to chemotherapy.
However, the mechanisms underlying BCSC-mediated chemoresistance remain poorly
understood. The Hh (Hedgehog) pathway is important in the stemness maintenance of
CSCs. Nonetheless, it is unknown whether the Hh pathway is involved in
BCSC-mediated chemoresistance. In the present study, we cultured breast cancer
MCF-7 cells in suspension in serum-free medium to obtain BCSC-enriched MCF-7 MS
(MCF-7 mammosphere) cells. We showed that MCF-7 MS cells are sensitive to
salinomycin, but not paclitaxel, distinct from parent MCF-7 cells. The expression
of the critical components of Hh pathway, i.e., PTCH (Patched), SMO (Smoothened),
Gli1 and Gli2, was significantly up-regulated in MCF-7 MS cells; salinomycin, but
not paclitaxel, treatment caused a remarkable decrease in expression of those
genes in MCF-7 MS cells, but not in MCF-7 cells. Salinomycin, but not paclitaxel,
increased apoptosis, decreased the migration capacity of MCF-7 MS cells,
accompanied by a decreased expression of c-Myc, Bcl-2 and Snail, the target genes
of the Hh pathway. The salinomycin-induced cytotoxic effect could be blocked by
Shh (Sonic Hedgehog)-mediated Hh signalling activation. Inhibition of the Hh
pathway by cyclopamine could sensitize MCF-7 MS cells to paclitaxel. In addition,
salinomycin, but not paclitaxel, significantly reduced the tumour growth,
accompanied by decreased expression of PTCH, SMO, Gli1 and Gli2 in xenograft
tumours. Furthermore, the expression of SMO and Gli1 was positively correlated
with the expression of CD44+ / CD24-, and the expression of SMO and Gli1 in CD44+
/ CD24- tissues was associated with a significantly shorter OS (overall survival)
and DFS (disease-free survival) in breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMID: 26201092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2935-51. doi: 10.1172/JCI74929. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

Pharmacological GLI2 inhibition prevents myofibroblast cell-cycle progression and
reduces kidney fibrosis.

Kramann R, Fleig SV, Schneider RK, Fabian SL, DiRocco DP, Maarouf O, Wongboonsin 
J, Ikeda Y, Heckl D, Chang SL, Rennke HG, Waikar SS, Humphreys BD.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 Oct;11(10):568.

Chronic kidney disease is characterized by interstitial fibrosis and
proliferation of scar-secreting myofibroblasts, ultimately leading to end-stage
renal disease. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway transcriptional effectors GLI1 and GLI2 
are expressed in myofibroblast progenitors; however, the role of these effectors 
during fibrogenesis is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that GLI2, but
not GLI1, drives myofibroblast cell-cycle progression in cultured mesenchymal
stem cell-like progenitors. In animals exposed to unilateral ureteral
obstruction, Hh pathway suppression by expression of the GLI3 repressor in GLI1+ 
myofibroblast progenitors limited kidney fibrosis. Myofibroblast-specific
deletion of Gli2, but not Gli1, also limited kidney fibrosis, and induction of
myofibroblast-specific cell-cycle arrest mediated this inhibition. Pharmacologic 
targeting of this pathway with darinaparsin, an arsenical in clinical trials,
reduced fibrosis through reduction of GLI2 protein levels and subsequent
cell-cycle arrest in myofibroblasts. GLI2 overexpression rescued the cell-cycle
effect of darinaparsin in vitro. While darinaparsin ameliorated fibrosis in WT
and Gli1-KO mice, it was not effective in conditional Gli2-KO mice, supporting
GLI2 as a direct darinaparsin target. The GLI inhibitor GANT61 also reduced
fibrosis in mice. Finally, GLI1 and GLI2 were upregulated in the kidneys of
patients with high-grade fibrosis. Together, these data indicate that GLI
inhibition has potential as a therapeutic strategy to limit myofibroblast
proliferation in kidney fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4563736
PMID: 26193634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Dev Cell. 2015 Aug 10;34(3):338-50. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.06.016. Epub 2015 
Jul 16.

Modulation of Ciliary Phosphoinositide Content Regulates Trafficking and Sonic
Hedgehog Signaling Output.

Chávez M(1), Ena S(2), Van Sande J(3), de Kerchove d'Exaerde A(2), Schurmans
S(4), Schiffmann SN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Université Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels 1070, Belgium. Electronic address: echavez@ulb.ac.be.
(2)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Université Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels 1070, Belgium. (3)IRIBHM, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels 1070, Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Functional Genetics, GIGA
Research Centre, and WELBIO, Université de Liège, Liège 4000, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, ULB Neuroscience Institute, Université Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels 1070, Belgium. Electronic address: sschiffm@ulb.ac.be.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2015 Aug 24;34(4):379-80.

Ciliary transport is required for ciliogenesis, signal transduction, and
trafficking of receptors to the primary cilium. Mutations in inositol
polyphosphate 5-phosphatase E (INPP5E) have been associated with ciliary
dysfunction; however, its role in regulating ciliary phosphoinositides is
unknown. Here we report that in neural stem cells, phosphatidylinositol
4-phosphate (PI4P) is found in high levels in cilia whereas phosphatidylinositol 
(4,5)-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2) is not detectable. Upon INPP5E inactivation,
PI(4,5)P2 accumulates at the ciliary tip whereas PI4P is depleted. This is
accompanied by recruitment of the PI(4,5)P2-interacting protein TULP3 to the
ciliary membrane, along with Gpr161. This results in an increased production of
cAMP and a repression of the Shh transcription gene Gli1. Our results reveal the 
link between ciliary regulation of phosphoinositides by INPP5E and Shh regulation
via ciliary trafficking of TULP3/Gpr161 and also provide mechanistic insight into
ciliary alterations found in Joubert and MORM syndromes resulting from INPP5E
mutations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26190144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Rep. 2015 Jul 28;12(4):599-609. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.054. Epub 2015
Jul 16.

AMP-Activated Protein Kinase Directly Phosphorylates and Destabilizes Hedgehog
Pathway Transcription Factor GLI1 in Medulloblastoma.

Li YH(1), Luo J(2), Mosley YY(1), Hedrick VE(3), Paul LN(3), Chang J(2), Zhang
G(4), Wang YK(5), Banko MR(6), Brunet A(6), Kuang S(7), Wu JL(8), Chang CJ(9),
Scott MP(2), Yang JY(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University College of Veterinary 
Medicine, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. (2)Departments of Developmental Biology,
Genetics, and Bioengineering, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA. (3)Bindley Bioscience Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN 47906, USA. (4)Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University College of
Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; Department of Comparative
Pathobiology, Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette,
IN 47907, USA. (5)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao
Tung University, Hsin-Chu 300, Taiwan. (6)Department of Genetics, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (7)Center for Cancer
Research, Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN
47907, USA; Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 
47907, USA. (8)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica,
Taipei 115 Taiwan. (9)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University
College of Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; Center for Cancer 
Research, Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN
47907, USA. (10)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University College
of Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; Center for Cancer
Research, Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN
47907, USA. Electronic address: jyyang@purdue.edu.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway regulates cell differentiation and proliferation during
development by controlling the Gli transcription factors. Cell fate decisions and
progression toward organ and tissue maturity must be coordinated, and how an
energy sensor regulates the Hh pathway is not clear. AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) is an important sensor of energy stores and controls protein synthesis and
other energy-intensive processes. AMPK is directly responsive to intracellular
AMP levels, inhibiting a wide range of cell activities if ATP is low and AMP is
high. Thus, AMPK can affect development by influencing protein synthesis and
other processes needed for growth and differentiation. Activation of AMPK reduces
GLI1 protein levels and stability, thus blocking Sonic-hedgehog-induced
transcriptional activity. AMPK phosphorylates GLI1 at serines 102 and 408 and
threonine 1074. Mutation of these three sites into alanine prevents
phosphorylation by AMPK. This leads to increased GLI1 protein stability,
transcriptional activity, and oncogenic potency.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4521589
PMID: 26190112  [PubMed - in process]


134. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 1;288(1):74-83. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.07.010.
Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Melittin induces PTCH1 expression by down-regulating MeCP2 in human
hepatocellular carcinoma SMMC-7721 cells.

Wu X(1), Zhao B(1), Cheng Y(1), Yang Y(1), Huang C(1), Meng X(1), Wu B(1), Zhang 
L(1), Lv X(1), Li J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; The Key Laboratory of
Anti-inflammatory and Immune Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Ministry of
Education, Hefei 230032, China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical
University, ILD-AMU, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. (2)School of 
Pharmacy, Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products, Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230032, China; The Key Laboratory of Anti-inflammatory and
Immune Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Ministry of Education, Hefei 230032,
China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University, ILD-AMU, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. Electronic address: xqwu01@foxmail.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a high mortality rate worldwide and still
remains to be a noticeable public health problem. Therefore, new remedies are
urgently needed. Melittin, a major component of bee venom, is known to suppress
cell growth in various cancers including HCC. However, the mechanism of the
anticancer effect of melittin on HCC has not been fully elucidated. It has been
reported that Methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) plays a key role in tumor
proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasion. In the present study, we found 
the high expression of MeCP2 in human HCC tissues and in the SMMC-7721 cell line.
MeCP2 silencing inhibited cell proliferation, while over-expression of MeCP2
promoted cell growth in SMMC-7721 cells. It indicates that MeCP2 may be an
attractive target for human HCC. We further found that melittin could inhibit
cell proliferation by reducing MeCP2 expression in vitro. Interestingly, the
inhibitory effect of melittin on cell proliferation was due to a delay in G0/G1
cell cycle progression, without influencing cell apoptosis. Next, we investigated
the potential molecular mechanisms and found that MeCP2 could modulate Shh
signaling in SMMC-7721 cells. Further study indicates that melittin may induce
the demethylation of PTCH1 promoter, resulting in the increased expression of
PTCH1. Furthermore, the expression of Shh and GLI1 was significantly lowered upon
treatment of melittin. These results suggest that melittin can block Shh
signaling in vitro. In short, these results indicate that melittin inhibits cell 
proliferation by down-regulating MeCP2 through Shh signaling in SMMC-7721 cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26189965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Oncogene. 2015 Jul 20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.267. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting hedgehog signaling reduces self-renewal in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.

Satheesha S(1), Manzella G(1), Bovay A(1), Casanova EA(1), Bode PK(2), Belle
R(1), Feuchtgruber S(3), Jaaks P(1), Dogan N(1), Koscielniak E(3), Schäfer BW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. (2)1] Department of Oncology and Children's
Research Center, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland [2]
Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Oncology/Hematology/Immunology, Olgahospital, Klinikum
Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.

Current treatment regimens for rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), the most common pediatric 
soft tissue cancer, rely on conventional chemotherapy, and although they show
clinical benefit, there is a significant risk of adverse side effects and
secondary tumors later in life. Therefore, identifying and targeting
sub-populations with higher tumorigenic potential and self-renewing capacity
would offer improved patient management strategies. Hedgehog signaling has been
linked to the development of embryonal RMS (ERMS) through mouse genetics and rare
human syndromes. However, activating mutations in this pathway in sporadic RMS
are rare and therefore the contribution of hedgehog signaling to oncogenesis
remains unclear. Here, we show by genetic loss- and gain-of-function experiments 
and the use of clinically relevant small molecule modulators that hedgehog
signaling is important for controlling self-renewal of a subpopulation of RMS
cells in vitro and tumor initiation in vivo. In addition, hedgehog activity
altered chemoresistance, motility and differentiation status. The core stem cell 
gene NANOG was determined to be important for ERMS self-renewal, possibly acting 
downstream of hedgehog signaling. Crucially, evaluating the presence of a
subpopulation of tumor-propagating cells in patient biopsies identified by GLI1
and NANOG expression had prognostic significance. Hence, this work identifies
novel functional aspects of hedgehog signaling in ERMS, redefines the rationale
for its targeting as means to control ERMS self-renewal and underscores the
importance of studying functional tumor heterogeneity in pediatric
cancers.Oncogene advance online publication, 20 July 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.267.

PMID: 26189795  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


136. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(5):1862-76.

Up-Regulation of Glioma-Associated Oncogene Homolog 1 Expression by Serum
Starvation Promotes Cell Survival in ER-Positive Breast Cancer Cells.

Xu J, Huang G, Zhang Z, Zhao J, Zhang M, Wang Y, Liu Z, Lu J.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Cancer cells are resistant to ischemia and starvation.
Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1) is a positive transcriptional
activator of Hedgehog (Hh) pathway and plays an essential role in the development
of cancers, including breast cancer. However, how Gli1 promotes cell survival
remains elusive. The main purpose of this study is to investigate the
pro-survival effect of Gli1 under serum starvation and its molecular mechanism in
ER-positive breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Gene expression was determined by quantitative real-time PCR (QRT-PCR)
and Western blot. The survival of Gli1 stably transfected ER-positive breast
cancer cell lines (Gli1-MCF-7 and Gli1-T47D cells) and their untransfected
control cells was estimated by WST-8 assay. Microarray analysis was performed to 
screen downstream Hh/Gli1 target genes in Gli1-overexpressed MCF-7 cells.
Transcriptional activities of NF-kappaB were measured by luciferase assays. ChIP 
analysis was performed to explore whether cIAP2 was a direct target gene of Gli1.
RESULTS: Serum starvation significantly up-regulated the expression of Gli1 gene 
through activating PI3K/AKT pathway. Over-expression of Gli1 markedly promoted
cell survival under serum starvation. Microarray analysis revealed that 338 genes
were differentially expressed in Gli1-MCF-7 cells compared with those in the
control cells. Among these genes, cellular inhibitor of apoptosis 2 (cIAP2),
coding an anti-apoptosis and pro-survival protein, was significantly up-regulated
not only by Hh/Gli1 pathway, but also by serum starvation. However, ChIP assay
revealed no binding of Gli1 to cIAP2 promoter at the region of -1792 to -1568bp. 
Moreover, over-expression of Gli1 resulted in enhanced trans-activation of
transcriptional factor NF-<U+03BA>B. Suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling with NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor
Bay11-7082, significantly reduced the expression of cIAP2 and the cell survival
under serum starvation.
CONCLUSION: Serum starvation significantly up-regulated the expression of Gli1,
which in turn increased its key target cIAP2 expression and enhanced NF-<U+03BA>B/cIAP2 
pathway, resulting in promoting cell survival under serum starvation. These
findings may provide new insights into the pro-survival mechanisms of Gli1 in
breast cancer.

Copyright © 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 26182949  [PubMed - in process]


137. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:147-56. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_13.

Determination of Acetylation of the Gli Transcription Factors.

Coni S(1), Di Magno L, Canettieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 324 Viale
Regina Elena, 00161, Rome, Italy.

The Gli transcription factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) are the final effectors of
the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling and play a key role in development and cancer. The
activity of the Gli proteins is finely regulated by covalent modifications, such 
as phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and acetylation. Both Gli1 and Gli2 are
acetylated at a conserved lysine, and this modification causes the inhibition of 
their transcriptional activity. Thus, the acetylation status of these proteins
represents a useful marker to monitor Hh activation in pathophysiological
conditions. Herein we describe the techniques utilized to detect in vitro and
intracellular acetylation of the Gli transcription factors.

PMID: 26179046  [PubMed - in process]


138. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:81-92. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_8.

Measuring Expression Levels of Endogenous Gli Genes by Immunoblotting and
Real-Time PCR.

Niewiadomski P(1), Rohatgi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 02-093, 
Warszawa, Poland, p.niewiadomski@nencki.gov.pl.

Gli proteins are transcription factors that mediate the transcriptional effects
of Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates. The activities of Gli2 and Gli3 are
regulated primarily by posttranslational modifications, while Gli1 is mostly
regulated at the transcriptional level. Detection of endogenous Gli proteins had 
been hampered by lack of good antibodies, but this problem has been mostly
resolved in recent years. In this chapter we describe methods of detecting
expression of endogenous Gli genes in whole-cell lysates and in subcellular
fractions and also provide protocols for the measurement of Gli mRNA levels by
quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (qPCR).

PMID: 26179041  [PubMed - in process]


139. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Aug 1;23(15):4150-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.06.058. Epub
2015 Jul 2.

Hedgehog inhibitors from Artocarpus communis and Hyptis suaveolens.

Arai MA(1), Uchida K(2), Sadhu SK(3), Ahmed F(4), Koyano T(5), Kowithayakorn
T(6), Ishibashi M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. Electronic address: midori_arai@chiba-u.jp.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. (3)Pharmacy Discipline, Life Science School,
Khulna University, Khulna 9208, Bangladesh. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh. (5)Temko Corporation,
4-27-4 Honcho, Nakano, Tokyo 164-0012, Japan. (6)Faculty of Agriculture, Khon
Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand. (7)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.
Electronic address: mish@chiba-u.jp.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays crucial roles in cell maintenance and
proliferation during embryonic development. Naturally occurring Hh inhibitors
were isolated from Artocarpus communis and Hyptis suaveolens using our previously
constructed cell-based assay system. Bioactivity guided fractionation led to the 
isolation of 15 compounds, including seven new compounds (4, 5, 6, 7, and 9-11). 
The isolated compounds showed cytotoxicity against a cancer cell line (PANC1) in 
which Hh signaling was abnormally activated. Several compounds (12-14; GLI1
transcriptional inhibition IC50=7.6, 4.7, and 4.0 µM, respectively) inhibited Hh 
related protein (BCL2) expression. Moreover, compounds 1, 12, and 13 disrupted
GLI1 and DNA complex formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26178912  [PubMed - in process]


140. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Nov 1;24(21):2547-60. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0050. Epub 2015 
Aug 18.

Suppressor of Fused Plays an Important Role in Regulating Mesodermal
Differentiation of Murine Embryonic Stem Cells In Vivo.

Hoelzl MA(1), Heby-Henricson K(1), Bilousova G(2), Rozell B(3,)(4), Kuiper RV(3),
Kasper M(1), Toftgård R(1), Teglund S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet , Huddinge,
Sweden . (2)2 Department of Dermatology, Charles C. Gates Center for Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, University of Colorado , Aurora, Colorado. (3)3
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet , Huddinge, Sweden .
(4)4 Department of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen, Denmark .

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays fundamental roles during embryonic
development and tumorigenesis. Previously, we have shown that ablation of the
tumor suppressor and negative regulator, Suppressor of fused (Sufu), within this 
pathway causes embryonic lethality around E9.5 in the mouse. In this study, we
examine how lack of Sufu influences early cell fate determination processes. We
established embryonic stem cell (ESC) lines from preimplantation Sufu(-/-) and
wild-type mouse embryos and show that these ESCs express the typical pluripotency
markers, alkaline phosphatase, SSEA-1, Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog. We demonstrate that
these ESCs express all core Hh pathway components and that glioma-associated
protein (Gli)1 mRNA levels are increased in Sufu(-/-) ESCs. Upon spontaneous
differentiation of Sufu(-/-) ESCs into embryoid bodies (EBs) in vitro, the Hh
pathway is strongly upregulated as indicated by an increase in both Gli1 and
patched1 (Ptch1) gene expression. Interestingly, developing Sufu(-/-) EBs were
smaller than their wild-type counterparts and showed decreased expression of the 
ectodermal markers, Fgf5 and Sox1. In vivo teratoma formation revealed that
Sufu(-/-) ESCs have a limited capacity for differentiation as the resulting
tumors lacked the mesodermal derivatives, cartilage and bone. However, Sufu(-/-) 
ESCs were able to develop into chondrocytes and osteocytes in vitro, which
suggests a differential response of ESCs compared with in vivo conditions. Our
findings suggest a regulatory function of the Hh signaling pathway in early
mesodermal cell fate determination and emphasize the role of Sufu as a key
molecule in this process.

PMID: 26176320  [PubMed - in process]


141. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 28;464(3):862-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.052. Epub 2015 Jul 11.

Sonic hedgehog stimulates glycolysis and proliferation of breast cancer cells:
Modulation of PFKFB3 activation.

Ge X(1), Lyu P(1), Gu Y(1), Li L(1), Li J(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang L(1), Fu C(2), Cao
Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou 450052, Henan, China. (2)Department of Ultrasonography, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, Henan,
China. (3)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, Henan, China. Electronic address:
zzzhangcao@126.com.

Sonic hesgehog (Shh) signaling has been reported to play an essential role in
cancer progression. The mechanism of Shh involved in breast cancer carcinogenesis
remains unclear. The present study sought to explore whether Shh signaling could 
regulate the glycolytic metabolism in breast cancers. Overexpression of the
smoothed (Smo) and Gli-1 was found in human primary breast cancers. The
expressions of Shh and Gli-1 correlated significantly with tumor size and tumor
stage. In vitro, human recombinant Shh (rShh) triggered Smo and Gli-1 expression,
promoted glucose utilization and lactate production, and accelerated cell
proliferation in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Notably, rShh did not alter
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 3 (PFKFB3) expression but
augmented PFKFB3 phosphorylation on ser(461), along with elevated
fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (F2,6BP) generation by MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. This
effect could be dampened by Smo siRNA but not by Gli-1 siRNA. In addition, our
data showed the upregulated expressions of MAPK by rShh and elevatory PFKFB3
phosphorylation by p38/MAPK activated kinase (MK2). In conclusion, our study
characterized a novel role of Shh in promoting glycolysis and proliferation of
breast cancer cells via PFKFB3 phosphorylation, which was mediated by Smo and
p38/MK2.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26171876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Sep 1;25(17):3541-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.06.081. 
Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Hedgehog inhibitors from Withania somnifera.

Yoneyama T(1), Arai MA(2), Sadhu SK(3), Ahmed F(4), Ishibashi M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. Electronic
address: midori_arai@chiba-u.jp. (3)Pharmacy Discipline, Life Science School,
Khulna University, Khulna 9208, Bangladesh. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh. (5)Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba
260-8675, Japan. Electronic address: mish@chiba-u.jp.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway performs an important role in embryonic
development and in cellular proliferation and differentiation. However, aberrant 
activation of the Hh signaling pathway is associated with tumorigenesis. Hh
signal inhibition was evaluated using a cell-based assay system that targets
GLI1-mediated transcription. Activity-guided isolation of the Withania somnifera 
MeOH extract led to the isolation of six compounds: withaferin A (1) and its
derivatives (2-6). Compounds 1 and 2 showed strong inhibition of Hh/GLI1-mediated
transcriptional activity with IC50 values of 0.5 and 0.6 µM, respectively.
Compounds 1, 2, 3, and 6 were cytotoxic toward human pancreatic (PANC-1),
prostate (DU145) and breast (MCF7) cancer cells. Furthermore, 1 also inhibited
GLI1-DNA complex formation in EMSA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26169123  [PubMed - in process]


143. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Jul 8. doi: 10.1002/mc.22356. [Epub ahead of print]

Amarogentin regulates self renewal pathways to restrict liver carcinogenesis in
experimental mouse model.

Sur S(1), Pal D(1), Banerjee K(1), Mandal S(2), Das A(2), Roy A(3), Panda CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute,
Kolkata, India. (2)Department of Chemistry, National Research Institute for
Ayurvedic Drug Development, Kolkata, India. (3)North Bengal Medical College and
Hospital, Darjeeling, West Bengal, India.

Amarogentin, a secoiridoid glycoside isolated from medicinal plant Swertia
chirata, was found to restrict CCl4 /N-nitrosodiethyl amine (NDEA) induced mouse 
liver carcinogenesis by modulating G1/S cell cycle check point and inducing
apoptosis. To understand its therapeutic efficacy on stem cell self renewal
pathways, prevalence of CD44 positive cancer stem cell (CSC) population,
expressions (mRNA/protein) of some key regulatory genes of self renewal Wnt and
Hedgehog pathways along with expressions of E-cadherin and EGFR were analyzed
during the liver carcinogenesis and in liver cancer cell line HepG2. It was
observed that amarogentin could significantly reduce CD44 positive CSCs in both
pre and post initiation stages of carcinogenesis than carcinogen control mice. In
Wnt pathway, amarogentin could inhibit expressions of ß-catenin, phospho
ß-catenin (Y-654) and activate expressions of antagonists sFRP1/2 and APC in the 
liver lesions. In Hedgehog pathway, decreased expressions of Gli1, sonic hedgehog
ligand, and SMO along with up-regulation of PTCH1 were seen in the liver lesions 
due to amarogentin treatment. Moreover, amarogentin could up-regulate E-cadherin 
expression and down-regulate expression of EGFR in the liver lesions. Similarly, 
amarogentin could inhibit HepG2 cell growth along with expression and prevalence 
of CD44 positive CSCs. Similar to in vivo analysis, amarogentin could modulate
the expressions of the key regulatory genes of the Wnt and hedgehog pathways and 
EGFR in HepG2 cells. Thus, our data suggests that the restriction of liver
carcinogenesis by amarogentin might be due to reduction of CD44 positive CSCs and
modulation of the self renewal pathways. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26154024  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


144. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jul;31(7):905-8, 913.

[Up-regulation of molecules associated with Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway
plays a protective role in mouse acute lung injury induced by
lipopolysaccharide].

[Article in Chinese]

Jin Y(1), Hou X(1), Liu F(1), Guo C(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan 250021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression changes and significance of Sonic hedgehog
(SHH) signaling pathway in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced acute lung injury
(ALI).
METHODS: The experimental animals were randomly divided into control group,
LPS-treated group (LPS 5 mg/kg) and cyclopamine-treated group (cyclopamine 50
mg/kg). The pathological changes of lung tissues were observed with HE staining, 
and the lung wet to dry mass ratio (W/D) was measured. Real-time quantitative PCR
(RT-PCR) was used to detect the mRNA expressions of tumor necrosis factor a
(TNF-a), SHH, Patched (PTC) and downstream transcription factor GLI1 in lung
tissues, and Western blotting was adopted to determine the protein levels of SHH 
and GLI1 in lung tissues.
RESULTS: Pathological injury score of lung tissues, W/D and mRNA level of TNF-a
were significantly higher in the LPS-treated group than in the control group.
Compared with the control group, the mRNA levels of SHH, PTC and GLI1 in the
LPS-treated group were not significantly different at 6 hours and were remarkably
higher at 12 and 24 hours, with a positive correlation with the time. Protein
expression levels of SHH and GLI1 at 6, 12 and 24 hours in the LPS-treated group 
showed a more notable increase than those in the control group, and a positive
correlation with the time was displayed. After cyclopamine intervention, the mRNA
levels of SHH, PTC and GLI1 and the protein levels of SHH and GLI1 were all
reduced, while pathological injury score of lung tissues, W/D and mRNA level of
TNF-a were obviously higher than those in the LPS-treated group.
CONCLUSION: SHH signaling pathway was activated in the development process of
LPS-induced ALI, and up-regulated expressions of SHH signaling pathway associated
molecules could relieve lung injury and involve repair of the injured lung
tissues.

PMID: 26146059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Biol. 2015 Sep 1;405(1):96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.06.020. Epub 2015
Jun 30.

Gdf5 progenitors give rise to fibrocartilage cells that mineralize via hedgehog
signaling to form the zonal enthesis.

Dyment NA(1), Breidenbach AP(2), Schwartz AG(3), Russell RP(4), Aschbacher-Smith 
L(5), Liu H(5), Hagiwara Y(6), Jiang R(5), Thomopoulos S(3), Butler DL(2), Rowe
DW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Skeletal Development, School of Dental
Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, United States. Electronic
address: dyment@uchc.edu. (2)Biomedical Engineering Program, College of
Engineering and Applied Science, University of Cincinnati, United States.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis, United 
States. (4)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Skeletal Development, School of
Dental Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, United States.
(5)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, United States. (6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nippon Medical
School Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

The sequence of events that leads to the formation of a functionally graded
enthesis is not clearly defined. The current study demonstrates that clonal
expansion of Gdf5 progenitors contributes to linear growth of the enthesis. Prior
to mineralization, Col1+ cells in the enthesis appose Col2+ cells of the
underlying primary cartilage. At the onset of enthesis mineralization, cells at
the base of the enthesis express alkaline phosphatase, Indian hedgehog, and ColX 
as they mineralize. The mineralization front then extends towards the tendon
midsubstance as cells above the front become encapsulated in mineralized
fibrocartilage over time. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway regulates this process, as
Hh-responsive Gli1+ cells within the developing enthesis mature from
unmineralized to mineralized fibrochondrocytes in response to activated
signaling. Hh signaling is required for mineralization, as tissue-specific
deletion of its obligate transducer Smoothened in the developing tendon and
enthesis cells leads to significant reductions in the apposition of mineralized
fibrocartilage. Together, these findings provide a spatiotemporal map of events -
from expansion of the embryonic progenitor pool to synthesis of the collagen
template and finally mineralization of this template - that leads to the
formation of the mature zonal enthesis. These results can inform future
tendon-to-bone repair strategies to create a mechanically functional enthesis in 
which tendon collagen fibers are anchored to bone through mineralized
fibrocartilage.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4529782 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26141957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 15;21(20):4686-97. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3319. 
Epub 2015 Jun 29.

SMO Gene Amplification and Activation of the Hedgehog Pathway as Novel Mechanisms
of Resistance to Anti-Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Drugs in Human Lung
Cancer.

Della Corte CM(1), Bellevicine C(2), Vicidomini G(3), Vitagliano D(1), Malapelle 
U(2), Accardo M(4), Fabozzi A(1), Fiorelli A(3), Fasano M(1), Papaccio F(1),
Martinelli E(1), Troiani T(1), Troncone G(2), Santini M(3), Bianco R(5),
Ciardiello F(1), Morgillo F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e
Sperimentale "F. Magrassi e A. Lanzara," Seconda Università degli Studi di
Napoli, Naples, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Università degli Studi
di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy. Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico
II, Naples, Italy. (3)Chirurgia Toracica, Dipartimento di Scienze
Cardio-Toraciche e Respiratorie, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli,
Naples, Italy. (4)Anatomia Patologica, Dipartimento di Salute Mentale e Fisica e 
Medicina Preventiva, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy.
(5)Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina clinica e Chirurgia, Università
degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy. (6)Oncologia Medica,
Dipartimento Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale "F.
Magrassi e A. Lanzara," Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy. 
florianamorgillo@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE: Resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) of EGF receptor (EGFR) is
often related to activation of other signaling pathways and evolution through a
mesenchymal phenotype.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Because the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has emerged as an
important mediator of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we studied the 
activation of Hh signaling in models of EGFR-TKIs intrinsic or acquired
resistance from both EGFR-mutated and wild-type (WT) non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines.
RESULTS: Activation of the Hh pathway was found in both models of EGFR-mutated
and EGFR-WT NSCLC cell line resistant to EGFR-TKIs. In EGFR-mutated HCC827-GR
cells, we found SMO (the Hh receptor) gene amplification, MET activation, and the
functional interaction of these two signaling pathways. In HCC827-GR cells,
inhibition of SMO or downregulation of GLI1 (the most important Hh-induced
transcription factor) expression in combination with MET inhibition exerted
significant antitumor activity.In EGFR-WT NSCLC cell lines resistant to EGFR
inhibitors, the combined inhibition of SMO and EGFR exerted a strong
antiproliferative activity with a complete inhibition of PI3K/Akt and MAPK
phosphorylation. In addition, the inhibition of SMO by the use of LDE225
sensitizes EGFR-WT NSCLC cells to standard chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: This result supports the role of the Hh pathway in mediating
resistance to anti-EGFR-TKIs through the induction of EMT and suggests new
opportunities to design new treatment strategies in lung cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26124204  [PubMed - in process]


147. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2610-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.121616. Epub 2015 Jun
26.

Hedgehog signaling stimulates the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived 
progenitor cells in the chick retina.

Todd L(1), Fischer AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
4190 Graves Hall, 333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 4190 Graves Hall,
333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA fischer.412@osu.edu.

Müller glia can be stimulated to de-differentiate and become proliferating
progenitor cells that regenerate neurons in the retina. The signaling pathways
that regulate the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived progenitor cells
(MGPCs) are beginning to be revealed. The purpose of this study was to
investigate whether Hedgehog (Hh) signaling influences the formation of MGPCs in 
the chick retina. We find that Hh signaling is increased in damaged retinas where
MGPCs are known to form. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is normally present in the axons of
ganglion cells, but becomes associated with Müller glia and MGPCs following
retinal damage. Activation of Hh signaling with recombinant human SHH (rhShh) or 
smoothened agonist (SAG) increased levels of Ptch1, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, Hes1 and
Hes5, and stimulated the formation of proliferating MGPCs in damaged retinas. In 
undamaged retinas, SAG or rhShh had no apparent effect upon the Müller glia.
However, SAG combined with FGF2 potentiated the formation of MGPCs, whereas SAG
combined with IGF1 stimulated the nuclear migration of Müller glia, but not the
formation of MGPCs. Conversely, inhibition of Hh signaling with KAAD-cyclopamine,
Gli antagonists or antibody to Shh reduced numbers of proliferating MGPCs in
damaged and FGF2-treated retinas. Hh signaling potentiates Pax6, Klf4 and cFos
expression in Müller glia during the formation of MGPCs. We find that FGF2/MAPK
signaling recruits Hh signaling into the signaling network that drives the
formation of proliferating MGPCs. Our findings implicate Hh signaling as a key
component of the network of signaling pathways that promote the
de-differentiation of Müller glia and proliferation of MGPCs.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529028 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26116667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jun;94(25):e998. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000998.

GLI1 Transcription Factor Affects Tumor Aggressiveness in Patients With Papillary
Thyroid Cancers.

Lee J(1), Jeong S, Lee CR, Ku CR, Kang SW, Jeong JJ, Nam KH, Shin DY, Chung WY,
Lee EJ, Jo YS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery (JL, CRL, S-WK, JJJ, K-HN, WYC); and Department
of Internal Medicine (SJ, CRK, DYS, EJL, YSJ), Open NBI Convergence Technology
Research Laboratory, Severance Hospital, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

A significant proportion of patients with papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) present 
with extrathyroidal extension (ETE) and lymph node metastasis (LNM). However, the
molecular mechanism of tumor invasiveness in PTC remains to be elucidated. The
aim of this study is to understand the role of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in tumor
aggressiveness in patients with PTC. Subjects were patients who underwent
thyroidectomy from 2012 to 2013 in a single institution. Frozen or
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues with contralateral-matched normal thyroid tissues
were collected. Hh signaling activity was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Datasets from Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) (National Center for Biotechnology Information) were subjected to
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). BRAFT1799A and telomerase reverse
transcriptase promoter mutation C228T were analyzed by direct sequencing. Among
137 patients with PTC, glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) group III
(patients in whom the ratio of GLI1 messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) level in
tumor tissue to GLI1 mRNA level in matched normal tissue was in the upper third
of the subject population) had elevated risk for ETE (odds ratio [OR] 4.381, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 1.414-13.569, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01) and LNM (OR 5.627, 95% CI
1.674-18.913, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.005). Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 2 (GLI2) group III
also had elevated risk for ETE (OR 4.152, 95% CI 1.292-13.342, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.017) and LNM
(OR 3.924, 95% CI 1.097-14.042, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036). GSEA suggested that higher GLI1
expression is associated with expression of the KEGG gene set related to axon
guidance (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.031, false discovery rate<U+200A><<U+200A>0.05), as verified by qRT-PCR and IHC
staining in our subjects.GLI1 and GLI2 expressions were clearly related to
aggressive clinicopathological features and aberrant activation of GLI1 involved 
in the axon guidance pathway. These results may contribute to development of new 
prognostic markers, as well as novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4504527
PMID: 26107686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Front Oncol. 2015 Jun 8;5:130. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00130. eCollection 2015.

Hedgehog Inhibitors in Rhabdomyosarcoma: A Comparison of Four Compounds and
Responsiveness of Four Cell Lines.

Ridzewski R(1), Rettberg D(1), Dittmann K(2), Cuvelier N(1), Fulda S(3), Hahn
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Goettingen , Goettingen
, Germany. (2)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Immunology, University Medical
Center Goettingen , Goettingen , Germany. (3)Institute for Experimental Cancer
Research in Pediatrics, Goethe-University Frankfurt , Frankfurt , Germany.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children and is 
divided into two major histological subgroups, i.e., embryonal (ERMS) and
alveolar RMS (ARMS). RMS can show HEDGEHOG/SMOOTHENED (HH/SMO) signaling activity
and several clinical trials using HH inhibitors for therapy of RMS have been
launched. We here compared the antitumoral effects of the SMO inhibitors
GDC-0449, LDE225, HhA, and cyclopamine in two ERMS (RD, RUCH-2) and two ARMS
(RMS-13, Rh41) cell lines. Our data show that the antitumoral effects of these
SMO inhibitors are highly divers and do not necessarily correlate with inhibition
of HH signaling. In addition, the responsiveness of the RMS cell lines to the
drugs is highly heterogeneous. Whereas some SMO inhibitors (i.e., LDE225 and HhA)
induce strong proapoptotic and antiproliferative effects in some RMS cell lines, 
others paradoxically induce cellular proliferation at certain concentrations
(e.g., 10<U+2009>µM GDC-0449 or 5<U+2009>µM cyclopamine in RUCH-2 and Rh41 cells) or can
increase HH signaling activity as judged by GLI1 expression (i.e., LDE225, HhA,
and cyclopamine). Similarly, some drugs (e.g., HhA) inhibit PI3K/AKT signaling or
induce autophagy (e.g., LDE225) in some cell lines, whereas others cannot (e.g., 
GDC-0449). In addition, the effects of SMO inhibitors are concentration-dependent
(e.g., 1 and 10<U+2009>µM GDC-0449 decrease GLI1 expression in RD cells whereas 30<U+2009>µM
GDC-0449 does not). Together these data show that some SMO inhibitors can induce 
strong antitumoral effects in some, but not all, RMS cell lines. Due to the
highly heterogeneous response, we propose to conduct thorough pretesting of SMO
inhibitors in patient-derived short-term RMS cultures or patient-derived
xenograft mouse models before applying these drugs to RMS patients.

PMCID: PMC4459089
PMID: 26106586  [PubMed]


150. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Aug 1;23(15):4777-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.05.036. Epub 
2015 Jun 3.

Synthesis and evaluation of hedgehog signaling inhibitor with novel core system.

Ohashi T(1), Tanaka Y(2), Shiokawa Z(2), Banno H(2), Tanaka T(2), Shibata S(2),
Satoh Y(2), Yamakawa H(2), Yamamoto Y(2), Hattori H(2), Kondo S(2), Miyamoto
M(2), Tojo H(2), Baba A(2), Sasaki S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company, Limited,
26-1, Muraoka-higashi 2-chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, Japan. Electronic
address: tomohiro.oohashi@takeda.com. (2)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Pharmaceutical Company, Limited, 26-1, Muraoka-higashi 2-chome, Fujisawa,
Kanagawa 251-8555, Japan. (3)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Pharmaceutical Company, Limited, 26-1, Muraoka-higashi 2-chome, Fujisawa,
Kanagawa 251-8555, Japan. Electronic address: satoshi.sasaki@takeda.com.

As we previously reported, N-methylpyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine derivatives 1 (TAK-441)
was discovered as a clinical candidate of hedgehog (Hh) signaling inhibitor by
modification of the upper part. We next focused on modification of the lower part
including core skeletons to discover new Hh signaling inhibitors with novel core 
rings. Efforts to find novel chemotypes by using X-ray single crystal structure
analysis led to some potent Hh signaling inhibitors (2c, 2d, 2e, 2f) with novel
core ring systems, which had benzamide moiety at the 5-position as a key
component for potent activity. The suppression of Gli1 expression with these new 
Hh signaling inhibitors were weaker than that of compound 1 (TAK-441) because of 
low pharmacokinetic property. We recognized again TAK-441 is a good compound as
clinical candidate with good structural and pharmacokinetic advantages.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26094943  [PubMed - in process]


151. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):22653-65.

The gain-of-function GLI1 transcription factor TGLI1 enhances expression of
VEGF-C and TEM7 to promote glioblastoma angiogenesis.

Carpenter RL(1), Paw I(1), Zhu H(2), Sirkisoon S(1), Xing F(1), Watabe K(1,)(3), 
Debinski W(1,)(4,)(3), Lo HW(1,)(4,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (3)Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. 
(4)Brain Tumor Center of Excellence, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

We recently discovered that truncated glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1
(TGLI1) is highly expressed in glioblastoma (GBM) and linked to increased GBM
vascularity. The mechanisms underlying TGLI1-mediated angiogenesis are unclear.
In this study, we compared TGLI1- with GLI1-expressing GBM xenografts for the
expression profile of 84 angiogenesis-associated genes. The results showed that
expression of six genes were upregulated and five were down-regulated in
TGLI1-carrying tumors compared to those with GLI1. Vascular endothelial growth
factor-C (VEGF-C) and tumor endothelial marker 7 (TEM7) were selected for further
investigations because of their significant correlations with high vascularity in
135 patient GBMs. TGLI1 bound to both VEGF-C and TEM7 gene promoters. Conditioned
medium from TGLI1-expressing GBM cells strongly induced tubule formation of brain
microvascular endothelial cells, and the induction was prevented by VEGF-C/TEM7
knockdown. Immunohistochemical analysis of 122 gliomas showed that TGLI1
expression was positively correlated with VEGF-C, TEM7 and microvessel density.
Analysis of NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus datasets with 161 malignant gliomas
showed an inverse relationship between tumoral VEGF-C, TEM7 or microvessel
density and patient survival. Together, our findings support an important role
that TGLI1 plays in GBM angiogenesis and identify VEGF-C and TEM7 as novel TGLI1 
target genes of importance to GBM vascularity.

PMCID: PMC4673189
PMID: 26093087  [PubMed - in process]


152. Int J Cancer. 2015 Dec 15;137(12):2815-24. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29646. Epub 2015 Jul 
2.

Regulation of nonsmall-cell lung cancer stem cell like cells by neurotransmitters
and opioid peptides.

Banerjee J(1), Papu John AM(1), Schuller HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN.

Nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading type of lung cancer and has a
poor prognosis. We have shown that chronic stress promoted NSCLC xenografts in
mice via stress neurotransmitter-activated cAMP signaling downstream of
beta-adrenergic receptors and incidental beta-blocker therapy was reported to
improve clinical outcomes in NSCLC patients. These findings suggest that
psychological stress promotes NSCLC whereas pharmacologically or psychologically 
induced decreases in cAMP may inhibit NSCLC. Cancer stem cells are thought to
drive the development, progression and resistance to therapy of NSCLC. However,
their potential regulation by stress neurotransmitters has not been investigated.
In the current study, epinephrine increased the number of cancer stem cell like
cells (CSCs) from three NSCLC cell lines in spheroid formation assays while
enhancing intracellular cAMP and the stem cell markers sonic hedgehog (SHH),
aldehyde dehydrogenase-1 (ALDH-1) and Gli1, effects reversed by GABA or dynorphin
B via Gai -mediated inhibition of cAMP formation. The growth of NSCLC xenografts 
in a mouse model of stress reduction was significantly reduced as compared with
mice maintained under standard conditions. Stress reduction reduced serum levels 
of corticosterone, norepinephrine and epinephrine while the inhibitory
neurotransmitter <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and opioid peptides increased. Stress
reduction significantly reduced cAMP, VEGF, p-ERK, p-AKT, p-CREB, p-SRc, SHH,
ALDH-1 and Gli1 in xenograft tissues whereas cleaved caspase-3 and p53 were
induced. We conclude that stress neurotransmitters activate CSCs in NSCLC via
multiple cAMP-mediated pathways and that pharmacologically or psychologically
induced decreases in cAMP signaling may improve clinical outcomes in NSCLC
patients.

© 2015 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4600645 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26088878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 24;290(30):18662-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.662882. Epub
2015 Jun 17.

Forkhead Box M1 Is Essential for Nuclear Localization of Glioma-associated
Oncogene Homolog 1 in Glioblastoma Multiforme Cells by Promoting Importin-7
Expression.

Xue J(1), Zhou A(2), Tan C(2), Wu Y(2), Lee HT(2), Li W(3), Xie K(4), Huang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, jfxue09@gmail.com. (2)From the Department of
Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030. (3)the Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, and the Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention 
and Therapy, Tianjin 300060, China, and. (4)the Departments of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology & Nutrition and Program in Cancer Biology, The University of Texas
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas 77030. (5)From the
Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, Program in Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas 77030 suhuang@mdanderson.org.

The transcription factors glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), a primary 
marker of Hedgehog pathway activation, and Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) are aberrantly
activated in a wide range of malignancies, including glioma. However, the
mechanism of nuclear localization of GLI1 and whether FOXM1 regulates the
Hedgehog signaling pathway are poorly understood. Here we found that FOXM1
promotes nuclear import of GLI1 in glioblastoma multiforme cells and thus
increases the expression of its target genes. Conversely, knockdown of FOXM1
expression with FOXM1 siRNA abrogated its nuclear import and inhibited the
expression of its target genes. Also, genetic deletion of FOXM1 in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts abolished nuclear localization of GLI1. We observed that
FOXM1 directly binds to the importin-7 (IPO7) promoter and increases its promoter
activity. IPO7 interacted with GLI1, leading to enhanced nuclear import of GLI1. 
Depletion of IPO7 by IPO7 siRNA reduced nuclear accumulation of GLI1. In
addition, FOXM1 induced nuclear import of GLI1 by promoting IPO7 expression.
Moreover, the FOXM1/IPO7/GLI1 axis promoted cell proliferation, migration, and
invasion in vitro. Finally, expression of FOXM1 was markedly correlated with that
of GLI1 in human glioblastoma specimens. These data suggest that FOXM1 and GLI1
form a positive feedback loop that contributes to glioblastoma development.
Furthermore, our study revealed a mechanism that controls nuclear import of GLI1 
in glioblastoma multiforme cells.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4513123 [Available on 2016-07-24]
PMID: 26085085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Am J Surg. 2015 Sep;210(3):554-60. doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2015.03.001. Epub 2015 
May 8.

Sonic hedgehog pathway inhibitor mitigates mouse hepatocellular carcinoma.

Jeng KS(1), Jeng CJ(2), Jeng WJ(3), Sheen IS(3), Chang CF(4), Hsiau HI(4), Hung
ZH(4), Yu MC(4), Chang FY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Medical Research, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
Electronic address: kevin.ksjeng@gmail.com. (2)Department of Ophthalmology,
Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Hepatogastroenterology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (4)Department of Medical Research, Far Eastern Memorial
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cause of death in Asian
countries. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway plays a role in hepatocarcinogenesis. We 
investigated the treatment effect of mouse HCC with Shh inhibitor GDC-0449.
METHODS: Mouse hepatoma ML-1 cells were implanted in B6 mice. Fifteen days later,
GDC-0449 (vismodegib), antagonist of smoothened, was used to treat HCC-bearing
mice. The tumor size and liver histopathological features were analyzed, as well 
as gene expression in Shh pathways.
RESULTS: GDC-0449 treatment effectively reduced tumor size and cell infiltration 
of the HCC in mice. Gene expression of Shh pathway molecules was altered,
including upregulated Shh expression and downregulated smoothened expression in
tumor fractions after GDC-0449 treatment.
CONCLUSION: GDC-0449 could effectively mitigate HCC growth in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26073903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Aug;36(8):547-58. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2015.05.006.
Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Targeting GLI factors to inhibit the Hedgehog pathway.

Infante P(1), Alfonsi R(2), Botta B(3), Mori M(4), Di Marcotullio L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Life Nano Science@Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 00161 
Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza" University, 00161
Rome, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, "La Sapienza"
University, 00161 Rome, Italy. (4)Center for Life Nano Science@Sapienza, Istituto
Italiano di Tecnologia, 00161 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
mattia.mori@iit.it. (5)Center for Life Nano Science@Sapienza, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, 00161 Rome, Italy; Department of Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza"
University, 00161 Rome, Italy; Pasteur Institute/Cenci Bolognetti Foundation,
Rome, Italy. Electronic address: lucia.dimarcotullio@uniroma1.it.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has emerged in recent years as an attractive target for
anticancer therapy because its aberrant activation is implicated in several
cancers. Major progress has been made in the development of SMOOTHENED (SMO)
antagonists, although they have shown several limitations due to downstream SMO
pathway activation or the occurrence of drug-resistant SMO mutations. Recently,
particular interest has been elicited by the identification of molecules able to 
hit glioma-associated oncogene (GLI) factors, the final effectors of the Hh
pathway, which provide a valid tool to overcome anti-SMO resistance. Here, we
review results achieved in developing GLI antagonists, explaining their
mechanisms of action and highlighting their therapeutic potential. We also
underline the relevance of structural details in their discovery and
optimization.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26072120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Virology. 2015 Oct;484:22-32. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.05.007. Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 2A mediated activation of Sonic
Hedgehog pathway induces HLA class Ia downregulation in gastric cancer cells.

Deb Pal A(1), Banerjee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics and Structural Genomics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, 1/AF, Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700064, India. (2)Biophysics and Structural
Genomics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 1/AF, Bidhannagar, Kolkata 
700064, India. Electronic address: subrata.banerjee@saha.ac.in.

One of the immune evasion strategies manifested by malignant cells is the
downregulation of the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA). HLA Class I (HLA- A, -B, -C)
present endogenous peptides including viral and tumor antigens to cytotoxic T
lymphocytes for immune mediated destruction. We have found the Epstein Barr Virus
(EBV) Latent Membrane Protein 2A (LMP2A) to be responsible for this HLA
downregulation in gastric cancer cells. Our results further indicate the Sonic
Hedgehog pathway; primarily Gli1 to bring about the LMP2A mediated decrease in
HLA expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26057149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 10;6(16):13899-913.

Targeting the Hedgehog signaling pathway in cancer: beyond Smoothened.

Gonnissen A(1), Isebaert S(1), Haustermans K(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Leuven (KU Leuven), Department of Oncology, Laboratory of
Experimental Radiotherapy, Leuven, Belgium. (2)University Hospitals Leuven,
Department of Radiation Oncology, Leuven, Belgium.

An essential role for Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in human cancer has been
established beyond doubt. At present, targeting Hh signaling has mainly been
investigated with SMO inhibitors. Unfortunately, resistance against currently
used SMO inhibitors has already been observed in basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
patients. Therefore, the use of Hh inhibitors targeting the signaling cascade
more downstream of SMO could represent a more promising strategy. Furthermore,
besides the classical canonical way of Hh signaling activation, non-canonical
activation of the GLI transcription factors by multiple important signaling
pathways (e.g. MAPK, PI3K, TGFß) has also been described, pinpointing the
importance of targeting the transcription factors GLI1/2. The most promising
agent in this context is probably the GLI1/2 inhibitor GANT61 which has been
investigated preclinically in numerous tumor types in the last few years. In this
review, the emerging role of Hh signaling in cancer is critically evaluated
focusing on the potential of targeting Hh signaling more downstream of SMO, i.e. 
at the level of the GLI transcription factors. Furthermore, the working mechanism
and therapeutic potential of the most extensively studied GLI inhibitor in human 
cancer, i.e. GANT61, is discussed in detail. In conclusion, GANT61 appears to be 
highly effective against human cancer cells and in xenograft mouse models,
targeting almost all of the classical hallmarks of cancer and could hence
represent a promising treatment option for human cancer.

PMCID: PMC4546439
PMID: 26053182  [PubMed - in process]


158. Front Neuroanat. 2015 May 13;9:58. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00058. eCollection
2015.

Corrigendum: Differential requirements for Gli2 and Gli3 in the regional
specification of the mouse hypothalamus.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Paul FA(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Theil T(3), Puelles L(4),
Blaess S(2), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Neurodevelopmental Genetics, Life and Brain Center, Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn Bonn, Germany. (3)Centre for
Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh Edinburgh, UK. (4)Department of
Morphology, University of Murcia and IMIB, Murcia Murcia, Spain.

PMCID: PMC4429587
PMID: 26029060  [PubMed]


159. J Nat Med. 2015 Oct;69(4):538-42. doi: 10.1007/s11418-015-0922-8. Epub 2015 May
31.

Hedgehog/GLI-mediated transcriptional activity inhibitors from Crinum asiaticum.

Arai MA(1), Akamine R, Sadhu SK, Ahmed F, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chuo-ku, Chiba, 260-8675, Japan, midori_arai@chiba-u.jp.

The inhibition of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has emerged as an
attractive anti-cancer strategy. As part of our continuing search for natural
inhibitors of the Hh/GLI1 signaling pathway, we isolated three alkaloids (1-3)
from Crinum asiaticum. Compounds 1 and 3 showed potent Hh/GLI1-mediated
transcriptional inhibitory activity and exhibited cytotoxicity against human
pancreatic (PANC1) and prostate (DU145) cancer cells. Our data revealed that
compounds 1 and 3 clearly inhibited the Hh signaling pathway by down-regulating
the expression of GLI-related proteins (PTCH and BCL2) in DU145 cells.

PMID: 26026497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Vascul Pharmacol. 2015 Nov;74:38-48. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2015.05.008. Epub 2015
May 27.

The critical role of Akt in cardiovascular function.

Abeyrathna P(1), Su Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology &
Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA
30912, USA. Electronic address: ysu@gru.edu.

Akt kinase, a member of AGC kinases, is important in many cellular functions
including proliferation, migration, cell growth and metabolism. There are three
known Akt isoforms which play critical and diverse roles in the cardiovascular
system. Akt activity is regulated by its upstream regulatory pathways at
transcriptional and post-translational levels. Beta-catenin/Tcf-4, GLI1 and
Stat-3 are some of few known transcriptional regulators of AKT gene. Threonine
308 and serine 473 are the two critical phosphorylation sites of Akt1.
Translocation of Akt to the cell membrane facilitates PDK1 phosphorylation of the
threonine site. The serine site is phosphorylated by mTORC2. Ack1, Src, PTK6,
TBK1, IKBKE and IKKe are some of the non-canonical pathways which affect the Akt 
activity. Protein-protein interactions of Akt to actin and Hsp90 increase the Akt
activity while Akt binding to other proteins such as CTMP and TRB3 reduces the
Akt activity. The action of Akt on its downstream targets determines its function
in cardiovascular processes such as cell survival, growth, proliferation,
angiogenesis, vasorelaxation, and cell metabolism. Akt promotes cell survival via
caspase-9, YAP, Bcl-2, and Bcl-x activities. Inhibition of FoxO proteins by Akt
also increases cell survival by transcriptional mechanisms. Akt stimulates cell
growth and proliferation through mTORC1. Akt also increases VEGF secretion and
mediates eNOS phosphorylation, vasorelaxation and angiogenesis. Akt can increase 
cellular metabolism through its downstream targets GSK3 and GLUT4. The
alterations of Akt signaling play an important role in many cardiovascular
pathological processes such as atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy, and vascular
remodeling. Several Akt inhibitors have been developed and tested as anti-tumor
agents. They could be potential novel therapeutics for the cardiovascular
diseases.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4659756 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26025205  [PubMed - in process]


161. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Dec;22(12):2006-19. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.56. Epub 2015
May 29.

HEDGEHOG/GLI-E2F1 axis modulates iASPP expression and function and regulates
melanoma cell growth.

Pandolfi S(1), Montagnani V(1), Lapucci A(2), Stecca B(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori (CRL-ITT), Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Health Sciences, Section of
Clinical Pharmacology and Oncology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, Florence,
Italy.

HEDGEHOG (HH) signaling is a key regulator of tissue development and its aberrant
activation is involved in several cancer types, including melanoma. We and others
have shown a reciprocal cross talk between HH signaling and p53, whose function
is often impaired in melanoma. Here we present evidence that both GLI1 and GLI2, 
the final effectors of HH signaling, regulate the transcription factor E2F1 in
melanoma cells, by binding to a functional non-canonical GLI consensus sequence. 
Consistently, we find a significant correlation between E2F1 and PATCHED1
(PTCH1), GLI1 and GLI2 expression in human melanomas. Functionally, we find that 
E2F1 is a crucial mediator of HH signaling and it is required for melanoma cell
proliferation and xenograft growth induced by activation of the HH pathway.
Interestingly, we present evidence that the HH/GLI-E2F1 axis positively modulates
the inhibitor of apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53 (iASPP) at multiple levels.
HH activation induces iASPP expression through E2F1, which directly binds to
iASPP promoter. HH pathway also contributes to iASPP function, by the induction
of Cyclin B1 and by the E2F1-dependent regulation of CDK1, which are both
involved in iASPP activation. Our data show that activation of HH signaling
enhances proliferation in presence of E2F1 and promotes apoptosis in its absence 
or upon CDK1 inhibition, suggesting that E2F1/iASPP dictates the outcome of HH
signaling in melanoma. Together, these findings identify a novel
HH/GLI-E2F1-iASPP axis that regulates melanoma cell growth and survival,
providing an additional mechanism through which HH signaling restrains p53
proapoptotic function.

PMID: 26024388  [PubMed - in process]


162. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Aug;11(8):2190-7. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00129c.

Fuzzy modeling reveals a dynamic self-sustaining network of the GLI transcription
factors controlling important metabolic regulators in adult mouse hepatocytes.

Schmidt-Heck W(1), Matz-Soja M, Aleithe S, Marbach E, Guthke R, Gebhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans
Knoell Institute, Beutenbergstr. 11a, 07745 Jena, Germany.
Wolfgang.Schmidt-Heck@hki-jena.de.

The GLI transcription factors, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, transduce Hedgehog and
non-hedgehog signals and are involved in regulating development and tumorgenesis.
Surprisingly, they were recently found to modulate important functions of mature 
liver. However, less is known about their mutual interactions and possible target
genes in mature hepatocytes. To get a deeper insight into these interactions
cultured mouse hepatocytes were transfected with siRNAs against each GLI factor. 
RNA was extracted at different times and the expression levels of the genes of
interest were determined by quantitative real-time PCR. The time-dependent data
were analysed by a fuzzy logic-based modelling approach. The results indicated
that the GLI factors constitute an interconnected network. GLI2 inhibited GLI1
expression and was coupled with GLI3 by a positive feedback loop. The regulatory 
activity between GLI1 and GLI3 was more complex switching between a positive and 
a negative feedback loop depending on whether the level of GLI2 is low or high,
respectively. Generally, this network structure enables a dynamic behaviour. When
GLI2 is low, it may keep GLI1 and GLI3 activity balanced favouring the
appropriate modulation of transcription factors like the Ppars and Srebp1. When
GLI2 is high, it may prevent an uncontrolled amplification that may lead to
cancer. In conclusion, the three GLI factors in mature hepatocytes form an
interactive transcriptional network that is involved in the control of target
genes associated with metabolic zonation as well as with lipid and drug
metabolism. Its structure in mature cells seems different from embryonic cells.

PMID: 26010061  [PubMed - in process]


163. PLoS One. 2015 May 22;10(5):e0128006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128006.
eCollection 2015.

Suppressor of Fused Is Required for Determining Digit Number and Identity via
Gli3/Fgfs/Gremlin.

Li J(1), Wang Q(1), Cui Y(1), Yang X(1), Li Y(1), Zhang X(1), Qiu M(2), Zhang
Z(3), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China;
Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky 40292, United States of America. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
United States of America.

The anterior-posterior patterning of the vertebrate limb bud requires closely
coordinated signaling interactions, including Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)-mediated
counteraction of the Gli3 transcription factor in the distal and posterior
mesenchyme of the limb bud. Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), an intracellular negative
regulator of Shh signaling via Gli2 and Gli3, is implicated in early development 
of the mouse limb bud. However, how Sufu is involved in the genetic regulation of
limb bud patterning still remains elusive. In this study, we show that the
conditional deletion of Sufu in the mesenchyme of the early limb bud results in
polydactyly with loss of digit identity and supernumerary bones in the wrist and 
the ankle. These pattern alterations are associated with anterior expansion of
HoxD genes located at the 5' end of the cluster. By focusing on gene expression
analysis of Shh/Gremlin1/Fgf signaling critical for the establishment and
maintenance of anterior-posterior patterning, we show that early response to loss
of Sufu involves anterior prolongation of Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression in the apical 
ectodermal ridge at E10.5. We also reveal the anterior activation of
Shh-dependent posterior markers Ptc1, Gli1 and Gremlin in limb buds lacking Sufu.
Furthermore, we find that loss of Sufu leads to attenuated levels of repressor
Gli2 and repressor Gli3 in the early limb bud. Moreover, expression of Hand2 is
activated in the entire limb bud at the early outgrowth stage in the mutant
lacking Sufu. Thus, we provide evidence that Sufu is involved in the genetic
network that restricts the posterior expression of Gli2/3/Hand2 and Gremlin/Fgf
in limb bud patterning.

PMCID: PMC4441507
PMID: 26001200  [PubMed - in process]


164. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jul;36(1):204-14. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2217. Epub 2015 May 
21.

Metformin exerts anticancer effects through the inhibition of the Sonic hedgehog 
signaling pathway in breast cancer.

Fan C(1), Wang Y(2), Liu Z(3), Sun Y(1), Wang X(1), Wei G(2), Wei J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Cancer Center, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China. (2)Department of Human Anatomy and Key
Laboratory of Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Emergency Medicine, The Fifth People's Hospital, Jinan, Shandong 250022, P.R.
China.

Metformin, a widely prescribed antidiabetic drug, has previously been shown to
lower the risk of certain types of cancer, including that of breast cancer, and
to improve prognosis. Its anticancer effects, which are mediated by the
activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), have become notable. The Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is involved in changes in mammary ducts and
malignant transformation. The aim of the present study was to elucidate the role 
of the Shh pathway in mediating the anticancer effects of metformin and the
correlation between AMPK and the Shh pathway. We investigated the effectiveness
of metformin in inhibiting the proliferation, migration, invasion and stemness of
breast cancer cells in vitro using RNA extraction and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), western blot analysis, cell
proliferation assay, scratch-wound assay (cell migration assay), cell invasion
assay, mammosphere culture and flow cytometry. In in vivo experiments, a tumor
xenograft model was used to detect the effects of metformin on cancer cell
proliferation. The results revealed that the treatment of breast cancer cells
with metformin led to the inhibition of the Shh signaling pathway. Importantly,
metformin inhibited recombinant human Shh (rhShh)-induced cell migration,
invasion, and stemness, and impaired cell proliferation both in vitro and in
vivo. Furthermore, the small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated downregulation of
AMPK reversed the inhibitory effects of metformin on rhShh-induced Gli-1
expression and stemness. Our findings identified a role of the Shh signaling
pathway in the anticancer effects of metformin in breast cancer. Furthermore, we 
revealed that the metformin-mediated inhibition of the Shh signaling pathway may 
be dependent on AMPK.

PMCID: PMC4494591
PMID: 25999130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Oncol. 2015 Jul;47(1):269-79. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3006. Epub 2015 May 15.

The presence of primary cilia in cancer cells does not predict responsiveness to 
modulation of smoothened activity.

Spann AL(1), Yuan K(1), Goliwas KF(1), Steg AD(1), Kaushik DD(1), Kwon YJ(1),
Frost AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Primary cilia are microtubule-based organelles that regulate smoothened-dependent
activation of the GLI transcription factors in canonical hedgehog signaling. In
many cancers, primary cilia are markedly decreased or absent. The lack of primary
cilia may inhibit or alter canonical hedgehog signaling and, thereby, interfere
in the cellular responsiveness to modulators of smoothened activity. Clinical
trials of smoothened antagonists for cancer treatment have shown the best
response in basal cell carcinomas, with limited response in other solid tumors.
To determine whether the presence or absence of primary cilia in cancer cells
will predict their responsiveness to modulation of smoothened activity, we
compared the ability of an agonist and/or inhibitor of smoothened (SAG and SANT1,
respectively) to modulate GLI-mediated transcription, as measured by GLI1 mRNA
level or GLI-luciferase reporter activity, in non-cancer cells with primary cilia
(ovarian surface epithelial cells and breast fibroblasts), in cancer cells that
cannot assemble primary cilia (MCF7, MDA-MB-231 cell lines), and in cancer cells 
with primary cilia (SKOV3, PANC1 cell lines). As expected, SAG and SANT1 resulted
in appropriate modulation of GLI transcriptional activity in ciliated non-cancer 
cells, and failed to modulate GLI transcriptional activity in cancer cells
without primary cilia. However, there was also no modulation of GLI
transcriptional activity in either ciliated cancer cell line. SAG treatment of
SKOV3 induced localization of smoothened to primary cilia, as assessed by
immunofluorescence, even though there was no increase in GLI transcriptional
activity, suggesting a defect in activation of SMO in the primary cilia or in
steps later in the hedgehog pathway. In contrast to SKOV3, SAG treatment of PANC1
did not cause the localization of smoothened to primary cilia. Our data
demonstrate that the presence of primary cilia in the cancer epithelial cells
lines tested does not indicate their responsiveness to smoothened activation or
inhibition.

PMID: 25997440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Sci Rep. 2015 May 20;5:10290. doi: 10.1038/srep10290.

Indian Hedgehog signaling pathway members are associated with magnetic resonance 
imaging manifestations and pathological scores in lumbar facet joint
osteoarthritis.

Shuang F(1), Zhou Y(2), Hou SX(2), Zhu JL(2), Liu Y(2), Zhang CL(2), Tang JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of General
Hospital of Chinese PLA, Beijing 100048, China [2] Department of Orthopedics, The
94th Hospital of Chinese PLA, Nanchang 330002, China. (2)Department of
Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of General Hospital of Chinese PLA,
Beijing 100048, China.

Indian Hedgehog (HH) has been shown to be involved in osteoarthritis (OA) in
articular joints, where there is evidence that Indian HH blockade could
ameliorate OA. It seems to play a prominent role in development of the
intervertebral disc (IVD) and in postnatal maintenance. There is little work on
IHH in the IVD. Hence the aim of the current study was to investigate the role of
Indian Hedgehog in the pathology of facet joint (FJ) OA. 24 patients diagnosed
with lumbar intervertebral disk herniation or degenerative spinal stenosis were
included. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and Osteoarthritis
Research Society International (OARSI) histopathology grading system was
correlated to the mRNA levels of GLI1, PTCH1, and HHIP in the FJs. The Weishaupt 
grading and OARSI scores showed high positive correlation (r = 0.894) (P < 0.01).
MRI Weishaupt grades showed positive correlation with GLI1 (r = 0.491), PTCH1 (r 
= 0.444), and HHIP (r = 0.654) mRNA levels (P < 0.05 in each case). OARSI scores 
were also positively correlated with GLI1 (r = 0. 646), PTCH1 (r = 0. 518), and
HHIP (r = 0.762) mRNA levels (P < 0.01 in each case). Cumulatively our findings
indicate that Indian HH signaling is increased in OA and is perhaps a key
component in OA pathogenesis and progression.

PMCID: PMC4438722
PMID: 25992955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Sci Rep. 2015 May 20;5:10364. doi: 10.1038/srep10364.

Cell context-specific expression of primary cilia in the human testis and ciliary
coordination of Hedgehog signalling in mouse Leydig cells.

Nygaard MB(1), Almstrup K(2), Lindbæk L(3), Christensen ST(3), Svingen T(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Copenhagen University
Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark [2] Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (2)University Department
of Growth and Reproduction, Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet),
Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (3)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (4)1] University Department of Growth and
Reproduction, Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen
DK-2100, Denmark [2] Department of Toxicology and Risk Assessment, National Food 
Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Søborg DK-2860, Denmark.

Primary cilia are sensory organelles that coordinate numerous cellular signalling
pathways during development and adulthood. Defects in ciliary assembly or
function lead to a series of developmental disorders and diseases commonly
referred to as ciliopathies. Still, little is known about the formation and
function of primary cilia in the mammalian testis. Here, we characterized primary
cilia in adult human testis and report a constitutive expression of cilia in
peritubular myoid cells and a dynamic expression of cilia in differentiating
Leydig cells. Primary cilia are generally absent from cells of mature
seminiferous epithelium, but present in Sertoli cell-only tubules in Klinefelter 
syndrome testis. Peritubular cells in atrophic testis produce overly long cilia. 
Furthermore cultures of growth-arrested immature mouse Leydig cells express
primary cilia that are enriched in components of Hedgehog signalling, including
Smoothened, Patched-1, and GLI2, which are involved in regulating Leydig cell
differentiation. Stimulation of Hedgehog signalling increases the localization of
Smoothened to the cilium, which is followed by transactivation of the Hedgehog
target genes, Gli1 and Ptch1. Our findings provide new information on the
spatiotemporal formation of primary cilia in the testis and show that primary
cilia in immature Leydig cells mediate Hedgehog signalling.

PMCID: PMC4438617
PMID: 25992706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Surgery. 2015 Jul;158(1):211-24. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2015.03.016.

Gli1 promotes transforming growth factor-beta1- and epidermal growth
factor-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition in pancreatic cancer cells.

Liu Q(1), Sheng W(2), Dong M(3), Dong X(4), Dong Q(5), Li F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Gastrointestinal Surgery, the First Hospital,
China Medical University, Shenyang, China; Department of General Surgery, the
People's Hospital of Liaoning Province, Shenyang, China. (2)Department of General
Surgery, Gastrointestinal Surgery, the First Hospital, China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China. (3)Department of General Surgery, Gastrointestinal Surgery, the 
First Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, China. Electronic address:
cmumingdong@sohu.com. (4)Department of Surgical Oncology, the First Hospital,
China Medical University, Shenyang, China. (5)Department of General Surgery, the 
People's Hospital of Liaoning Province, Shenyang, China. (6)Department of Cell
Biology, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog signaling pathway and its key target effector Gli1 are
linked closely to the development of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in many cancers. The definite function of Gli1 in regulating the EMT of
pancreatic cancer (PC), however, is still unclear.
METHODS: At the cell and tissue levels, we investigated the role of Gli1 in the
initiation of EMT in PC with and without external stimulus treatments.
RESULTS: The immunohistochemistry results showed that Gli1 was associated
positively with MMP9 but not with E-cad or Vimentin. Gli1 expression was
associated positively with tumor T (P = .025) and Union for International Cancer 
Control stage (P = .032), whereas MMP9 expression was associated positively with 
lymph node metastasis (P = .017) and Union for International Cancer Control stage
(P = .006). Furthermore, patients with Gli1 and MMP9 coexpression had poor
overall survival (P = .015). Silencing of Gli1 alone without external stimulus
had no effect on EMT but inhibited transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGFß1)- and 
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced EMT in PANC-1, AsPC-1, and BxPC-3 PC cell
lines, along with the inhibition of TGFß1- and EGF-induced EMT-like cell
morphology and invasion, down-regulation of E-cad, and up-regulation of MMP9 and 
Vimentin in those 3 cell lines, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Gli1 silencing alone has no effect on EMT initiation; however, it
exerts a protumor role in the aggressive invasion of PC cells by promoting TGFß1-
and EGF-induced EMT.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25979438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Apr 17;8:877-83. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S71034. eCollection
2015.

Synergistic inhibition of colon carcinoma cell growth by Hedgehog-Gli1 inhibitor 
arsenic trioxide and phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002.

Cai X(1), Yu K(1), Zhang L(2), Li Y(1), Li Q(1), Yang Z(1), Shen T(1), Duan L(3),
Xiong W(1), Wang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Colorectal Cancer Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pathology, The 
Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, People's Republic of China.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway not only plays important roles in
embryogenesis and adult tissue homeostasis, but also in tumorigenesis. Aberrant
Hh pathway activation has been reported in a variety of malignant tumors
including colon carcinoma. Here, we sought to investigate the regulation of the
Hh pathway transcription factor Gli1 by arsenic trioxide and phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor LY294002 in colon carcinoma cells. We transfected cells
with siGli1 and observed a significant reduction of Gli1 expression in HCT116 and
HT29 cells, which was confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction and Western blots. Knocking down endogenous Gli1 reduced colon carcinoma
cell viability through inducing cell apoptosis. Similarly, knocking down Gli2
using short interfering RNA impaired colon carcinoma cell growth in vitro. To
elucidate the regulation of Gli1 expression, we found that both Gli inhibitor
arsenic trioxide and PI3K inhibitor LY294002 significantly reduced Gli1 protein
expression and colon carcinoma cell proliferation. Arsenic trioxide treatment
also reduced Gli1 downstream target gene expression, such as Bcl2 and CCND1. More
importantly, the inhibition of Hedgehog-Gli1 by arsenic trioxide showed
synergistic anticancer effect with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 in colon carcinoma
cells. Our findings suggest that the Hh pathway transcription factor Gli1 is
involved in the regulation of colon carcinoma cell viability. Inhibition of
Hedgehog-Gli1 expression by arsenic trioxide and PI3K inhibitor synergistically
reduces colon cancer cell proliferation, indicating that they could be used as an
effective anti-colon cancer combination therapy.

PMCID: PMC4407746
PMID: 25945059  [PubMed]


170. Lab Invest. 2015 Jul;95(7):790-803. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.59. Epub 2015 May
4.

Curcumin regulates cell fate and metabolism by inhibiting hedgehog signaling in
hepatic stellate cells.

Lian N(1), Jiang Y(1), Zhang F(2), Jin H(1), Lu C(1), Wu X(1), Lu Y(2), Zheng
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Nanjing, China. (2)1] Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy,
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China [2] Jiangsu Key Laboratory
for Pharmacology and Safety Evaluation of Chinese Materia Medica, Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China [3] The National First-Class Key
Discipline for Traditional Chinese Medicine of Nanjing University of Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing, China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling becomes activated in
chronic liver injury and plays a role in the pathogenesis of hepatic fibrosis.
Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are Hh-responsive cells and activation of the Hh
pathway promotes transdifferentiation of HSCs into myofibroblasts. Targeting Hh
signaling may be a novel therapeutic strategy for treatment of liver fibrosis. We
previously reported that curcumin has potent antifibrotic effects in vivo and in 
vitro, but the underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. This study shows
that curcumin downregulated Patched and Smoothened, two key elements in Hh
signaling, but restored Hhip expression in rat liver with carbon
tetrachloride-induced fibrosis and in cultured HSCs. Curcumin also halted the
nuclear translocation, DNA binding, and transcription activity of Gli1. Moreover,
the Hh signaling inhibitor cyclopamine, like curcumin, arrested the cell cycle,
induced mitochondrial apoptosis, reduced fibrotic gene expression, restored lipid
accumulation, and inhibited invasion and migration in HSCs. However, curcumin's
effects on cell fate and fibrogenic properties of HSCs were abolished by the Hh
pathway agonist SAG. Furthermore, curcumin and cyclopamine decreased
intracellular levels of adenosine triphosphate and lactate, and inhibited the
expression and/or function of several key molecules controlling glycolysis.
However, SAG abrogated the curcumin effects on these parameters of glycolysis.
Animal data also showed that curcumin downregulated glycolysis-regulatory
proteins in rat fibrotic liver. These aggregated data therefore indicate that
curcumin modulated cell fate and metabolism by disrupting the Hh pathway in HSCs,
providing novel molecular insights into curcumin reduction of HSC activation.

PMID: 25938627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Panminerva Med. 2015 Dec;57(4):167-75. Epub 2015 Apr 29.

ZnRF3 induces apoptosis of gastric cancer cells by antagonizing Wnt and Hedgehog 
signaling.

Qin H(1), Cai A, Xi H, Yuan J, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Department, PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China -
chenlin11111111@sina.com.

AIM: The aim of this paper was to investigate the function an importance of
E3-ubiquitin ligase ZnRF3 in the progression of cancer cell growth.
METHODS: A total of 58 patients (44 males and 14 females) were enrolled in the
study and their gastric tumors were removed surgically and were staged by the TNM
approach. Among these patients, 43 patients died and 15 survived at the time of
this study. The tumors and the paracancerous tissues were examined by
immunohostochemistry for the expression of ZnRF3. We assessed the expression of
ZnRF3 in gastric tumors and paracancerous tissues from our patients and related
this to patient survival.
RESULTS: A large proportion of malignant cancers of the stomach are gastric
adenocarcinoma type. In spite of many studies, the molecular basis for this
cancer is still unclear. Deregulated cell proliferative signaling via
Wnt/ß-catenin and Hedgehog pathways is considered important in the pathogenesis
of many cancers including the gastric cancer. Recent studies identified ZnRF3
protein, which is a E3-ubiquitin ligase and which is either deleted or mutated in
cancers, to inhibit Wnt signaling. However, the significance of ZnRF3 in the
control of gastric cancer and whether it also regulates Hedgehog signaling
pathway, is not known. ZnRF3 expression was much higher in tumors from aged
patients. Male patients showed higher mortality than the females. Mechanistic
studies using normal gastric cells (GES1) and gastric cancer cells (MGC-803)
infected with either AdZnRF3 or AdGFP viral vectors, revealed that ZnRF3
overexpression causes significantly more apoptosis and lowered proliferation of
cancer cells. ZnRF3 overexpression led to greatly reduced levels of Lgr5, a
component of Wnt signaling and also Gli1, a component of Hedgehog signaling.
Thus, ZnRF3 negatively influences both the Wnt and Hedgehog proliferative
pathways and probably this way it negatively regulates cancer progression. These 
results suggest the importance of normal ZnRF3 function in checking the
progression of cancer cell growth and indicate that a lack of this protein can
lead to poorer clinical outcomes for gastric cancer patients.
CONCLUSION: We observed a clear relationship between ZnRF3 expression in
paracancerous tissue and tumor size.

PMID: 25923840  [PubMed - in process]


172. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 28;6:6934. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7934.

Lineage specification of ovarian theca cells requires multicellular interactions 
via oocyte and granulosa cells.

Liu C(1), Peng J(2), Matzuk MM(3), Yao HH(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana Illinois, USA [2] Reproductive and Developmental Biology Laboratory,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)1] Departments of Pathology &Immunology, and Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Centers for Drug
Discovery and Reproductive Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (3)1] Departments of Pathology &Immunology, and Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Centers for
Drug Discovery and Reproductive Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA [3] Departments of Molecular &Cellular Biology and Pharmacology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)Reproductive and
Developmental Biology Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Organogenesis of the ovary is a highly orchestrated process involving multiple
lineage determination of ovarian surface epithelium, granulosa cells and theca
cells. Although the sources of ovarian surface epithelium and granulosa cells are
known, the origin(s) of theca progenitor cells have not been definitively
identified. Here we show that theca cells derive from two sources: Wt1(+) cells
indigenous to the ovary and Gli1(+) mesenchymal cells that migrate from the
mesonephros. These progenitors acquire theca lineage marker Gli1 in response to
paracrine signals Desert hedgehog (Dhh) and Indian hedgehog (Ihh) from granulosa 
cells. Ovaries lacking Dhh/Ihh exhibit theca layer loss, blunted steroid
production, arrested folliculogenesis and failure to form corpora lutea.
Production of Dhh/Ihh in granulosa cells requires growth differentiation factor 9
(GDF9) from the oocyte. Our studies provide the first genetic evidence for the
origins of theca cells and reveal a multicellular interaction critical for the
formation of a functional theca.

PMCID: PMC4413950
PMID: 25917826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Integr Cancer Ther. 2015 Jul;14(4):394-401. doi: 10.1177/1534735415583553. Epub
2015 Apr 27.

Inhibition of Hepatocellular Carcinoma by Total Alkaloids of Rubus alceifolius
Poir Involves Suppression of Hedgehog Signaling.

Zhao J(1), Liu L(1), Wan Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhuang Q(1), Zhong X(1), Hong Z(2),
Peng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian Province,
China. (2)Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian
Province, China zfhong1953@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the effects of total alkaloids of Rubus alceifolius Poir 
(TARAP) on the migration and invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
furthermore investigated the possible molecular mechanisms mediating its
anticancer activity.
METHODS: We implanted nude mice with human HCC HepG2 cells and fed them with
vehicle (physiological saline) or 3 g/kg/day dose of TARAP 5 days per week for 21
days. We determined the in vitro effect of TARAP on the migration and invasion of
HepG2 cells by transwell assay. We evaluated SHH signaling components' (SHH,
PTCH, SMO, and Gli1) expression levels by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction and immunohistochemistry. Activity of the matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) in supernatants was analyzed by zymography. The expression of the MMPs and
their specific tissue inhibitor (tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases,
TIMP-1, 2) in HCC tissues was detected by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We discovered that TARAP inhibited hepatocellular migration and invasion
in a dose-dependent manner in vitro. In addition, TARAP decreased the expression 
of SHH, PTCH, SMO, and Gli1 in HCC mouse tumors at both transcriptional and
translational levels. Moreover, TARAP inhibited the activity of MMP2 and MMP9. We
found that TARAP reduced the expression of MMP2 and MMP9, as well as the tissue
inhibitor of MMPs.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that TARAP inhibits HCC migration and invasion
likely through suppression of the hedgehog pathway. This may, in part, explain
its anticancer properties. These results suggest that total alkaloids in Rubus
alceifolius may have potential as a novel antimetastasis drug in the treatment of
HCC.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25917815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10728-45.

Chemotherapy induces the cancer-associated fibroblast phenotype, activating
paracrine Hedgehog-GLI signalling in breast cancer cells.

Peiris-Pagès M(1,)(2), Sotgia F(1,)(2), Lisanti MP(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Unit, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
University of Manchester, UK. (2)The Manchester Centre for Cellular Metabolism
(MCCM), Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, UK.

Cancer cells recruit normal cells such as fibroblasts to establish reactive
microenvironments. Via metabolic stress, catabolism and inflammation, these
cancer-associated fibroblasts set up a synergistic relationship with tumour
cells, that contributes to their malignancy and resistance to therapy. Given that
chemotherapy is a systemic treatment, the possibility that healthy cell damage
affects the metastatic risk or the prospect of developing a second malignancy
becomes relevant. Here, we demonstrate that standard chemotherapies
phenotypically and metabolically transform stromal fibroblasts into
cancer-associated fibroblasts, leading to the emergence of a highly glycolytic,
autophagic and pro-inflammatory microenvironment. This catabolic
microenvironment, in turn, activates stemness (Sonic hedgehog/GLI signalling),
antioxidant response and interferon-mediated signalling, in adjacent breast
cancer cells. Thus, we propose a model by which chemotherapy-induced catabolism
in healthy fibroblasts constitutes a source of energy-rich nutrients and
inflammatory cytokines that would activate stemness in adjacent epithelial cells,
possibly triggering new tumorigenic processes. In this context, immune cell
recruitment would be also stimulated to further support malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4484415
PMID: 25915429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Stem Cells. 2015 Aug;33(8):2496-508. doi: 10.1002/stem.2043. Epub 2015 May 26.

Noggin-Mediated Retinal Induction Reveals a Novel Interplay Between Bone
Morphogenetic Protein Inhibition, Transforming Growth Factor ß, and Sonic
Hedgehog Signaling.

Messina A(1), Lan L(2), Incitti T(1), Bozza A(1), Andreazzoli M(2), Vignali R(2),
Cremisi F(3), Bozzi Y(1,)(4), Casarosa S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy. (2)Department of Biology,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy. (4)CNR
Institute of Neuroscience, Pisa, Italy.

It has long been known that the depletion of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) is 
one of the key factors necessary for the development of anterior neuroectodermal 
structures. However, the precise molecular mechanisms that underlie forebrain
regionalization are still not completely understood. Here, we show that Noggin1
is involved in the regionalization of anterior neural structures in a
dose-dependent manner. Low doses of Noggin1 expand prosencephalic territories,
while higher doses specify diencephalic and retinal regions at the expense of
telencephalic areas. A similar dose-dependent mechanism determines the ability of
Noggin1 to convert pluripotent cells in prosencephalic or diencephalic/retinal
precursors, as shown by transplant experiments and molecular analyses. At a
molecular level, the strong inhibition of BMP signaling exerted by high doses of 
Noggin1 reinforces the Nodal/transforming growth factor (TGF)ß signaling pathway,
leading to activation of Gli1 and Gli2 and subsequent activation of Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) signaling. We propose a new role for Noggin1 in determining
specific anterior neural structures by the modulation of TGFß and SHH signaling.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25913744  [PubMed - in process]


176. Oncotarget. 2015 May 20;6(14):12493-504.

Combining TGF-ß1 knockdown and miR200c administration to optimize antitumor
efficacy of B16F10/GPI-IL-21 vaccine.

Wang X(1), Zhao F(1), He X(1,)(2), Wang J(3), Zhang Y(1), Zhang H(1), Ni Y(1),
Sun J(1), Wang X(4), Dou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, School of Medicine &
Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Affiliated Tumor
Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong, China. (3)Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, Zhongda Hospital, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, 
China. (4)Department of Center for Experiment Animal, School of Medicine,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China.

TGF-ß1 secreted abundantly by tumors cells as well as present in the local
microenvironment promotes neoplasm invasion and metastasis by triggering the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). MiR200c has been shown to suppress
EMT and to regulate the cellular epithelial and interstitial state conversion,
whereas the tumor vaccines are intended to specifically initiate or amplify a
host response against evolving tumor cells. Our study aimed at optimizing the
antitumor effects of the B16F10/glycosylphosphatidylinositol-interleukin 21
(B16F10/GPI-IL-21) tumor vaccine on melanoma bearing mice by combining the TGF-ß1
knockdown and the administration of miR200c agomir. The mice were subcutaneously 
vaccinated with inactivated B16F10/GPI-IL-21 vaccine and challenged by B16F10
cells transfected with shTGF-ß1 (B16F10/shTGF-ß1 cells) or B16F10/shTGF-ß1 cells 
with the administration of miR200c agomir. The later combination showed that,
when compared with the mice in the control group that received no vaccination,
vaccinated mice significantly increased NK and CTL activities, enhanced levels of
IFN-<U+03B3>, and reduced expression of TGF-ß1, N-cadherin, Vimentin, Gli1/2, P-Smad2/3 
and others involved in promoting expression of EMT-related molecules in tumor
areas, and inhibited the melanoma metastasis in lungs and lymph nodes.
Altogether, our findings demonstrate that this synergistic anti-cancer regimen
effectively induces strong immune response and diminishes the melanoma
progression.

PMCID: PMC4494953
PMID: 25895132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Transl Med. 2015 Feb 12;13:52. doi: 10.1186/s12967-014-0370-3.

An RNA editing fingerprint of cancer stem cell reprogramming.

Crews LA(1,)(2), Jiang Q(3,)(4), Zipeto MA(5,)(6), Lazzari E(7,)(8,)(9), Court
AC(10,)(11), Ali S(12,)(13), Barrett CL(14), Frazer KA(15), Jamieson CH(16,)(17).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine, Moores Cancer
Center at University of California, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. lcrews@ucsd.edu.
(2)Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
lcrews@ucsd.edu. (3)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Moores Cancer Center at University of California, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
q1jiang@ucsd.edu. (4)Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 
92037, USA. q1jiang@ucsd.edu. (5)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Moores Cancer Center at University of California, La Jolla, CA, 92093, 
USA. mzipeto@ucsd.edu. (6)Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla,
CA, 92037, USA. mzipeto@ucsd.edu. (7)Division of Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Moores Cancer Center at University of California, La
Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. elazzari@ucsd.edu. (8)Sanford Consortium for Regenerative 
Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. elazzari@ucsd.edu. (9)Doctoral School of
Molecular and Translational Medicine, Department of Health Sciences, University
of Milan, Milan, Italy. elazzari@ucsd.edu. (10)Division of Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Moores Cancer Center at University of California, La
Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. acourtrecart@ucsd.edu. (11)Sanford Consortium for
Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. acourtrecart@ucsd.edu.
(12)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine, Moores Cancer
Center at University of California, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. sha003@ucsd.edu.
(13)Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.
sha003@ucsd.edu. (14)Division of Genome Information Sciences, Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
cbarrett@ucsd.edu. (15)Division of Genome Information Sciences, Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
kafrazer@ucsd.edu. (16)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Moores Cancer Center at University of California, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
cjamieson@ucsd.edu. (17)Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla,
CA, 92037, USA. cjamieson@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Deregulation of RNA editing by adenosine deaminases acting on dsRNA
(ADARs) has been implicated in the progression of diverse human cancers including
hematopoietic malignancies such as chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Inflammation-associated activation of ADAR1 occurs in leukemia stem cells
specifically in the advanced, often drug-resistant stage of CML known as blast
crisis. However, detection of cancer stem cell-associated RNA editing by RNA
sequencing in these rare cell populations can be technically challenging, costly 
and requires PCR validation. The objectives of this study were to validate RNA
editing of a subset of cancer stem cell-associated transcripts, and to develop a 
quantitative RNA editing fingerprint assay for rapid detection of aberrant RNA
editing in human malignancies.
METHODS: To facilitate quantification of cancer stem cell-associated RNA editing 
in exons and intronic or 3'UTR primate-specific Alu sequences using a sensitive, 
cost-effective method, we established an in vitro RNA editing model and developed
a sensitive RNA editing fingerprint assay that employs a site-specific
quantitative PCR (RESSq-PCR) strategy. This assay was validated in a
stably-transduced human leukemia cell line, lentiviral-ADAR1 transduced primary
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, and in primary human chronic myeloid
leukemia stem cells.
RESULTS: In lentiviral ADAR1-expressing cells, increased RNA editing of MDM2,
APOBEC3D, GLI1 and AZIN1 transcripts was detected by RESSq-PCR with improved
sensitivity over sequencing chromatogram analysis. This method accurately
detected cancer stem cell-associated RNA editing in primary chronic myeloid
leukemia samples, establishing a cancer stem cell-specific RNA editing
fingerprint of leukemic transformation that will support clinical development of 
novel diagnostic tools to predict and prevent cancer progression.
CONCLUSIONS: RNA editing quantification enables rapid detection of malignant
progenitors signifying cancer progression and therapeutic resistance, and will
aid future RNA editing inhibitor development efforts.

PMCID: PMC4341880
PMID: 25889244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jul;1850(7):1438-48. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.04.005. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Hedgehog signaling through GLI1 and GLI2 is required for epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in human trophoblasts.

Tang C(1), Mei L(1), Pan L(1), Xiong W(2), Zhu H(2), Ruan H(1), Zou C(2), Tang
L(2), Iguchi T(3), Wu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. (2)The Affiliated Children Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (3)Department of Toxicology, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka, Japan. (4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: xiwu@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is critical for human
placental development, trophoblastic differentiation, and pregnancy-associated
diseases. Here, we investigated the effects of hedgehog (HH) signaling on EMT in 
human trophoblasts, and further explored the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Human primary cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells were
used as in vitro models. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis 
were performed to examine mRNA and protein levels, respectively. Lentiviruses
expressing short hairpin RNA were used to knock down the target genes. Reporter
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation were performed to determine the
transactivity. Cell migration, invasion and colony formation were accessed by
wound healing, Matrigel-coated transwell, and colony formation assays,
respectively.
RESULTS: Activation of HH signaling induced the transdifferentiation of
cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells from epithelial to mesenchymal 
phenotypes, exhibiting the decreases in E-Cadherin expression as well as the
increases in vimentin expression, invasion, migration and colony formation.
Knockdown of GLI1 and GLI2 but not GLI3 attenuated HH-induced
transdifferentiation, whereas GLI1 was responsible for the expression of
HH-induced key EMT regulators including Snail1, Slug, and Twist, and both GLI1
and GLI2 acted directly as transcriptional repressor of CDH1 gene encoding
E-Cadherin.
CONCLUSION: HH through GLI1 and GLI2 acts as critical signals in supporting the
physiological function of mature placenta.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: HH signaling through GLI1 and GLI2 could be required for
the maintenance of human pregnancy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25888497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jan 27;95(4):299-305.

[Effects of itraconazole plus doxorubicin on proliferation and apoptosis in acute
myeloid leukemia cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Xu X(2), Zhou R, Guo K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510282, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Zhongshan Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Zhongshan 528403, China. (3)Department of Hematology,
Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510282, China. Email:
wodeyoujian@foxmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of itraconazole (ITC) plus adriamycin (ADM) on 
proliferation and apoptosis of acute myeloid leukemia cells in vitro.
METHODS: The growth inhibition effects of different concentrations of ITC, ADM or
ITC (2, 6, 15 µmol/L) plus ADM (0.30, 0.75 µmol/L) were detected by CCK8 assay in
KG1a and primary adult acute leukemia cells. Different concentrations of ITC for 
7, 14 and 21 days were applied for observing the effect on colony formation.
After 48 h treatments with 6 µmol/L ITC, 0.75 µmol/L ADM or ITC (6 µmol/L) plus
ADM (0.75 µmol/L), the morphological changes of cells were observed by Wright
staining. Flow cytometry was used to detect cell apoptotic rate, mitochondrial
membrane potential and cell cycle arrest. And the expression levels of Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh) signal pathway-related proteins Shh and glima-associated oncogene 
homdog1 (Gli1) were determined by Western blot.
RESULTS: ITC and ADM inhibited the proliferation of KG1a and primary adult acute 
leukemia cells and ITC reduced the colony-formation ability of KG1a cells both in
dose-dependent manners. Compared with control or single drug group, the changes
of cell morphology were more apparent in combined group. Weeb coefficient test
revealed a synergistic effect (D = 70%C) of 0.75 µmol/L ADM plus 6 µmol/L ITC.
When KG1a cells were treated with 6 µmol/L ITC plus 0.75 µmol/L ADM, the
apoptotic rate was 31.72% ± 1.58%. And it was significantly higher than that in
control, ITC and ADM groups (4.17% ± 0.74%, 4.33% ± 1.12%, 9.53% ± 1.15%, P <
0.01). Detection of mitochondrial membrane potential showed that low
red-fluorescent cells (P3) of combined group were obviously higher than that in
control, ADM and ITC single drug groups (18.80% ± 0.96% vs 5.00% ± 0.38%, 9.70% ±
0.43%, 7.10% ± 0.77%, P < 0.01) . KG1a cells were obviously arrested in G2 phase 
in combined group and it showed no statistical significance compared with control
or single drug group. Western blot showed that the expression levels of Shh and
Gli1 decreased with rising concentration of ITC.
CONCLUSIONS: ITC plus ADM can obviously inhibit cell proliferation and increase
KG1a cell apoptotic rate, mitochondrial damage and G2 phase retardation. And ITC 
inhibits the Shh signal pathways.

PMID: 25877249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):8593-605.

Crosstalk between Desmoglein 2 and Patched 1 accelerates chemical-induced skin
tumorigenesis.

Brennan-Crispi DM(1,)(2,)(3), Hossain C(1), Sahu J(1), Brady M(1), Riobo
NA(2,)(3), Mahoney MG(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Sidney Kimmel Cancer
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is causative of BCCs and has been 
associated with a fraction of SCCs. Desmoglein 2 (Dsg2) is an adhesion protein
that is upregulated in many cancers and overexpression of Dsg2 in the epidermis
renders mice more susceptible to squamous-derived neoplasia. Here we examined a
potential crosstalk between Dsg2 and Hh signaling in skin tumorigenesis. Our
findings show that Dsg2 modulates Gli1 expression, in vitro and in vivo. Ectopic 
expression of Dsg2 on Ptc1(+/lacZ) background enhanced epidermal proliferation
and interfollicular activation of the Hh pathway. Furthermore, in response to
DMBA/TPA, the Dsg2/Ptc1+/lacZ mice developed squamous lessons earlier than the
WT, Ptc1(+/lacZ), and Inv-Dsg2 littermates. Additionally, DMBA/TPA induced BCC
formation in all mice harboring the Ptc1(+/lacZ) gene and the presence of Dsg2 in
Dsg2/Ptc1(+/lacZ) mice doubled the BCC tumor burden. Reporter analysis revealed
activation of the Hh pathway in the BCC tumors. However, in the SCCs we observed 
Hh activity only in the underlying dermis of the tumors. Furthermore,
Dsg2/Ptc1(+/lacZ) mice demonstrated enhanced MEK/Erk1/2 activation within the
tumors and expression of Shh in the dermis. In summary, our results demonstrate
that Dsg2 modulates Hh signaling, and this synergy may accelerate skin tumor
development by different mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4496169
PMID: 25871385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dev Cell. 2015 Apr 20;33(2):125-35. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.02.021. Epub 2015 
Apr 9.

BMP-SHH signaling network controls epithelial stem cell fate via regulation of
its niche in the developing tooth.

Li J(1), Feng J(2), Liu Y(3), Ho TV(2), Grimes W(2), Ho HA(2), Park S(2), Wang
S(4), Chai Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA; Molecular
Laboratory for Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Beijing Key Laboratory of
Tooth Regeneration and Function Reconstruction, Capital Medical University School
of Stomatology, Beijing 100050, PRC. (2)Center for Craniofacial Molecular
Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (3)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow
School of Dentistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA; Department of Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Haidian District, Beijing 100081, PRC. (4)Molecular Laboratory for
Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tooth Regeneration
and Function Reconstruction, Capital Medical University School of Stomatology,
Beijing 100050, PRC. (5)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School 
of Dentistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
Electronic address: ychai@usc.edu.

During embryogenesis, ectodermal stem cells adopt different fates and form
diverse ectodermal organs, such as teeth, hair follicles, mammary glands, and
salivary glands. Interestingly, these ectodermal organs differ in their tissue
homeostasis, which leads to differential abilities for continuous growth
postnatally. Mouse molars lose the ability to grow continuously, whereas incisors
retain this ability. In this study, we found that a BMP-Smad4-SHH-Gli1 signaling 
network may provide a niche supporting transient Sox2+ dental epithelial stem
cells in mouse molars. This mechanism also plays a role in continuously growing
mouse incisors. The differential fate of epithelial stem cells in mouse molars
and incisors is controlled by this BMP/SHH signaling network, which partially
accounts for the different postnatal growth potential of molars and incisors.
Collectively, our study highlights the importance of crosstalk between two
signaling pathways, BMP and SHH, in regulating the fate of epithelial stem cells 
during organogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4406846 [Available on 2016-04-20]
PMID: 25865348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Anticancer Res. 2015 Apr;35(4):1835-42.

Characterization of the 12q amplicons in lipomatous soft tissue tumors by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification-based copy number analysis.

Creytens D(1), Van Gorp J(2), Speel EJ(3), Ferdinande L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium david.creytens@uzgent.be creytensdavid@hotmail.com. (2)Department 
of Pathology, Diakonessenhuis Hospital Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. (4)Department 
of Pathology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Well-differentiated liposarcoma (WDLPS) and de-differentiated
liposarcoma (DDLPS) are characterized by amplified sequences derived from the
long arm of chromosome 12. The goal of the present study was to identify, besides
the well-known candidate genes, novel relevant genes in these large, complex 12q 
amplicons.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification,
genetic alterations in 19 different genes of 12q12-24 were evaluated in 77
lipomatous soft tissue tumors (including lipomas, WDLPS, DDLPS and pleomorphic
liposarcomas).
RESULTS: We recorded several amplified genes of 12q13-15, including miR-26a-2, a 
gene not well studied in liposarcoma, and the well-known and previously described
genes murine double minute 2 (MDM2), YEATS domain-containing protein 4 (YEATS4), 
high-mobility AT-hook 2 (HMGA2), cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and tetraspanin
31 (TSPAN31). Interestingly, the amplification profiles of these six genes were
found to be significantly different between WDLPS and DDLPS, more frequently
having a high-level status in DDLPS than in WDLPS. In addition, DDLPS were found 
to have significantly higher mean amplification ratios compared to WDLPS.
Moreover, we identified additional genes exclusively amplified in DDLPS in 12q13,
12q21 and 12q24, including glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), mitogen
activated protein kinase kinase kinase 12 (MAP3K12), cyclin-dependent kinase 2
(CDK2), ALX homeobox 1 (ALX1) and T-box 5 (TBX5).
CONCLUSION: Differences in amplification profiles among WDLPS and DDLPS may be
related to progression/de-differentiation in liposarcomas and show how in the
future amplification profiles could provide an adjunctive tool in characterizing 
progression to DDLPS. In addition, we identified additional genes exclusively
amplified in DDLPS, which may play a role in liposarcomagenesis, particularly in 
the de-differentiation process.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25862836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:957502. doi: 10.1155/2015/957502. Epub 2015 Mar 15.

Sonic hedgehog produced by bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells supports
cell survival in myelodysplastic syndrome.

Zou J(1), Hong Y(2), Tong Y(1), Wei J(1), Qin Y(1), Shao S(1), Wang C(1), Zhou
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First
People's Hospital, Shanghai 200080, China. (2)Experimental Research Center,
Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's Hospital, Shanghai 200080,
China.

The role of marrow microenvironment in the pathogenesis of myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) remains controversial. Therefore, we studied the influence of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) from patients with different
risk types of MDS on the survival of the MDS cell lines SKM-1 and MUTZ-1. We
first demonstrated that the expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), smoothened (Smo),
and glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1) was increased in MDS patients (n 
= 23); the increase in expression was positively correlated with the presence of 
high-risk factors. The Shh signaling inhibitor, cyclopamine, inhibited high-risk 
MDS BMSC-induced survival of SKM-1 and MUTZ-1 cells, suggesting a role for Shh
signaling in MDS cell survival. Furthermore, cyclopamine-mediated inhibition of
Shh signaling in SKM-1 and MUTZ-1 cells resulted in decreased DNMT1 expression
and cell survival; however, exogenous Shh peptide had the opposite effect,
suggesting that Shh signaling could regulate the expression of DNMT1, thereby
modulating cell survival in MDS. In addition, the apoptosis of SKM-1 and MUTZ-1
cell increased significantly when cultured with cyclopamine and a demethylation
agent, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine. These findings suggest that Shh signaling from
BMSCs is important in the pathogenesis of MDS and could play a role in disease
progression by modulating methylation.

PMCID: PMC4377515
PMID: 25861282  [PubMed]


184. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Mar 25;9:34. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00034. eCollection
2015.

Differential requirements for Gli2 and Gli3 in the regional specification of the 
mouse hypothalamus.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Paul FA(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Theil T(3), Puelles L(4),
Blaess S(2), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology and Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Laboratory of Neurodevelopmental Genetics, Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn Bonn,
Germany. (3)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh Edinburgh,
UK. (4)Department of Morphology, Instituto Murciano de Investigación
Biosanitaria, School of Medicine, University of Murcia Murcia, Spain ; Facultad
de Medicina, University of Murcia Murcia, Spain.

Secreted protein Sonic hedgehog (Shh) ventralizes the neural tube by modulating
the crucial balance between activating and repressing functions (GliA, GliR) of
transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3. This balance-the Shh-Gli code-is species-
and context-dependent and has been elucidated for the mouse spinal cord. The
hypothalamus, a forebrain region regulating vital functions like homeostasis and 
hormone secretion, shows dynamic and intricate Shh expression as well as complex 
regional differentiation. Here we asked if particular combinations of Gli2 and
Gli3 and of GliA and GliR functions contribute to the variety of hypothalamic
regions, i.e., we wanted to approach the question of a possible hypothalamic
version of the Shh-Gli code. Based on mouse mutant analysis, we show that: (1)
hypothalamic regional heterogeneity is based in part on differentially stringent 
requirements for Gli2 or Gli3; (2) another source of diversity are differential
requirements for Shh of neural vs. non-neural origin; (3) the medial progenitor
domain known to depend on Gli2 for its development generates several essential
hypothalamic nuclei plus the pituitary and median eminence; (4) the suppression
of Gli3R by neural and non-neural Shh is essential for hypothalamic
specification. Finally, we have mapped our results on a recent model which
considers the hypothalamus as a transverse region with alar and basal portions.
Our data confirm the model and are explained by it.

PMCID: PMC4373379
PMID: 25859185  [PubMed]


185. Cancer Genet. 2015 Apr;208(4):107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.02.003. Epub 
2015 Feb 19.

Germline and somatic mutations in meningiomas.

Smith MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. Electronic address: miriam.smith@manchester.ac.uk.

Meningiomas arise from the arachnoid layer of the meninges that surround the
brain and spine. They account for over one third of all primary central nervous
system tumors in adults and confer a significant risk of location-dependent
morbidity due to compression or displacement. A significant increase in risk of
meningiomas is associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) disease through
mutation of the NF2 gene. In addition, approximately 5% of individuals with
schwannomatosis disease develop meningiomas, through mutation of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex subunit, SMARCB1. Recently, a second SWI/SNF complex
subunit, SMARCE1, was identified as a cause of clear cell meningiomas, indicating
a wider role for this complex in meningioma disease. The sonic hedgehog
(SHH)-GLI1 signaling pathway gene, SUFU, has also been identified as the cause of
hereditary multiple meningiomas in a large Finnish family. The recent
identification of somatic mutations in components of the SHH-GLI1 and AKT1-MTOR
signaling pathways indicates the potential for cross talk of these pathways in
the development of meningiomas. This review describes the known meningioma
predisposition genes and their links to the recently identified somatic
mutations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25857641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Apr 9;6:e1712. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.76.

Histone acetyltransferase PCAF accelerates apoptosis by repressing a
GLI1/BCL2/BAX axis in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gai X(1), Tu K(1), Li C(1), Lu Z(1), Roberts LR(2), Zheng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China. (2)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

P300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF), a histone acetyltransferase (HAT), has been
found to regulate numerous cell signaling pathways controlling cell fate by
acetylating both histone and non-histone proteins. We previously reported that
PCAF upregulates cell apoptosis by inactivating Serine/Threonine Protein Kinase 1
(AKT1) signaling and consequently inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell
growth. Here, we show that PCAF can directly acetylate cytoplasmic GLI1 protein
at lysine 518, preventing its nuclear translocation and promoter occupancy, and
consequently suppressing Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in HCC. Further, our results
show that GLI1 can increase Bcl-2 expression and downregulate BAX. Interestingly,
forced expression of PCAF reduced Bcl-2 expression, upregulated BAX and repressed
cell apoptosis. Further, we provide evidence that knockdown of GLI1 abrogates the
inhibitory effect of PCAF on the growth of HCC in vitro. PCAF was also found to
sensitize HCC cells to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) treatment by regulating
GLI1/Bcl-2/BAX axis-dependent apoptosis. In vivo experiments also confirmed the
regulatory effect of PCAF on the GLI1/Bcl-2/BAX axis and its synergistic
antitumor effects with 5-FU. Gene expression microarray studies showed that PCAF 
was downregulated in HCC tissues compared with adjacent liver tissues and that
PCAF expression was significantly associated with longer overall survival and
recurrence-free survival after surgery. Together, these results show that PCAF
can induce cell apoptosis by modulating a GLI1/Bcl-2/BAX axis that in turn
suppresses HCC progression, and suggest that 5-FU may exert a stronger anti-tumor
effect in patients with PCAF expression in HCC tumors.

PMCID: PMC4650545
PMID: 25855960  [PubMed - in process]


187. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Apr 2;16(4):400-12. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.02.006.

Basal cell carcinoma preferentially arises from stem cells within hair follicle
and mechanosensory niches.

Peterson SC(1), Eberl M(1), Vagnozzi AN(1), Belkadi A(2), Veniaminova NA(1),
Verhaegen ME(1), Bichakjian CK(1), Ward NL(2), Dlugosz AA(1), Wong SY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology and Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Departments of Dermatology and
Neuroscience, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
(3)Departments of Dermatology and Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: sunnyw@umich.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2015 May;15(5):257.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is characterized by frequent loss of PTCH1, leading to
constitutive activation of the Hedgehog pathway. Although the requirement for
Hedgehog in BCC is well established, the identity of disease-initiating cells and
the compartments in which they reside remain controversial. By using several
inducible Cre drivers to delete Ptch1 in different cell compartments in mice, we 
show here that multiple hair follicle stem cell populations readily develop
BCC-like tumors. In contrast, stem cells within the interfollicular epidermis do 
not efficiently form tumors. Notably, we observed that innervated Gli1-expressing
progenitors within mechanosensory touch dome epithelia are highly tumorigenic.
Sensory nerves activate Hedgehog signaling in normal touch domes, while
denervation attenuates touch dome-derived tumors. Together, our studies identify 
varying tumor susceptibilities among different stem cell populations in the skin,
highlight touch dome epithelia as "hot spots" for tumor formation, and implicate 
cutaneous nerves as mediators of tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4387376 [Available on 2016-04-02]
PMID: 25842978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):4140-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419690112. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Inversion of Sonic hedgehog action on its canonical pathway by electrical
activity.

Belgacem YH(1), Borodinsky LN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Membrane Biology and Institute for Pediatric
Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospital for Children Northern California,
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817
lnborodinsky@ucdavis.edu yhbelgacem@ucdavis.edu.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a morphogenic protein that operates through the Gli
transcription factor-dependent canonical pathway to orchestrate normal
development of many tissues. Because aberrant levels of Gli activity lead to a
wide spectrum of diseases ranging from neurodevelopmental defects to cancer,
understanding the regulatory mechanisms of Shh canonical pathway is paramount.
During early stages of spinal cord development, Shh specifies neural progenitors 
through the canonical signaling. Despite persistence of Shh as spinal cord
development progresses, Gli activity is switched off by unknown mechanisms. In
this study we find that Shh inverts its action on Gli during development.
Strikingly, Shh decreases Gli signaling in the embryonic spinal cord by an
electrical activity- and cAMP-dependent protein kinase-mediated pathway. The
inhibition of Gli activity by Shh operates at multiple levels. Shh promotes
cytosolic over nuclear localization of Gli2, induces Gli2 and Gli3 processing
into repressor forms, and activates cAMP-responsive element binding protein that 
in turn represses gli1 transcription. The regulatory mechanisms identified in
this study likely operate with different spatiotemporal resolution and ensure
effective down-regulation of the canonical Shh signaling as spinal cord
development progresses. The developmentally regulated intercalation of electrical
activity in the Shh pathway may represent a paradigm for switching from canonical
to noncanonical roles of developmental cues during neuronal differentiation and
maturation.

PMCID: PMC4386408
PMID: 25829542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9113-24.

Overexpression of mutant Ptch in rhabdomyosarcomas is associated with promoter
hypomethylation and increased Gli1 and H3K4me3 occupancy.

Nitzki F(1), Tolosa EJ(2), Cuvelier N(1), Frommhold A(1), Salinas-Riester G(3),
Johnsen SA(4), Fernandez-Zapico ME(2), Hahn H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (3)Microarray and Deep-Sequencing Core Facility,
University Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany. (4)Department of General, Visceral
and Pediatric Surgery, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Mice with heterozygous loss of the tumor suppressor Patched1 (Ptch) develop
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS)-like tumors. However, Ptch transcripts are consistently
overexpressed in these tumors. We have recently shown that the upregulated
transcripts are derived from the mutated Ptch allele thus leading to the
hypothesis that the wild-type allele is repressed during RMS development. Here we
describe epigenetic changes taking place at the Ptch locus during RMS
development. We showed a lower degree of DNA-methylation in methylation-sensitive
CpG regions of the Ptch promoter in RMS compared to normal muscle from
heterozygous Ptch animals. In agreement with these results, treatment of
heterozygous Ptch mice with the DNA demethylating agent 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC) between embryonic days E9.5-E11.5 significantly accelerated RMS
formation. Since Ptch promoter methylation occurs after/around E13.5, the window 
for RMS initiation during embryogenesis, these results provide additional
evidence that Ptch promoter hypomethylation may contribute to RMS formation. We
have also demonstrated increased trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) 
and preferential binding of Gli1, a known Ptch activator, to the mutant locus in 
RMS. Together, these findings support an alternative model for RMS formation in
heterozygous Ptch mice including loss of methylation and concomitant occupancy by
activating histone marks of mutant Ptch.

PMCID: PMC4496206
PMID: 25823816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Inflamm (Lond). 2015 Mar 28;12:24. doi: 10.1186/s12950-015-0072-5. eCollection 
2015.

Expression of hedgehog signal pathway in articular cartilage is associated with
the severity of cartilage damage in rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis.

Li R(1), Cai L(2), Hu CM(1), Wu TN(1), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230032
Anhui China ; Key Laboratory for Bioactivity of Natural Medicine of Anhui
Province, Hefei, 230032 Anhui China. (2)Department of Pathology, School of Basic 
Medicine, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230032 Anhui China.

BACKGROUND: Cartilage damage is a crucial step in rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
disease progress while its molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. Here we
investigated the expression of hedgehog (Hh) signal pathway in articular
cartilage of adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rats and its possible pathological 
role in cartilage damage.
METHODS: 30 rats were divided into sham and AIA group (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15). Complete Freund's
adjuvant was used to induce AIA. Secondary paw swelling was measured on day 10,
14, 18, 22 and 26 after induction. Rats were sacrificed on day 26 and knee joints
and cartilage tissues were collected. Paw swelling, cartilage histopathologic
changes and OARSI scores were used to evaluate AIA in rats. The protein
expression of Hh signal related genes (Shh, Ptch1, Smo and Gli1) in cartilage
were assayed by immunohistochemistry. The mRNA levels of Shh, Ptch1, Smo, Gli1,
type-II collagen (COII) and aggrecan in cartilage were assayed by real-time PCR. 
In vitro study, cultured AIA chondrocytes were treated with cyclopamine (a
specific inhibitor of Hh signal) and the mRNA levels of Hh signal and ECM
components (COII and aggrecan) were measured by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical results revealed that Shh, Ptch1, Smo and Gli1
proteins showed higher expression in the articular cartilage of AIA rats than
those of sham rats. Real-time PCR results confirmed that Shh, Ptch1, Smo and Gli1
mRNA levels in cartilage tissues of AIA rats were significantly increased
compared with those of sham rats (1.6, 1.4, 1.6, 2.0 fold, respectively). The
mRNA levels of Shh, Ptch1, Smo, and Gli1 were associated with the severity of
cartilage damage (indicated by OARSI scores, COII and aggrecan mRNA levels in
cartilage). In vitro, cyclopamine effectively decreased the mRNA levels of Shh,
Ptch1, Smo and Gli1, and increased the mRNA levels of COII and aggrecan in AIA
chondrocytes, suggesting Hh signal inhibition might directly promote ECM
production.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings present certain experimental evidence that Hh signal
pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of cartilage damage in RA.

PMCID: PMC4377216
PMID: 25821409  [PubMed]


191. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Apr;56(4):2773-82. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-16104.

The Effects of Sonic Hedgehog on Retinal Müller Cells Under High-Glucose Stress.

Zhao X(1), Li Y(1), Lin S(1), Cai Y(1), Zhang J(2), Yu X(1), Yang H(1), Yang
L(1), Chen X(1), Luo Y(1), Lu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)Aier Eye Hospital
Group, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: To investigate sonic hedgehog (SHH) expression and its effects on
retinal Müller cells in diabetic rats and in vitro culture systems under
high-glucose stress.
METHODS: Diabetic rats were induced by intraperitoneal injection of
streptozotocin. Primary rat retinal Müller cells were grown in medium containing 
5.5 or 35 mM glucose with SHH and/or cyclopamine. Retinas' and primary Müller
cells' expression of SHH pathway components protein and mRNA were determined by
Western blot analysis and real-time PCR. The effects of exogenous SHH and its
inhibitor cyclopamine on retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) survival after 3-month
diabetes were examined by the counting of Brn-3a-labeled RGCs. Phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K), extracellular signal regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), and P38
were detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: Both mRNA and protein expression of SHH, SMO, GLI1, and glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP) in the retinas of diabetic rats and high-glucose cultured
Müller cells increased in a time-dependent manner. Exogenous SHH increased the
mRNA and protein expression of SHH, SMO, and GLI1 and cyclopamine reversed that
effect. Three months after onset of diabetes, administration of SHH inhibited
gliosis significantly and promoted RGC survival. Exogenous SHH upregulated the
phosphorylation of PI3K and downregulated ERK1/2, but did not affect the
expression of P38.
CONCLUSIONS: Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway was upregulated in diabetic rat
retina and high-glucose cultured Müller cells, and SHH exerted neuroprotective
effects on damaged RGCs in a rat diabetes model. The neuroprotective effects of
SHH may act indirectly, via Müller cells, through PI3K or ERK1/2 pathways.

PMID: 25813994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0121115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121115.
eCollection 2015.

HIF-1a contributes to proliferation and invasiveness of neuroblastoma cells via
SHH signaling.

Chen S(1), Zhang M(1), Xing L(1), Wang Y(1), Xiao Y(2), Wu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Shanghai Institute for Pediatric
Research, Shanghai, China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1a (HIF-1a) on the proliferation, migration and invasion of neuroblastoma 
(NB) cells and the mechanisms involved. We here initially used the real-time
polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR), Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) to detect the expression of HIF-1a and components of
the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway in NB cells and human specimens.
Subsequently, cell proliferation, migration and invasion were analyzed using the 
cell counting assay, wound healing assay and Transwell system in two types of
human NB cell lines, SH-SY5Y and IMR32. In addition, the role of HIF-1a in NB
cells growth was determined in a xenograft nude mouse model. We found that the
level of HIF-1a was significantly upregulated during NB progression and was
associated with the expression of two components of SHH signaling, SHH and GLI1. 
We next indicated that the proliferation, migration and invasiveness of SH-SY5Y
and IMR32 cells were significantly inhibited by HIF-1a knockdown, which was
mediated by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting against its mRNA.
Furthermore, the growth of NB cells in vivo was also suppressed by HIF-1a
inhibition. Finally, the pro-migration and proliferative effects of HIF-1a could 
be reversed by disrupting SHH signaling. In conclusion, our results demonstrated 
that upregulation of HIF-1a in NB promotes proliferation, migration and
invasiveness via SHH signaling.

PMCID: PMC4374675
PMID: 25811359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2207-10. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1370. 
Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Molecular Pathways: GLI1-Induced Drug Glucuronidation in Resistant Cancer Cells.

Zahreddine HA(1), Borden KL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer (IRIC), Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Institute 
of Research in Immunology and Cancer (IRIC), Department of Pathology and Cell
Biology, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
katherine.borden@umontreal.ca.

Drug resistance remains a major impediment in the development of durable cancer
therapies. Studies in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) patients revealed a new
form of multidrug resistance. Here, increased glioma-associated protein GLI1
leads to elevation of the UDP-glucuronosyl transferase (UGT) enzymes. UGTs add
glucuronic acid to xenobiotics and metabolites. Traditionally, the loss of these 
enzymes is thought to contribute to cancer as a result of impaired clearance of
environmental carcinogens. However, we demonstrate that overexpression of UGTs
can contribute to oncogenesis by promoting drug resistance. Indeed, UGT levels in
AML patients treated with ribavirin and/or cytarabine were elevated at relapse
relative to diagnosis. This was reversed by GLI1 inhibition, suggesting a
clinically relevant strategy to overcome drug resistance. Further, overexpression
of UGTs can also lead to drug resistance in other cancers, such as certain Hsp90 
inhibitors and vorinostat in colorectal and chronic lymphoblastic leukemia,
respectively. Not all drugs are targets of glucuronidation, suggesting that UGT
status could be relevant to treatment choice. Here, we describe several facets of
UGT biology and how these could be exploited clinically. These studies
demonstrate how drugs in cancer cells can be metabolized differentially than
their normal counterparts. In summary, we describe a new form of drug resistance 
relevant to a variety of cancer contexts.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4433783 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25810373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Aug;135(8):2138-41. doi: 10.1038/jid.2015.115. Epub 2015 
Mar 24.

Rolling the Genetic Dice: Neutral and Deleterious Smoothened Mutations in
Drug-Resistant Basal Cell Carcinoma.

Atwood SX(1), Sarin KY(1), Li JR(1), Yao CY(1), Urman NM(1), Chang AL(1), Tang
JY(1), Oro AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.

PMCID: PMC4504757
PMID: 25801792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;17(4):386-96. doi: 10.1038/ncb3139. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

The suture provides a niche for mesenchymal stem cells of craniofacial bones.

Zhao H(1), Feng J(1), Ho TV(1), Grimes W(1), Urata M(1), Chai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, 2250 Alcazar Street, CSA 103 Los Angeles,
California 90033, USA.

Bone tissue undergoes constant turnover supported by stem cells. Recent studies
showed that perivascular mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) contribute to the turnover
of long bones. Craniofacial bones are flat bones derived from a different
embryonic origin than the long bones. The identity and regulating niche for
craniofacial-bone MSCs remain unknown. Here, we identify Gli1+ cells within the
suture mesenchyme as the main MSC population for craniofacial bones. They are not
associated with vasculature, give rise to all craniofacial bones in the adult and
are activated during injury repair. Gli1+ cells are typical MSCs in vitro.
Ablation of Gli1+ cells leads to craniosynostosis and arrest of skull growth,
indicating that these cells are an indispensable stem cell population.
Twist1(+/-) mice with craniosynostosis show reduced Gli1+ MSCs in sutures,
suggesting that craniosynostosis may result from diminished suture stem cells.
Our study indicates that craniofacial sutures provide a unique niche for MSCs for
craniofacial bone homeostasis and repair.

PMCID: PMC4380556
PMID: 25799059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Spine J. 2015 Jul 1;15(7):1653-9. doi: 10.1016/j.spinee.2015.03.015. Epub 2015
Mar 20.

In vivo dynamic changes of dimensions in the lumbar intervertebral foramen.

Zhong W(1), Driscoll SJ(2), Tsai TY(2), Wang S(2), Mao H(3), Cha TD(2), Wood
KB(2), Li G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard Medical 
School/Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA 02114,
USA; Department of Spinal Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital and Central South
University, 139 Middle of Renmin Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410011, P.R. China.
(2)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard Medical 
School/Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA 02114,
USA. (3)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard
Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA 
02114, USA; Department of Orthopedic Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215006, China.
(4)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard Medical 
School/Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA 02114,
USA. Electronic address: gli1@partners.org.

BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Previous studies have reported position-dependent changes of 
the lumbar intervertebral foramen (LIVF) dimensions at different static
flexion-extension postures. However, the changes of the LIVF dimensions during
dynamic body motion have not been reported.
PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to investigate the in vivo dimensions of
the LIVF during a dynamic weight-lifting activity.
STUDY DESIGN/SETTING: This was a retrospective study.
METHODS: Ten asymptomatic subjects were recruited for this study.
Three-dimensional (3D) vertebral models of the lumbar segments from L2 to S1 were
constructed for each subject using magnetic resonance images. The lumbar spine
was then imaged using a dual fluoroscopic imaging system as the subject performed
a dynamic weight-lifting activity from an upper body position of 45° to a maximal
extension position. The in vivo positions of the vertebrae along the motion path 
were reproduced using the 3D vertebral models and the fluoroscopic images. The
minimal area, height, and width of each LIVF during the dynamic body motion were 
analyzed.
RESULTS: The LIVF area and width monotonically decreased with lumbar extension at
all levels except L5-S1 (p<.05). On average, the LIVF area decreased by 7.4±6.7%,
10.8±7.7%, and 10.0±8.0% at the L2-L3, L3-L4, and L4-L5 levels, respectively,
from the flexion to the upright standing position, and by 6.4±5.0%, 7.7±7.4%, and
5.1±5.1%, respectively, from the upright standing to the extension position. The 
LIVF height remained relatively constant at all segments during the dynamic
activity. The foramen area, height, and width of the L5-S1 remained relatively
constant throughout the activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Human lumbar foramen dimensions show segment-dependent
characteristics during the dynamic weight-lifting activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4475422 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25797808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jun 28;362(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.03.015. Epub 2015
Mar 18.

Mechanisms regulating glioma invasion.

Paw I(1), Carpenter RC(1), Watabe K(2), Debinski W(2), Lo HW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA; Brain Tumor Center
of Excellence, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC
27157, USA; Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake
Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA; Brain Tumor
Center of Excellence, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem,
NC 27157, USA; Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. Electronic address: hlo@wakehealth.edu.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive, deadliest, and most common brain
malignancy in adults. Despite the advances made in surgical techniques,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the median survival for GBM patients has remained 
at a mere 14 months. GBM poses several unique challenges to currently available
treatments for the disease. For example, GBM cells have the propensity to
aggressively infiltrate/invade into the normal brain tissues and along the
vascular tracks, which prevents complete resection of all malignant cells and
limits the effect of localized radiotherapy while sparing normal tissue. Although
anti-angiogenic treatment exerts anti-edematic effect in GBM, unfortunately,
tumors progress with acquired increased invasiveness. Therefore, it is an
important task to gain a deeper understanding of the intrinsic and post-treatment
invasive phenotypes of GBM in hopes that the gained knowledge would lead to novel
GBM treatments that are more effective and less toxic. This review will give an
overview of some of the signaling pathways that have been shown to positively and
negatively regulate GBM invasion, including, the PI3K/Akt, Wnt, sonic
hedgehog-GLI1, and microRNAs. The review will also discuss several approaches to 
cancer therapies potentially altering GBM invasiveness.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4435977 [Available on 2016-06-28]
PMID: 25796440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0116390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116390.
eCollection 2015.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is active in GBM with GLI1 mRNA expression showing a
single continuous distribution rather than discrete high/low clusters.

Chandra V(1), Das T(1), Gulati P(2), Biswas NK(1), Rote S(2), Chatterjee U(3),
Ghosh SN(2), Deb S(2), Saha SK(4), Chowdhury AK(2), Ghosh S(2), Rudin CM(5),
Mukherjee A(1), Basu A(1), Dhara S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, P.O. N.S.S. Kalyani, West Bengal
741251, India. (2)Bangur Institute of Neurology, 52/1A, S.N. Pandit Street,
Bhawanipore, Kolkata 700098, India. (3)Institute of Post Graduate Medical
Education and Research, 244 AJC Bose Road, Kolkata-700020, India. (4)Nil Ratan
Sarkar Medical College and Hospital, 138, AJC Bose Road, Kolkata-700014, India.
(5)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York
10065, United States of America.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is a valid therapeutic target in a wide range of 
malignancies. We focus here on glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a lethal malignancy
of the central nervous system (CNS). By analyzing RNA-sequencing based
transcriptomics data on 149 clinical cases of TCGA-GBM database we show here a
strong correlation (r = 0.7) between GLI1 and PTCH1 mRNA expression--as a
hallmark of the canonical Hh-pathway activity in this malignancy. GLI1 mRNA
expression varied in 3 orders of magnitude among the GBM patients of the same
cohort showing a single continuous distribution-unlike the discrete high/low-GLI1
mRNA expressing clusters of medulloblastoma (MB). When compared with MB as a
reference, the median GLI1 mRNA expression in GBM appeared 14.8 fold lower than
that of the "high-Hh" cluster of MB but 5.6 fold higher than that of the "low-Hh"
cluster of MB. Next, we demonstrated statistically significant up- and
down-regulation of GLI1 mRNA expressions in GBM patient-derived low-passage
neurospheres in vitro by sonic hedgehog ligand-enriched conditioned media
(shh-CM) and by Hh-inhibitor drug vismodegib respectively. We also showed
clinically achievable dose (50 µM) of vismodegib alone to be sufficient to induce
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in these low-passage GBM neurospheres in vitro.
Vismodegib showed an effect on the neurospheres, both by down-regulating GLI1
mRNA expression and by inducing apoptosis/cell cycle arrest, irrespective of
their relative endogenous levels of GLI1 mRNA expression. We conclude from our
study that this single continuous distribution pattern of GLI1 mRNA expression
technically puts almost all GBM patients in a single group rather than discrete
high- or low-clusters in terms of Hh-pathway activity. That is suggestive of
therapies with Hh-pathway inhibitor drugs in this malignancy without a need for
further stratification of patients on the basis of relative levels of Hh-pathway 
activity among them.

PMCID: PMC4361547
PMID: 25775002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 2015 May;25(5):613-7. doi: 10.1517/13543776.2015.1019467.
Epub 2015 Mar 15.

Targeting GLI proteins in human cancer by small molecules (WO2014116651 A1): a
patent evaluation.

Hadden MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , 69 N
Eagleville Rd, Unit 3092, Storrs, CT , USA +1 860 846 8446; +1 860 486 6857;
kyle.hadden@uconn.edu.

The invention reviewed in this patent evaluation is the synthesis and application
of small molecule inhibitors of Gli transcriptional activity as potential
anticancer agents. The oncogenic nature of Gli proteins has been traditionally
associated with the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway; however, the recent
identification of aberrant Gli activation unrelated to Hh signaling has prompted 
drug discovery efforts directly targeting Gli proteins. The central core of the
compounds described in this patent (WO2014116651 A1) is structurally analogous to
the pyrazoline scaffold previously disclosed by these inventors. Data describing 
the inhibitory activity of these compounds against the Hh pathway in vitro and in
Hh-dependent in vivo models of human cancer are not provided. For this patent
disclosure, the inventors primarily focus on the anticancer properties of their
compounds in lung and lung-related malignancies. The compounds are moderately
active in these models, but they do not exhibit the overall preclinical profile
generally required for advancement into clinical trials.

PMID: 25772316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):252-9. eCollection 2015.

Sequential treatment with betulinic acid followed by 5-fluorouracil shows
synergistic cytotoxic activity in ovarian cancer cells.

Wang YJ(1), Liu JB(1), Dou YC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin
University Changchun 130000, China. (2)Department of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University Changchun 130000, China.

Betulinic acid selectively inhibits the growth of ovarian carcinoma cell lines
without affecting the normal cells. In the present study, the effect of
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and betulinic acid (BA) combination on ovarian carcinoma
cells was studied. The results demonstrated that ovarian carcinoma cells on
concurrent or 5-FU followed by BA treatment show increased Sub-G1 cell
population, increased rate of cell apoptosis and morphological changes in
mitochondrial membrane. In OVCAR 432 cells treatment with sequential combination 
of 5-FU and BA increased the Sub-G1 cell population to 51.3% and growth
inhibition rate of > 72%. However, exposure to BA before 5-FU treatment caused a 
decrease in rate of inhibition to < 35%. Treatment with combination of 5 µM of
5-FU and 1 µM of BA for 48 h, led to an induction of apoptosis in 79.7% and
induced morphological changes in OVCAR 432 cells. The Western blot results showed
high concentration of cytochrome c in the cell cytosol after 24 h of 5-FU and BA 
combination treatment. Treatment of BA-responsive RMS-13 cells with 5-FU and BA
combination resulted in inhibition of GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, and IGF2 genes. In
addition, we found a significant reduction in hedgehog activity of RMS-13 cells
after 5-FU and BA combination treatment by means of a hedgehog-responsive
reporter assay. Therefore, 5-FU and BA combination can be a promising regimen for
the treatment of ovarian carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4348889
PMID: 25755712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):8722-35.

Identification of a novel synthetic lethality of combined inhibition of hedgehog 
and PI3K signaling in rhabdomyosarcoma.

Graab U(1), Hahn H(2), Fulda S(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research in Pediatrics, Goethe-University,
Frankfurt, Germany. (2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center,
Goettingen, Germany. (3)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

We previously reported that aberrant HH pathway activation confers a poor
prognosis in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Searching for new treatment strategies we
therefore targeted HH signaling. Here, we identify a novel synthetic lethality of
concomitant inhibition of HH and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways in RMS by GLI1/2
inhibitor GANT61 and PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI103. Synergistic drug interaction is
confirmed by calculation of combination index (CI < 0.2). Similarly, genetic
silencing of GLI1/2 significantly increases PI103-induced apoptosis. GANT61 and
PI103 also synergize to induce apoptosis in cultured primary RMS cells
emphasizing the clinical relevance of this combination. Importantly, GANT61/PI103
cotreatment suppresses clonogenic survival, three-dimensional sphere formation
and tumor growth in an in vivo model of RMS. Mechanistic studies reveal that
GANT61 and PI103 cooperate to trigger caspase-dependent apoptosis via the
mitochondrial pathway, as demonstrated by several lines of evidence. First,
GANT61/PI103 cotreatment increases mRNA and protein expression of NOXA and BMF,
which is required for apoptosis, since knockdown of NOXA or BMF significantly
reduces GANT61/PI103-induced apoptosis. Second, GANT61/PI103 cotreatment triggers
BAK/BAX activation, which contributes to GANT61/PI103-mediated apoptosis, since
knockdown of BAK provides protection. Third, ectopic expression of BCL-2 or
non-degradable phospho-mutant MCL-1 significantly rescue GANT61/PI103-triggered
apoptosis. Fourth, GANT61/PI103 cotreatment initiate activation of the caspase
cascade via apoptosome-mediated cleavage of the initiator caspase-9, as indicated
by changes in the cleavage pattern of caspases (e.g. accumulation of the
caspase-9 p35 cleavage fragment) upon addition of the caspase inhibitor zVAD.fmk.
Thus, combined GLI1/2 and PI3K/mTOR inhibition represents a promising novel
approach for synergistic apoptosis induction and tumor growth reduction with
implications for new treatment strategies in RMS.

PMCID: PMC4496179
PMID: 25749378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2388-98. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1059. 
Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Expression of Hedgehog Pathway Mediator GLI Represents a Negative Prognostic
Marker in Human Acute Myeloid Leukemia and Its Inhibition Exerts Antileukemic
Effects.

Wellbrock J(1), Latuske E(1), Köhler J(1), Wagner K(2), Stamm H(1), Vettorazzi
E(3), Vohwinkel G(1), Klokow M(1), Uibeleisen R(2), Ehm P(4), Riecken K(5), Loges
S(6), Thol F(2), Schubert C(7), Amling M(8), Jücker M(4), Bokemeyer C(1), Heuser 
M(2), Krauter J(2), Fiedler W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation with
Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald University Cancer Center, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology,
Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany. (3)Department of Medical Biometry and Epidemiology, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (4)Center for Experimental
Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (5)Research Department Cell and Gene 
Therapy, Clinic for Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (6)Department of Oncology, Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation with Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald University
Cancer Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
Department of Tumor Biology, Center of Experimental Medicine, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (7)Department of Transfusion
Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (9)Department of Oncology, Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation with Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald University
Cancer Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
fiedler@uke.de.

PURPOSE: The Hedgehog pathway plays an important role in stem-cell biology and
malignant transformation. Therefore, we investigated the expression and
prognostic impact of Hedgehog pathway members in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Pretreatment samples from 104 newly diagnosed AML patients
(AMLSG 07-04 trial) were analyzed by qPCR, and expression of Hedgehog family
members was correlated with clinical outcome. Inhibition of GLI by GANT61 or
shRNA was investigated in AML cells in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Expression of receptors Smoothened and Patched-1 and their downstream
mediators, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, was found in AML patients in contrast to
Hedgehog ligands. GLI2 expression had a significant negative influence on
event-free survival (EFS), relapse-free survival (RFS), and overall survival (OS;
P = 0.037, 0.026, and 0.013, respectively) and was correlated with FLT3
mutational status (P < 0.001). Analysis of a second, independent patient cohort
confirmed the negative impact of GLI2 on EFS and OS (P = 0.007 and 0.003,
respectively; n = 290). Within this cohort, GLI1 had a negative prognostic impact
(P < 0.001 for both EFS and OS). Although AML cells did not express Hedgehog
ligands by qPCR, AML patients had significantly increased Desert Hedgehog (DHH)
plasma levels compared with healthy subjects (P = 0.002), in whom DHH was
presumably provided by bone marrow niche cells. Moreover, the GLI inhibitor
GANT61 or knockdown of GLI1/2 by shRNA caused antileukemic effects, including
induction of apoptosis, reduced proliferation, and colony formation in AML cells,
and a survival benefit in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: GLI expression is a negative prognostic factor and might represent a
novel druggable target in AML.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25745035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Br J Cancer. 2015 Mar 17;112(6):1042-51. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.625.

Novel therapeutic strategy targeting the Hedgehog signalling and mTOR pathways in
biliary tract cancer.

Zuo M(1), Rashid A(2), Churi C(1), Vauthey JN(3), Chang P(1), Li Y(1), Hung
MC(4), Li D(1), Javle M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of
Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the PI3K/mTOR and Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathways
occurs frequently in biliary tract cancer (BTC). Crosstalk between these pathways
occurs in other gastrointestinal cancers. The respective signalling inhibitors
rapamycin and vismodegib may inhibit BTC synergistically and suppress cancer stem
cells (CSCs).
METHODS: Gene expression profiling for p70S6k and Gli1 was performed with BTC
cell lines. Tumour and pathway inhibitory effects of rapamycin and vismodegib
were investigated in BTC preclinical models and CSCs.
RESULTS: Rapamycin and vismodegib synergistically reduced BTC cell viability and 
proliferation. This drug combination arrested BTC Mz-ChA-1 cells in the G1 phase 
but had no significant effect on the cell cycle of BTC Sk-ChA-1 cells. Combined
treatment inhibited the proliferation of CSCs and ALDH-positive cells. Nanog and 
Oct-4 expression in CSCs was decreased by the combination treatment. Western
blotting results showed the p-p70S6K, p-Gli1, p-mTOR, and p-AKT protein
expression were inhibited by the combination treatment in BTC cells. In an
Mz-ChA-1 xenograft model, combination treatment resulted in 80% inhibition of
tumour growth and prolonged tumour doubling time. In 4 of 10 human BTC specimens,
tumour p-p70S6K and Gli1 protein expression levels were decreased with the
combination treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeted inhibition of the PI3K/mTOR and Hhpathways indicates a new 
avenue for BTC treatment with combination therapy.

PMCID: PMC4366884
PMID: 25742482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biomed Environ Sci. 2015 Feb;28(2):105-15. doi: 10.3967/bes2015.013.

Autophagy Accompanied with Bisdemethoxycurcumin-induced Apoptosis in Non-small
Cell Lung Cancer Cells.

Xu JH(1), Yang HP(1), Zhou XD(1), Wang HJ(1), Gong L(1), Tang CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of bisdemethoxycurcumin (BDMC) on non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line, A549, and the highly metastatic lung cancer
95D cells.
METHODS: CCK-8 assay was used to assess the effect of BDMC on cytotoxicity. Flow 
cytometry was used to evaluate apoptosis. Western blot analysis, electron
microscopy, and quantification of GFP-LC3 punctuates were used to test the effect
of BDMC on autophagy and apoptosis of lung cancer cells.
RESULTS: BDMC inhibited the viability of NSCLC cells, but had no cytotoxic
effects on lung small airway epithelial cells (SAECs). The apoptotic cell death
induced by BDMC was accompanied with the induction of autophagy in NSCLC cells.
Blockage of autophagy by the autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine (3-MA) repressed
the growth inhibitory effects and induction of apoptosis by BDMC. In addition,
BDMC treatment significantly decreased smoothened (SMO) and the transcription
factor glioma-associated oncogene 1 (Gli1) expression. Furthermore, depletion of 
Gli1 by siRNA and cyclopamine (a specific SMO inhibitor) induced autophagy.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated in
several human cancers, including lung cancers. The present findings provide
direct evidence that BDMC-induced autophagy plays a pro-death role in NSCLC, in
part, by inhibiting Hedgehog signaling.

Copyright © 2015 The Editorial Board of Biomedical and Environmental Sciences.
Published by China CDC. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25716561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Apr;8(4):385-91. doi: 10.1242/dmm.018887. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Downregulation of Wnt signaling by sonic hedgehog activation promotes
repopulation of human tumor cell lines.

Ma J(1), Cheng J(2), Gong Y(3), Tian L(4), Huang Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Comprehensive Cancer Center & Shanghai Key Laboratory for Pancreatic
Diseases, Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 201620, China. Department of Pharmacy, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. (2)The
Comprehensive Cancer Center & Shanghai Key Laboratory for Pancreatic Diseases,
Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 201620, China. (3)Experimental Research Center, Shanghai
First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 201620, China. (4)Experimental Research Center, Shanghai First People's 
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 201620,
China. tl09168@hotmail.com qhuang2007@gmail.com. (5)The Comprehensive Cancer
Center & Shanghai Key Laboratory for Pancreatic Diseases, Shanghai First People's
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 201620,
China. tl09168@hotmail.com qhuang2007@gmail.com.

Tumor repopulation after radiotherapy is a big obstacle for clinical cancer
therapy. The molecular mechanisms of tumor cell repopulation after radiotherapy
remain unclear. This study investigated the role of sonic hedgehog (SHH) and Wnt 
signaling pathways in tumor repopulation after radiotherapy in an in vitro
repopulation model. In this model, irradiated dying tumor cells functioned as
feeder cells, whereas luciferase-labeled living tumor cells acted as reporter
cells. Proliferation of reporter cells was measured by bioluminescence imaging.
Results showed that irradiated dying HT29 and Panc1 tumor cells significantly
stimulated the repopulation of living cells in their respective cultures. In HT29
and Panc1 cells, radiation significantly inhibited Wnt activity. In the
irradiated dying HT29 and Panc1 cells, the level of the activated nuclear
ß-catenin was significantly decreased. Treatment with the Wnt agonist 68166
significantly decreased, whereas treatment with Wnt antagonist significantly
increased, repopulation in HT29 and Panc1 tumor cells in a dose-dependent manner.
ß-catenin short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) also significantly promoted tumor cell
repopulation. The level of secreted frizzled related protein-1 (SFRP1), hedgehog 
and Gli1 were increased in irradiated cells. Our results highlight the
interaction between Wnt and SHH signaling pathways in dying tumor cells and
suggest that downregulation of Wnt signaling after SHH activation is negatively
associated with tumor repopulation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4381337
PMID: 25713298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 May;172(5):603-8. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0934. Epub 2015 Feb 
18.

Sonic Hedgehog pathway is upregulated in adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas.

Gomes DC(1), Jamra SA(2), Leal LF(2), Colli LM(2), Campanini ML(2), Oliveira
RS(2), Martinelli CE Jr(2), Elias PC(2), Moreira AC(2), Machado HR(2), Saggioro
F(2), Neder L(2), Castro M(2), Antonini SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine of Ribeirao PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida
Bandeirantes, 3900 - Monte Alegre, CEP 14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo,
BrazilFederal University of UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil School of 
Medicine of Ribeirao PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes, 3900 -
Monte Alegre, CEP 14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, BrazilFederal University 
of UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (2)School of Medicine of Ribeirao 
PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes, 3900 - Monte Alegre, CEP
14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, BrazilFederal University of
UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (3)School of Medicine of Ribeirao
PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes, 3900 - Monte Alegre, CEP
14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, BrazilFederal University of
UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil antonini@fmrp.usp.br.

OBJECTIVES: Pituitary stem cells play a role in the oncogenesis of human
adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas (aCPs). We hypothesized that crosstalk
between the Wnt/ß-catenin and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathways, both of which are
important in normal pituitary development, would contribute to the pathogenesis
of aCPs.
DESIGN: To explore the mRNA and protein expression of components of the SHH
signaling pathway in aCPs and their relationship with the identification of
CTNNB1/ß-catenin mutations and patients outcomes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 18 aCP samples, CTNNB1 was sequenced, and the mRNA
expression levels of SHH pathway members (SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, and 
SUFU) and SMO, GLI1, GLI3, SUFU, ß-catenin, and Ki67 proteins were evaluated by
quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry respectively. Anterior normal
pituitaries were used as controls. Associations between molecular findings and
clinical data were analyzed.
RESULTS: The aCPs presented higher mRNA expression of SHH (+400-fold change (FC);
P<0.01), GLI1 (+102-FC; P<0.001), and GLI3 (+5.1-FC; P<0.01) than normal anterior
pituitaries. Longer disease-free survival was associated with low SMO and SUFU
mRNA expression (P<0.01 and P=0.02 respectively). CTNNB1/ß-catenin mutations were
found in 47% of the samples. aCPs with identified mutations presented with higher
mRNA expression of SMO and GLI1 (+4.3-FC; P=0.02 and +10.2-FC; P=0.03
respectively). SMO, GLI1, GLI3, and SUFU staining was found in 85, 67, 93, and
64% of the samples respectively. Strong GLI1 and GLI3 staining was detected in
palisade cells, which also labeled Ki67, a marker of cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: The upregulation of SHH signaling occurs in aCPs. Thus, activation
of Wnt/ß-catenin and SHH pathways, both of which are important in pituitary
embryogenesis, appears to contribute to the pathogenesis of aCP.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25693592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3752-69.

CtBP2 is an independent prognostic marker that promotes GLI1 induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zheng X(1), Song T(1), Dou C(1), Jia Y(1), Liu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.

C-terminal binding protein 2 (CtBP2) is a transcriptional co-repressor that
promotes cancer cell migration and invasion by inhibiting multiple tumor
suppressor genes that contribute to cell mobility and adhesion. In this
investigation, we showed thatCtBP2 expression was increased significantly in HCC 
tissues when compared to matched normal adjacent liver tissues. We also showed
that CtBP2 expression is associated with worse HCC patient prognosis after liver 
resection. CtBP2 over-expression induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
in Huh7 cells and, correspondingly, silencing CtBP2 suppressed EMT in MHCC97H
cells. ChIP assays revealed that GLI1 increased CtBP2 transcription by directly
binding its promoter. Furthermore, interaction of CtBP2 and Snail Family Zinc
Finger 1 (SNAI1), both of which were found to be positively regulated by GLI1,
was confirmed by Co-IP assay. SNAI1 knockdown revealed that SNAI1 was essential
for CtBP2 induction of the EMT phenotype of HCC cells, and CtBP2 knockdown
reversed GLI1-SNAI1 driven EMT in Huh7 cells. Finally, in vivo experiments
demonstrated that enhanced CtBP2expression promoted HCC xenograft growth and
induced EMT. In conclusion, CtBP2 may serve as a prognostic marker for post liver
resection HCC and may play a role during GLI1-driven EMT as a transcriptional
co-repressor of SNAI1.

PMCID: PMC4414151
PMID: 25686837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Apr;76:57-66. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.01.006. Epub 2015 Feb
11.

Fingolimod treatment promotes proliferation and differentiation of
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in mice with experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis.

Zhang J(1), Zhang ZG(2), Li Y(2), Ding X(2), Shang X(2), Lu M(3), Elias SB(2),
Chopp M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
Electronic address: jingz@neuro.hfh.edu. (2)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford
Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA. (3)Biostatistics and Research
Epidemiology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA. (4)Department of 
Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA; Department of
Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a major demyelinating disease of the central nervous
system (CNS) leading to functional deficits. The remyelination process is
mediated by oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs). In this study, we tested the
hypothesis that Fingolimod, a sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) receptor modulator,
stimulates OPC differentiation into mature oligodendrocytes, in addition to its
well-known anti-inflammatory effect. Using an animal model of MS, experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), we performed a dose-response study of
Fingolimod (0.15 or 0.3mg/kg bw), which was initiated on the day of EAE onset.
The neurological function was tested to determine the optimal dose of Fingolimod.
Immunofluorescent staining was performed to measure the profile of OPC
proliferation and differentiation. The mechanistic premise underlying the
therapeutic effect of Fingolimod, was that Fingolimod stimulates the sonic
hedgehog (Shh) pathway, and this pathway promotes OPC differentiation. To test
this hypothesis, a loss-of-function study using cyclopamine, an inhibitor of the 
sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway, was employed in vivo. Protein levels of the Shh
pathway were measured by Western blot analysis. We found that Fingolimod
treatment (0.3mg/kg bw) significantly decreased cumulative disease score compared
to the EAE control group. Concurrently, OPCs and proliferation of OPCs were
significantly increased in the white matter of the brain and spinal cord at day 7
and day 30 after EAE onset, and oligodendrocytes, myelination and differentiation
of OPCs were significantly increased at day 30 compared with the EAE control
group. EAE mice treated with Fingolimod exhibited substantially elevated levels
of Shh, its receptor Smoothened and effector Gli1 in the white matter of the CNS.
However, combination treatment of EAE mice with cyclopamine-Fingolimod decreased 
Fingolimod monotherapy elevated protein levels of Smoothened and Gli1, and
abolished the effect of Fingolimod on OPC proliferation and differentiation, as
well as on neurological function outcome. Together, these data demonstrate that
Fingolimod is effective as a treatment of EAE by promoting OPC proliferation and 
differentiation, which facilitate remyelination. In addition, the Shh pathway
likely contributes to the therapeutic effects of Fingolimod on OPCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25680941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Anticancer Res. 2015 Feb;35(2):669-76.

GLI1, CTNNB1 and NOTCH1 protein expression in a thymic epithelial malignancy
tissue microarray.

Riess JW(1), West R(2), Dean M(3), Klimowicz AC(3), Neal JW(4), Hoang C(5),
Wakelee HA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of
California Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Davis
School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA, U.S.A. Department of Medicine, Division of
Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, U.S.A.
jonathan.riess@udmc.ucdavis.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, Division of Thoracic
Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, U.S.A. (3)Tom
Baker Cancer Centre, Translational Research Laboratories, Alberta Health Services
and Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, Alberta, Canada. (4)Department of
Medicine, Division of Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, U.S.A. (5)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, U.S.A.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Thymic epithelial tumors (TET) are rare. Wingless and INT (WNT), 
NOTCH and sonic hedgehog pathway interactions between thymocytes and thymic
stroma are important to thymus and T-cell development. We analyzed a thymoma
tissue microarray (TMA) for glioma associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), NOTCH1
and catenin (cadherin-associated protein, beta 1) (CTNNB1) expression as
surrogate markers of sonic hedgehog, NOTCH and WNT pathway activity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GLI1, NOTCH1 and CTNNB1 expression were assayed in a
tissue microarray of 68 TET and eight benign thymus by fluorescent
immunohistochemistry (AQUA) as surrogates for activity of the sonic hedgehog,
NOTCH and WNT pathways respectively.
RESULTS: No difference in tumor GLI1 (mean 201 vs. 211, p=0.31), CTNNB1 (mean 222
vs. 306, p=0.66) or NOTCH1 expression (mean 317 vs. 325, p=0.82) was noted
between thymic tumor and benign thymus.
CONCLUSION: No evidence for preferential expression of GLI1, NOTCH1 or CTNNB1 was
noted. High-throughput immunofluorescence using AQUA technology can help overcome
limitations of small sample size and tissue heterogeneity when analyzing protein 
expression in thymic tumors.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25667444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Jan 28;69:158-64.

[TUBB3 role in the response of tumor cells to epothilones and taxanes].

[Article in Polish]

Marczak A(1), Rogalska A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Katedra Termobiologii, Instytut Biofizyki, Wydzial Biologii i Ochrony
Srodowiska, Uniwersytet Lódzki.

Because of increased incidence of cancer and the development of resistance after 
treatment with typical drugs, new insights into the mechanisms of action of
individual compounds are extremely valuable. In this article, we focus on
taxanes, drugs belonging to the group of microtubule stabilizers, and their new
generation - epothilones. Facing the fact that the molecular target for these
compounds are microtubules, our attention was focused primarily on the role of
overexpression of one of tubulin isotypes in response of tumor cells,
particularly ovarian cancer to treatment with these compounds. On the basis of
the literature data it can be concluded that one reason for the ineffectiveness
of taxane is the resistance growing in the case of overexpression of b-tubulin
class III- (TUBB3). Epothilones, however, due to their ability to bind equally to
b-tubulin class I and III are effective in these cells, giving them an advantage 
over taxanes. It is necessary to emphasize the role of mikroRNA, transcription
factors and other proteins associated with the activation of microtubules in
development of resistance to taxanes and overcoming the resistance of the
epothilones. Particularly interesting tubuseems to be the link between expression
of TUBB3 and Glis proteins, which are end-effectors of Hedgehog pathway. Thanks
to the confirmation that Gli1 overexpression is associated with decreased
response to chemotherapy, it was possible to sensitize cells to epothilones after
addition a suitable inhibitor.

PMID: 25661915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2015 Feb 9;17:e5. doi: 10.1017/erm.2015.3.

Cooperative integration between HEDGEHOG-GLI signalling and other oncogenic
pathways: implications for cancer therapy.

Pandolfi S(1), Stecca B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Core Research Laboratory,Istituto Toscano Tumori,Florence,Italy.

The HEDGEHOG-GLI (HH-GLI) signalling is a key pathway critical in embryonic
development, stem cell biology and tissue homeostasis. In recent years, aberrant 
activation of HH-GLI signalling has been linked to several types of cancer,
including those of the skin, brain, lungs, prostate, gastrointestinal tract and
blood. HH-GLI signalling is initiated by binding of HH ligands to the
transmembrane receptor PATCHED and is mediated by transcriptional effectors that 
belong to the GLI family, whose activity is finely tuned by a number of molecular
interactions and post-translation modifications. Several reports suggest that the
activity of the GLI proteins is regulated by several proliferative and oncogenic 
inputs, in addition or independent of upstream HH signalling. The identification 
of this complex crosstalk and the understanding of how the major oncogenic
signalling pathways interact in cancer is a crucial step towards the
establishment of efficient targeted combinatorial treatments. Here we review
recent findings on the cooperative integration of HH-GLI signalling with the
major oncogenic inputs and we discuss how these cues modulate the activity of the
GLI proteins in cancer. We then summarise the latest advances on SMO and GLI
inhibitors and alternative approaches to attenuate HH signalling through rational
combinatorial therapies.

PMID: 25660620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biomech. 2015 Feb 26;48(4):555-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2015.01.021. Epub
2015 Jan 22.

Asymmetric hip kinematics during gait in patients with unilateral total hip
arthroplasty: in vivo 3-dimensional motion analysis.

Tsai TY(1), Dimitriou D(1), Li JS(1), Woo Nam K(1), Li G(2), Kwon YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ-1215, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (2)Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
55 Fruit Street, GRJ-1215, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address:
gli1@mgh.harvard.edu.

Asymmetric limb loading has been reported in unilateral total hip arthroplasty
(THA) patients during gait. However, restoration of 3D motion symmetry of the hip
following unilateral THA remains unclear. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the in vivo 3D kinematics of the hip in unilateral THA patients
during gait. Eight unilateral THA patients were evaluated for both hips during
treadmill gait using a dual fluoroscopic imaging system. Reduced hip range of
motion in sagittal plane, decreased peak hip extension and asymmetric pelvic
rotation of the THA were observed. Furthermore, significant pelvic
anterior/posterior tilt asymmetry, higher internal rotation (increased by
8.6°±4.6°) during stance phase and higher adduction (increased by 4.5°±3.2°)
during swing phase of the THA were found in this cohort of patients. The results 
demonstrated that there was 3D motion asymmetry of the hip and pelvis in
unilateral THA patients during gait. The data could provide insights into
optimizing kinematics and to restoring normal hip function after THA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25655464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cancer. 2015 Feb 3;14:17. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0294-4.

ß-Catenin-Gli1 interaction regulates proliferation and tumor growth in
medulloblastoma.

Zinke J(1), Schneider FT(2,)(3), Harter PN(4,)(5), Thom S(6), Ziegler N(7),
Toftgård R(8), Plate KH(9), Liebner S(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology (Edinger-Institute), Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University 
Frankfurt, Medical School, Heinrich-Hoffmann-Straße 7, 60528, Frankfurt, Germany.
jenny.zinke@kgu.de. (2)Center for Biosciences and Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, Huddinge, Sweden.
fabian.t.schneider@tum.de. (3)Current address: Department of Neuropathology,
Institute of Pathology and Pathological Anatomy, Technical University Munich,
Trogerstrasse 18, 81675, Munich, Germany. fabian.t.schneider@tum.de. (4)Institute
of Neurology (Edinger-Institute), Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Frankfurt,
Medical School, Heinrich-Hoffmann-Straße 7, 60528, Frankfurt, Germany.
patrick.harter@kgu.de. (5)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. patrick.harter@kgu.de. (6)Institute 
of Neurology (Edinger-Institute), Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Frankfurt,
Medical School, Heinrich-Hoffmann-Straße 7, 60528, Frankfurt, Germany.
sonja.thom@kgu.de. (7)Institute of Neurology (Edinger-Institute), Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Medical School, Heinrich-Hoffmann-Straße 7, 60528,
Frankfurt, Germany. nicole.ziegler@kgu.de. (8)Center for Biosciences and
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, Huddinge, 
Sweden. rune.toftgard@ki.se. (9)Institute of Neurology (Edinger-Institute),
Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Frankfurt, Medical School,
Heinrich-Hoffmann-Straße 7, 60528, Frankfurt, Germany. plate@kgu.de.
(10)Institute of Neurology (Edinger-Institute), Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University
Frankfurt, Medical School, Heinrich-Hoffmann-Straße 7, 60528, Frankfurt, Germany.
stefan.liebner@kgu.de.

BACKGROUND: The Wnt/beta-catenin and the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway interact in
various cell types while eliciting opposing or synergistic cellular effects. Both
pathways are known as exclusive drivers of two distinct molecular subtypes of
medulloblastoma (MB). In sonic hedgehog (Shh)-driven MB, activation of Wnt
signaling has been shown to suppress tumor growth by either
beta-catenin-dependent or -independent inhibition of Shh signaling. However,
mechanistic insight in how beta-catenin inhibits the Hh pathway is not known.
FINDINGS: Here we show that beta-catenin stabilization by the glycogen synthase
kinase 3 inhibitor lithium chloride (LiCl) reduced growth of primary
hedgehog-driven MB tumor spheres from patched heterozygous mice (Ptch(+/-)) in
vitro. LiCl treatment of MB spheres down-regulated the Hh target Gli1, whereas
the repressive Gli3 protein (Gli3R) was increased. Mechanistically, we show by
co-immunoprecipitation and proximity ligation assay that stabilized beta-catenin 
physically interacts with Gli1, leading to Gli1 sequestration and inhibition of
its transcriptional activity. Reduction of Hh signaling upon LiCl stimulation
resulted in reduced proliferation, sphere self renewal, a G2/M arrest and
induction of a senescent-like state, indicated by p21 upregulation and by
increased staining of senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-betaGal).
Moreover, LiCl treatment of subcutaneously transplanted MB cells significantly
reduced tumor initiation defined as "tumor take". Although tumor progression was 
similar, LiCl-treated tumors showed decreased mitotic figures and phospho-histone
H3 staining.
CONCLUSION: We propose that beta-catenin stabilization increases its physical
interaction with Gli1, leading to Gli1 degradation and inhibition of Hh
signaling, thereby promoting tumor cell senescence and suppression of "tumor
take" in mice.

PMCID: PMC4320815
PMID: 25645196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2015 Jul;67(7):963-71. doi: 10.1111/jphp.12379. Epub 2015 Feb 
3.

Inhibition of hedgehog signal pathway by cyclopamine attenuates inflammation and 
articular cartilage damage in rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis.

Li R(1), Cai L(2), Ding J(2), Hu CM(1), Wu TN(1), Hu XY(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. (2)Department of
Pathology, School of Basic Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

OBJECTIVES: We investigated whether inhibition of hedgehog (Hh) signal by
cyclopamine attenuated inflammation and cartilage damage in adjuvant-induced
arthritis (AIA) rats.
METHODS: Cyclopamine (2.5, 5, 10<U+2009>mg/kg) was given by intraperitoneal injection
once daily from day 12 to 21 after AIA induction. Paw swelling (volume changes), 
serum pro-inflammatory cytokines levels (ELISA), histological analysis of joint
damage (H&E staining), proteoglycans expression (Alcian blue staining), mRNA
levels of sonic Hh (Shh), glioma-associated oncogene homologue 1 (Gli1), type II 
collagen (COII) and aggrecan in cartilage (real-time PCR) and articular
chondrocyte apoptosis (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick
end labelling) were measured respectively.
KEY FINDINGS: Cyclopamine effectively attenuated inflammation and cartilage
damage of AIA rats, as evidenced by reduced paw swelling, serum levels of tumor
necrosis factors (TNF)-a, IL-1ß, IL-6 and histological scores of joint damage,
increased proteoglycans expression and mRNA levels of COII and aggrecan in
articular cartilage. Shh or Gli1 mRNA level was correlated negatively with COII
and aggrecan mRNA levels, suggesting Hh signal inhibition was associated with
promotion of cartilage extracellular matrix production. Furthermore, cyclopamine 
decreased the number of apoptotic articular chondrocytes of AIA rats, which might
be partly related to its mechanisms on relieving cartilage damage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings present some experimental evidence that Hh signal
inhibition might be of potential clinical interest in rheumatoid arthritis
treatment.

© 2015 Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

PMID: 25645065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jul;56(7):2092-7. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.984703. Epub
2015 Feb 17.

Phase II evaluation of IPI-926, an oral Hedgehog inhibitor, in patients with
myelofibrosis.

Sasaki K(1), Gotlib JR, Mesa RA, Newberry KJ, Ravandi F, Cortes JE, Kelly P,
Kutok JL, Kantarjian HM, Verstovsek S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center ,
Houston, TX , USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jul;56(7):1926-7.

The clinical safety and efficacy of IPI-926 was evaluated in 14 patients with
myelofibrosis in a phase II study. Patients received 160 mg IPI-926 orally in
continuous 28-day cycles. The median treatment duration was 5.1 months, and all
patients had discontinued treatment by 7.5 months. Nine patients discontinued due
to lack of response as determined by the treating physician, two after developing
acute leukemia and one due to disease progression/loss of response. Twelve
patients had slight reductions in spleen size (less than 50% from baseline), but 
symptoms did not improve consistently. One patient achieved transfusion
independence lasting 5 months. Reductions in GLI1 mRNA and protein levels,
JAK2V617F allele burden, degree of fibrosis or cytokine levels were observed in
some patients, but were not significant when evaluated for the cohort. Low-grade 
gastrointestinal/liver abnormalities were the most common toxicities. The results
did not support continued evaluation of IPI-926 as a monotherapy in
myelofibrosis.

PMID: 25641433  [PubMed - in process]


216. J Cell Sci. 2015 Mar 15;128(6):1123-38. doi: 10.1242/jcs.162164. Epub 2015 Jan
27.

SOX9 inhibits ß-TrCP-mediated protein degradation to promote nuclear GLI1
expression and cancer stem cell properties.

Deng W(1), Vanderbilt DB(2), Lin CC(1), Martin KH(3), Brundage KM(3), Ruppert
JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West
Virginia 26506 The Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West Virginia University,
West Virginia 26506. (2)Program in Cancer Cell Biology, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, West Virginia 26506. (3)The Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West
Virginia University, West Virginia 26506. (4)The Department of Biochemistry, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia 26506 The Mary Babb Randolph
Cancer Center, West Virginia University, West Virginia 26506 Program in Cancer
Cell Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia 26506
mruppert@hsc.wvu.edu.

The high mobility group box protein SOX9 and the GLI1 transcription factor play
protumorigenic roles in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). In Kras
transgenic mice, each of these factors are crucial for the development of PDA
precursor lesions. SOX9 transcription is directly regulated by GLI1, but how SOX9
functions downstream of GLI1 is unclear. We observed positive feedback, such that
SOX9-deficient PDA cells have severely repressed levels of endogenous GLI1,
attributed to loss of GLI1 protein stability. SOX9 associated with the F-box
domain of the SKP1/CUL1/F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase component, ß-TrCP (also
known as F-box/WD repeat-containing protein 1A), and suppressed its association
with SKP1 and GLI1, a substrate of SCF-ß-TrCP. SOX9 also tethered ß-TrCP within
the nucleus and promoted its degradation. SOX9 bound to ß-TrCP through the SOX9
C-terminal PQA/S domain that mediates transcriptional activation. Suppression of 
ß-TrCP in SOX9-deficient PDA cells restored GLI1 levels and promoted
SOX9-dependent cancer stem cell properties. These studies identify SOX9-GLI1
positive feedback as a major determinant of GLI1 protein stability and implicate 
ß-TrCP as a latent SOX9-bound tumor suppressor with the potential to degrade
oncogenic proteins in tumor cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4359920
PMID: 25632159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 28;10(1):e0114932. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114932.
eCollection 2015.

Rapid screening of gene function by systemic delivery of morpholino
oligonucleotides to live mouse embryos.

McClelland KS(1), Wainwright EN(1), Bowles J(1), Koopman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Traditional gene targeting methods in mice are complex and time consuming,
especially when conditional deletion methods are required. Here, we describe a
novel technique for assessing gene function by injection of modified antisense
morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) into the heart of mid-gestation mouse embryos. 
After allowing MOs to circulate through the embryonic vasculature, target tissues
were explanted, cultured and analysed for expression of key markers. We
established proof-of-principle by partially phenocopying known gene knockout
phenotypes in the fetal gonads (Stra8, Sox9) and pancreas (Sox9). We also
generated a novel double knockdown of Gli1 and Gli2, revealing defects in Leydig 
cell differentiation in the fetal testis. Finally, we gained insight into the
roles of Adamts19 and Ctrb1, genes of unknown function in sex determination and
gonadal development. These studies reveal the utility of this method as a means
of first-pass analysis of gene function during organogenesis before committing to
detailed genetic analysis.

PMCID: PMC4309589
PMID: 25629157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;43(12):814-9.

[Expression of sonic hedgehog signaling pathw ay and its inhibition by
cyclopamine in rat liver with chronic fluorosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao L(1), Yu Y(2), Deng C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Guiyang Medical College, Guiyang 550004, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Guiyang Medical College, Guiyang 550004, China.
E-mail: gyyxyb12010@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
pathway in liver fluorosis and to explore related mechanism.
METHODS: To establish animal model, 48 normal SD rats (aged 4-5 weeks) were
randomly divided into 4 groups (12 each): control group, fluoriosis group,
blocking group and blocking control group. After 6 months, the blocking group and
blocking control group were injected intraperitoneally once every 2 days for 3
times with 10 mg/kg cyclopamine or dimethysulfoxide, respectively. Rats were
sacrificed at the end of the experiment and the fluoride content in urine and
liver function was determined. The expression of Shh and Gli1 protein and mRNA in
hepatocytes was detected by immunohistochemistry and real-time fluorescence
quantitative PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: The fluoride contents in the urine and the incidence of dental fluorosis
increased in the fluoride and blocking control groups as compared with those in
the control group, but decreased in the blocking group compared with those of the
fluoride and blocking control group. Compared with the control group, the titers 
of aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) significantly
increased, while the activity of total protein and albumin decreased in the
fluoride and blocking control groups. Compared with the fluoride and blocking
control groups, the activity of the ALT slightly declined and the AST, total
protein and albumin slightly increased in the blocking group. Histologically, the
cells were disorganized and swollen with cytoplasmic clearing (balloon cells),
compared with the control group. The expression of Shh and Gli1 significantly
increased in all but the control group. Compared with the fluoride and blocking
control groups, the expression of Shh and Gli1 declined in the blocking group.
CONCLUSIONS: The overexpression and cyclopamine inhibition of the Shh signaling
pathway are closely related to the content of fluoride in the liver. The Shh
signaling pathway plays an important role in the pathogenesis of liver injury
caused by fluorosis, suggesting a preventive and therapeutic target of the
disease.

PMID: 25623978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Mar;240(3):392-9. doi: 10.1177/1535370214565989.
Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Modulation of Sonic hedgehog signaling and WW domain containing oxidoreductase
WOX1 expression enhances radiosensitivity of human glioblastoma cells.

Chiang MF(1), Chen HH(2), Chi CW(2), Sze CI(3), Hsu ML(2), Shieh HR(2), Lin
CP(2), Tsai JT(4), Chen YJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 104, Taiwan
Graduate Institute of Injury Prevention and Control, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei 110, Taiwan. (2)Department of Medical Research, MacKay Memorial Hospital, 
Taipei 104, Taiwan. (3)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Taipei
Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of
Pharmacology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan Department of
Radiation Oncology, MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taipei 104, Taiwan
chenmdphd@gmail.com kitty4024@gmail.com.

WW domain containing oxidoreductase, designated WWOX, FOR or WOX1, is a known
pro-apoptotic factor when ectopically expressed in various types of cancer cells,
including glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). The activation of sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling, especially paracrine Shh secretion in response to radiation, is
associated with impairing the effective irradiation of cancer cells. Here, we
examined the role of Shh signaling and WOX1 overexpression in the
radiosensitivity of human GBM cells. Our results showed that ionizing irradiation
(IR) increased the cytoplasmic Shh and nuclear Gli-1 content in GBM U373MG and
U87MG cells. GBM cells with exogenous Shh treatment exhibited similar results.
Pretreatment with Shh peptides protected U373MG and U87MG cells against IR in a
dose-dependent manner. Cyclopamine, a Hedgehog/Smoothened (SMO) inhibitor,
reversed the protective effect of Shh in U87MG cells. Cyclopamine increased Shh
plus IR-induced H2AX, a marker of DNA double-strand breaks, in these cells. To
verify the role of Shh signaling in the radiosensitivity of GBM cells, we tested 
the effect of the Gli family zinc finger 1 (Gli-1) inhibitor zerumbone and found 
that it could sensitize GBM cells to IR. We next examined the role of WOX1 in
radiosensitivity. Overexpression of WOX1 enhanced the radiosensitivity of U87MG
(possessing wild type p53 or WTp53) but not U373MG (harboring mutant p53 or
MTp53) cells. Pretreatment with Shh peptides protected both WOX1-overexpressed
U373MG and U87MG cells against IR and increased the cytoplasmic Shh and nuclear
Gli-1 content. Zerumbone enhanced the radiosensitivity of WOX1-overexpressed
U373MG and U87MG cells. In conclusion, overexpression of WOX1 preferentially
sensitized human GBM cells possessing wild type p53 to radiation therapy.
Blocking of Shh signaling may enhance radiosensitivity independently of the
expression of p53 and WOX1. The crosstalk between Shh signaling and WOX1
expression in human glioblastoma warrants further investigation.

© 2015 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 25595187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Cell Sci. 2015 Mar 1;128(5):1034-50. doi: 10.1242/jcs.162552. Epub 2015 Jan 14.

The heterotrimeric kinesin-2 complex interacts with and regulates GLI protein
function.

Carpenter BS(1), Barry RL(1), Verhey KJ(1), Allen BL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA benallen@umich.edu.

GLI transport to the primary cilium and nucleus is required for proper Hedgehog
(HH) signaling; however, the mechanisms that mediate these trafficking events are
poorly understood. Kinesin-2 motor proteins regulate ciliary transport of cargo, 
yet their role in GLI protein function remains unexplored. To examine a role for 
the heterotrimeric KIF3A-KIF3B-KAP3 kinesin-2 motor complex in regulating GLI
activity, we performed a series of structure-function analyses using biochemical,
cell signaling and in vivo approaches that define novel specific interactions
between GLI proteins and two components of this complex, KAP3 and KIF3A. We find 
that all three mammalian GLI proteins interact with KAP3 and we map specific
interaction sites in both proteins. Furthermore, we find that GLI proteins
interact selectively with KIF3A, but not KIF3B, and that GLI interacts
synergistically with KAP3 and KIF3A. Using a combination of cell signaling assays
and chicken in ovo electroporation, we demonstrate that KAP3 interactions
restrict GLI activator function but not GLI repressor function. These data
suggest that GLI interactions with KIF3A-KIF3B-KAP3 complexes are essential for
proper GLI transcriptional activity.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4342584
PMID: 25588831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Med Rep. 2015 May;11(5):3259-68. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3150. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 is required for
transforming growth factor-ß1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition of
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Li H(1), Da LJ(1), Fan WD(1), Long XH(1), Zhang XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400010, P.R. China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the process by which epithelial cells 
depolarize and acquire a mesenchymal phenotype, and is a common early step in the
process of metastasis. Patients with lung cancer frequently already have distant 
metastases when they are diagnosed, highlighting the requirement for early and
effective interventions to control metastatic disease. Transforming growth
factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) is able to induce EMT, however the molecular mechanism of this
remains unclear. In the current study, TGF-ß1 was reported to induce EMT and
promote the migration of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. A notable
observation was that EMT induction was accompanied by the upregulation of human
glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1) mRNA and protein levels. Furthermore,
Gli1 levels were depleted by small interfering RNA, and the Gli1 inhibitor GANT
61 attenuated the TGF-ß1-mediated induction of EMT and cell migration. The
results of the current study suggest that Gli1 regulates TGF-ß1-induced EMT,
which may provide a novel therapeutic target to inhibit metastasis in patients
with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4368139
PMID: 25586417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014 Nov 15;90(4):942-51. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.06.065. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Reciprocal regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 2a and GLI1 expression
associated with the radioresistance of renal cell carcinoma.

Zhou J(1), Wu K(2), Gao D(3), Zhu G(2), Wu D(2), Wang X(2), Chen Y(2), Du Y(2),
Song W(2), Ma Z(2), Authement C(4), Saha D(4), Hsieh JT(5), He D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China; Department of Urology, Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(2)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Urology, Shandong Provincial 
Hospital affiliated with Shandong University, Ji'nan, China. (4)Department of
Urology, Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (5)Department of Urology, Department of Radiation 
Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
Electronic address: jt.hsieh@utsouthwestern.edu. (6)Department of Urology, First 
Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
Electronic address: dalinhe@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is often considered a radioresistant tumor,
but the molecular mechanism underlying its radioresistance is poorly understood. 
This study explored the roles of hypoxia-inducible factor 2a (HIF2a) and sonic
hedgehog (SHH)-GLI1 signaling in mediating the radioresistance of RCC cells and
to unveil the interaction between these 2 signaling pathways.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: The activities of SHH-GLI1 signaling pathway under
normoxia and hypoxia in RCC cells were examined by real-time polymerase chain
reaction, Western blot, and luciferase reporter assay. The expression of HIF2a
and GLI1 in RCC patients was examined by immunohistochemistry, and their
correlation was analyzed. Furthermore, RCC cells were treated with HIF2a-specific
shRNA (sh-HIF2a), GLI1 inhibitor GANT61, or a combination to determine the effect
of ionizing radiation (IR) on RCC cells based on clonogenic assay and
double-strand break repair assay.
RESULTS: RCC cells exhibited elevated SHH-GLI1 activities under hypoxia, which
was mediated by HIF2a. Hypoxia induced GLI1 activation through SMO-independent
pathways that could be ablated by PI3K inhibitor or MEK inhibitor. Remarkably,
the SHH-GLI1 pathway also upregulated HIF2a expression in normoxia. Apparently,
there was a positive correlation between HIF2a and GLI1 expression in RCC
patients. The combination of sh-HIF2a and GLI1 inhibitor significantly sensitized
RCC cells to IR.
CONCLUSIONS: Cross-talk between the HIF2a and SHH-GLI1 pathways was demonstrated 
in RCC. Cotargeting these 2 pathways, significantly sensitizing RCC cells to IR, 
provides a novel strategy for RCC treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25585786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Dyn. 2015 Mar;244(3):468-78. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24249. Epub 2015 Jan 24.

Sufu and Kif7 in limb patterning and development.

Zhulyn O(1), Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The vertebrate digit pattern is defined by the morphogen Sonic
hedgehog (Shh), which controls the activity of Gli transcription factors. Gli1, 2
and 3 are dynamically expressed during patterning. Downstream of Shh, their
activity is regulated by Sufu and Kif7, core components of the Shh signaling
cascade. The precise roles of these regulators during limb development have not
been fully described. We analyze the role of Sufu and Kif7 in the limb and
demonstrate that their loss has distinct and synergistic effects on Gli activity 
and digit pattern.
RESULTS: Using a series of mouse mutants, we show that Sufu and Kif7 are
expressed throughout limb development and their deletion has distinct effects on 
Gli levels and limb formation. Concomitant deletion of Sufu and Kif7 results in
constitutive pathway activity and severe limb truncation. This is consistent with
the recently published two-population model, which suggests that precocious
activation of Shh signaling inhibits organizing center formation and limb
outgrowth.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our findings demonstrate that perturbations of Sufu and
Kif7 affect Gli activity and recapitulate the full spectrum of vertebrate limb
defects, ranging from severe truncation to polydactyly.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25581370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3969-77. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3040-z. Epub 2015
Jan 11.

Arsenic trioxide inhibits growth of human chondrosarcoma cells through G2/M
arrest and apoptosis as well as autophagy.

Jiao G(1), Ren T, Guo W, Ren C, Yang K.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Tumor Center, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing,
100044, People's Republic of China.

It has been demonstrated that Gli1 is expressed in chondrosarcoma but not in the 
normal articular cartilage tissues. Downregulating Gli1 by small interfering RNA 
inhibited chondrosarcoma cells growth. Arsenic trioxide (ATO) has been
demonstrated to suppress human cancer cell growth by targeting Gli1. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effect of ATO on antineoplastic capability of
chondrosarcoma cells. We found that ATO inhibited the growth of chondrosarcoma
cells in dose-dependent and time-dependent manners via MTT and colony formation
assays. In addition, ATO treatment induced apoptosis and promoted G2/M phase
arrest in SW1353 cells as analyzed by flow cytometry assays and Western blotting.
Furthermore, we observed that ATO also triggered autophagy by regulating
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) phosphorylation. Finally, we found that
ATO-mediated cell death could be averted by autophagy inhibitor. Taken together, 
the current study suggested that ATO had therapeutic efficacy in human
chondrosarcoma cells through the promotion of G2/M arrest and induction of both
apoptosis as well as autophagy. ATO administration could be a novel therapeutic
strategy for treating chondrosarcomas.

PMID: 25577250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Feb 13;457(3):318-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.12.108. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Hedgehog signaling is synergistically enhanced by nutritional deprivation and
ligand stimulation in human fibroblasts of Gorlin syndrome.

Mizuochi H(1), Fujii K(2), Shiohama T(2), Uchikawa H(2), Shimojo N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-8-1 
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba-shi, 260-8670, Chiba, Japan. Electronic address:
hiromi_miz@yahoo.co.jp. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba-shi, 260-8670, Chiba, Japan.

Hedgehog signaling is a pivotal developmental pathway that comprises hedgehog,
PTCH1, SMO, and GLI proteins. Mutations in PTCH1 are responsible for Gorlin
syndrome, which is characterized by developmental defects and tumorigenicity.
Although the hedgehog pathway has been investigated extensively in Drosophila and
mice, its functional roles have not yet been determined in human cells. In order 
to elucidate the mechanism by which transduction of the hedgehog signal is
regulated in human tissues, we employed human fibroblasts derived from three
Gorlin syndrome patients and normal controls. We investigated GLI1 transcription,
downstream of hedgehog signaling, to assess native signal transduction, and then 
treated fibroblasts with a recombinant human hedgehog protein with or without
serum deprivation. We also examined the transcriptional levels of
hedgehog-related genes under these conditions. The expression of GLI1 mRNA was
significantly higher in Gorlin syndrome-derived fibroblasts than in control
cells. Hedgehog stimulation and nutritional deprivation synergistically enhanced 
GLI1 transcription levels, and this was blocked more efficiently by vismodegib, a
SMO inhibitor, than by the natural compound, cyclopamine. Messenger RNA profiling
revealed the increased expression of Wnt signaling and morphogenetic molecules in
these fibroblasts. These results indicated that the hedgehog stimulation and
nutritional deprivation synergistically activated the hedgehog signaling pathway 
in Gorlin syndrome fibroblasts, and this was associated with increments in the
transcription levels of hedgehog-related genes such as those involved in Wnt
signaling. These fibroblasts may become a significant tool for predicting the
efficacies of hedgehog molecular-targeted therapies such as vismodegib.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25576868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Jan 8;16(1):3-4. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.12.008.

Targeting the cellular origin of organ fibrosis.

Kim J(1), Braun T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Development and Remodeling, Max-Planck-Institute for
Heart and Lung Research, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany. (2)Department of Cardiac
Development and Remodeling, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung Research,
61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany. Electronic address: thomas.braun@mpi-bn.mpg.de.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Jan 8;16(1):51-66.

Organ fibrosis after injury, which can significantly compromise tissue function, 
is in part due to proliferation of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts of unclear
cellular origin. Now in Cell Stem Cell, Kramann et al. (2015) show that
perivascular Gli1+ mesenchymal-stem-cell-like cells generate a large fraction of 
myofibroblasts in disease conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25575074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biomech. 2015 Feb 5;48(3):418-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2014.12.036. Epub
2014 Dec 19.

Elongation of the collateral ligaments after cruciate retaining total knee
arthroplasty and the maximum flexion of the knee.

Park KK(1), Hosseini A(2), Tsai TY(3), Kwon YM(4), Li G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Yonsei University, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
Electronic address: kkpark@yuhs.ac. (2)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: ahosseini@partners.org. (3)Bioengineering
Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: ttsai1@partners.org.
(4)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
ymkwon@partners.org. (5)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA. Electronic address: gli1@partners.org.

The mechanisms that affect knee flexion after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) are
still debatable. This study investigated the elongation of the superficial medial
(sMCL) and lateral collateral ligaments (LCL) before and after a posterior
cruciate retaining (CR) TKA. We hypothesized that overstretching of the
collateral ligaments in high flexion after TKA could reduce maximal flexion of
the knee. Three-dimensional models of 11 osteoarthritic knees of 11 patients
including the insertions of the collateral ligaments were created using MR
images. Each ligament was divided into three equal portions: anterior, middle and
posterior portions. The shortest 3D wrapping length of each ligament portion was 
determined before and after the TKA surgery along a weight-bearing, single leg
flexion path. The relationship between the changes of ligament elongation and the
changes of the maximal knee flexion after TKAs was quantitatively analyzed. The
sMCL showed significant increases in length only at low flexion after TKA; the
LCL showed decreases in length at full extension, but increases with further
flexion after TKA. The amount of increases of the maximum flexion angle after TKA
was negatively correlated with the increases of the elongations of the anterior
portion (p=0.010, r=0.733) and middle portion (p=0.049, r=0.604) of the sMCL as
well as the anterior portion (p=0.010, r=0.733) of the LCL at maximal flexion of 
the knee. The results indicated that the increases of the length of the
collateral ligaments at maximal flexion after TKA were associated with the
decreases of the maximal flexion of the knee. Our data suggest that collateral
ligament management should also be evaluated at higher knee flexion angles in
order to optimize maximal flexion of the knee after TKAs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25555307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 1;21(5):1215-24. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0667.
Epub 2014 Dec 31.

Sonic hedgehog and Gli1 expression predict outcome in resected pancreatic
adenocarcinoma.

Maréchal R(1), Bachet JB(2), Calomme A(3), Demetter P(4), Delpero JR(5), Svrcek
M(6), Cros J(7), Bardier-Dupas A(8), Puleo F(3), Monges G(9), Hammel P(10),
Louvet C(11), Paye F(12), Bachelier P(13), Le Treut YP(14), Vaillant JC(15),
Sauvanet A(16), André T(17), Salmon I(18), Devière J(3), Emile JF(19), Van
Laethem JL(20).

Author information: 
(1)Saint Antoine Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Cancer Unit,
Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. Laboratory of 
Experimental Gastroenterology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium. raphael.marechal@erasme.ulb.ac.be. (2)Medical University
Pierre et Marie Curie, UFR Paris VI, Paris, France. EA4340 "Epidémiologie et
oncogènes des tumeurs digestives," Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines
University, Versailles, France. Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Pitié
Salpêtrière Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. (3)Saint Antoine Department of
Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Cancer Unit, Erasme Hospital, Université
Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. Laboratory of Experimental
Gastroenterology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium. (4)Department of Pathology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, and DiaPath, Brussels, Belgium. (5)Department of Surgery, Institute
Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, France. Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France. 
(6)Department of Pathology, Saint Antoine Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Pathology, Beaujon Hospital, APHP, Clichy, France. (8)Medical
University Pierre et Marie Curie, UFR Paris VI, Paris, France. Department of
Pathology, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. (9)Department of
Pathology, Institute Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, France. (10)Department of
Gastroenterology, Beaujon Hospital, APHP, Clichy, France. (11)Medical University 
Pierre et Marie Curie, UFR Paris VI, Paris, France. Department of Oncology,
Institut Mutualiste Montsouris, Paris, France. (12)Medical University Pierre et
Marie Curie, UFR Paris VI, Paris, France. Department of Surgery, Saint Antoine
Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. (13)Department of Surgery, University Hospital of 
Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France. (14)Department of Digestive Surgery, Conception 
Hospital, Marseille, France. (15)Medical University Pierre et Marie Curie, UFR
Paris VI, Paris, France. Department of Digestive Surgery, Pitié Salpêtrière
Hospital, Paris, France. (16)Department of Digestive Surgery, Beaujon Hospital,
APHP, Clichy, France. (17)Department of Oncology, Saint-Antoine Hospital, APHP,
Paris, France. (18)Department of Pathology, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, and DiaPath, Brussels, Belgium. DIAPath - Center for Microscopy and
Molecular Imaging (CMMI), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Gosselies, Belgium.
(19)EA4340 "Epidémiologie et oncogènes des tumeurs digestives," Versailles
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines University, Versailles, France. Department of
Pathology, Ambroise Paré Hospital, APHP, Boulogne Billancourt, France. (20)Saint 
Antoine Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Cancer Unit, Erasme
Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

PURPOSE: Aberrant activation of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway is implicated in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tumorigenesis. We investigated the
prognostic and predictive value of four Hh signaling proteins and of the tumor
stromal density.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry, the
expression of Shh, Gli1, SMO, and PTCH1 was assessed in 567 patients from three
independent cohorts who underwent surgical resection for PDAC. In 82 patients,
the tumor stromal index (SI) was calculated, and its association with overall
survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) was investigated.
RESULTS: Shh and Gli1 protein abundance were independent prognostic factors in
resected PDACs; low expressors for those proteins experiencing a better OS and
DFS. The combination of Shh and Gli1 levels was the most significant predictor
for OS and defined 3 clinically relevant subgroups of patients with different
prognosis (Gli1 and Shh low; HR set at 1 vs. 3.08 for Shh or Gli1 high vs. 5.69
for Shh and Gli1 high; P < 0.001). The two validating cohorts recapitulated the
findings of the training cohort. After further stratification by lymph node
status, the prognostic significance of combined Shh and Gli1 was maintained. The 
tumor SI was correlated with Shh levels and was significantly associated with OS 
(P = 0.023).
CONCLUSIONS: Shh and Gli1 are prognostic biomarkers for patients with resected
PDAC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25552484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Mar;14(3):727-39. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0481. Epub 
2014 Dec 31.

Histone deacetylase 6 represents a novel drug target in the oncogenic Hedgehog
signaling pathway.

Dhanyamraju PK(1), Holz PS(1), Finkernagel F(1), Fendrich V(2), Lauth M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Philipps University, Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), 
Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Marburg, Germany. (2)Department of
Surgery, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany. (3)Philipps University, Institute
of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor Biology and
Immunology, Marburg, Germany. lauth@imt.uni-marburg.de.

Uncontrolled Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is the cause of several malignancies,
including the pediatric cancer medulloblastoma, a neuroectodermal tumor affecting
the cerebellum. Despite the development of potent Hh pathway antagonists,
medulloblastoma drug resistance is still an unresolved issue that requires the
identification of novel drug targets. Following up on our observation that
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) expression was increased in Hh-driven
medulloblastoma, we found that this enzyme is essential for full Hh pathway
activation. Intriguingly, these stimulatory effects of HDAC6 are partly
integrated downstream of primary cilia, a known HDAC6-regulated structure. In
addition, HDAC6 is also required for the complete repression of basal Hh target
gene expression. These contrasting effects are mediated by HDAC6's impact on Gli2
mRNA and GLI3 protein expression. As a result of this complex interaction with Hh
signaling, global transcriptome analysis revealed that HDAC6 regulates only a
subset of Smoothened- and Gli-driven genes, including all well-established Hh
targets such as Ptch1 or Gli1. Importantly, medulloblastoma cell survival was
severely compromised by HDAC6 inhibition in vitro and pharmacologic HDAC6
blockade strongly reduced tumor growth in an in vivo allograft model. In summary,
our data describe an important role for HDAC6 in regulating the mammalian Hh
pathway and encourage further studies focusing on HDAC6 as a novel drug target in
medulloblastoma.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25552369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Feb 1;23(3):548-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.12.005. Epub
2014 Dec 10.

Design, synthesis, and evaluation of hybrid vitamin D3 side chain analogues as
hedgehog pathway inhibitors.

Banerjee U(1), DeBerardinis AM(1), Hadden MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Connecticut, 69 N
Eagleville Rd, Storrs, CT 06269, USA. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Connecticut, 69 N Eagleville Rd, Storrs, CT 06269, USA. Electronic 
address: kyle.hadden@uconn.edu.

Vitamin D3 (VD3) is a moderately potent and non-selective inhibitor of the
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling cascade. Previous studies have established that the
CD-ring region of VD3 serves as the Hh inhibitory pharmacophore. Subsequently,
compound 3, an ester linked aromatic A-ring and CD-ring derivative was identified
as an improved and selective Hh inhibitor. Herein, we report modifications of the
CD-ring side chain that afford enhancement of selectivity for Hh modulation
thereby diminishing the detrimental effects of concomitant vitamin D receptor
activation. In general, linear or moderately branched alkyl chains of five or six
carbons were optimal for potent and selective inhibition of Hh signaling.
Moreover, hybrid VD3 side chain derivative 20 demonstrated 4-fold improvement in 
Hh antagonistic activity over VD3(IC50=1.1-1.6 µM) while gaining greater than a
1000-fold selectivity for Hh signaling over canonical activation of the vitamin D
receptor pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25549899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 30;6(3):1519-30.

Mitochondria-derived reactive oxygen species drive GANT61-induced mesothelioma
cell apoptosis.

Lim CB(1), Prêle CM(1,)(2), Baltic S(1), Arthur PG(3), Creaney J(4), Watkins
DN(5), Thompson PJ(1), Mutsaers SE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Institute of Western Australia and Centre for Asthma, Allergy and
Respiratory Research, School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western 
Australia, Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, Nedlands, WA, Australia. 
(2)Centre for Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia and Harry Perkins Institute of
Medical Research, Nedlands, WA, Australia. (3)School of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.
(4)National Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases, School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Harry Perkins Institute of Medical
Research and Australian Mesothelioma Tissue Bank, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, 
Nedlands, WA, Australia. (5)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst,
NSW, Australia.

Gli transcription factors of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway have been reported to be
drivers of malignant mesothelioma (MMe) cell survival. The Gli inhibitor GANT61
induces apoptosis in various cancer cell models, and has been associated directly
with Gli inhibition. However various chemotherapeutics can induce cell death
through generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) but whether ROS mediates
GANT61-induced apoptosis is unknown. In this study human MMe cells were treated
with GANT61 and the mechanisms regulating cell death investigated. Exposure of
MMe cells to GANT61 led to G1 phase arrest and apoptosis, which involved ROS but 
not its purported targets, GLI1 or GLI2. GANT61 triggered ROS generation and
quenching of ROS protected MMe cells from GANT61-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, 
we demonstrated that mitochondria are important in mediating GANT61 effects: (1) 
ROS production and apoptosis were blocked by mitochondrial inhibitor rotenone;
(2) GANT61 promoted superoxide formation in mitochondria; and (3) mitochondrial
DNA-deficient LO68 cells failed to induce superoxide, and were more resistant to 
apoptosis induced by GANT61 than wild-type cells. Our data demonstrate for the
first time that GANT61 induces apoptosis by promoting mitochondrial superoxide
generation independent of Gli inhibition, and highlights the therapeutic
potential of mitochondrial ROS-mediated anticancer drugs in MMe.

PMCID: PMC4359311
PMID: 25544756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Haematologica. 2015 Mar;100(3):e102-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.119248. Epub
2014 Dec 19.

Hedgehog pathway mutations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Dagklis A(1), Pauwels D(1), Lahortiga I(1), Geerdens E(1), Bittoun E(2),
Cauwelier B(3), Tousseyn T(2), Uyttebroeck A(4), Maertens J(5), Verhoef G(5),
Vandenberghe P(6), Cools J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Biology of the Disease, VIB, Leuven Center for Human Genetics, 
KU Leuven. (2)Department of Pathology UZ Leuven. (3)Laboratory Department of
Hematology, AZ St Jan, Brugge. (4)Pediatric oncology, UZ Leuven. (5)Hematology
Department, UZ Leuven, Belgium. (6)Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven.
(7)Center for the Biology of the Disease, VIB, Leuven Center for Human Genetics, 
KU Leuven Jan.cools@cme.vib-kuleuven.be.

PMCID: PMC4349289
PMID: 25527561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1853(3):561-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.12.011.
Epub 2014 Dec 16.

Mitochondrial function contributes to oxysterol-induced osteogenic
differentiation in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Kwon IK(1), Lee SC(1), Hwang YS(1), Heo JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Biomedical Engineering and Institute of Oral
Biology, School of Dentistry, Kyung Hee University, 26 Kyunghee-daero,
Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, South Korea. (2)Department of Maxillofacial
Biomedical Engineering and Institute of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, Kyung 
Hee University, 26 Kyunghee-daero, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, South Korea.
Electronic address: heojs@khu.ac.kr.

Oxysterols, oxidized derivatives of cholesterol, are biologically active
molecules. Specific oxysterols have potent osteogenic properties that act on
osteoprogenitor cells. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these
osteoinductive effects on embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are unknown. This study
investigated the effect of an oxysterol combination of 22(S)-hydroxycholesterol
and 20(S)-hydroxycholesterol (SS) on osteogenic differentiation of ESCs and the
alterations to mitochondrial activity during differentiation. Osteogenic
differentiation was assessed by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, matrix
mineralization, mRNA expression of osteogenic factors, runt-related transcription
factor 2, osterix, and osteocalcin, and protein levels of collagen type IA
(COLIA) and osteopontin (OPN). Treatment of cells with SS increased
osteoinductive activity compared to the control group. Intracellular reactive
oxygen species production, intracellular ATP content, mitochondrial membrane
potential, mitochondrial mass, mitochondrial DNA copy number, and mRNA expression
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivators 1a and ß,
transcription factors involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, were significantly
increased during osteogenesis, indicating upregulation of mitochondrial activity.
Oxysterol combinations also increased protein levels of mitochondrial respiratory
complexes I-V. We also found that SS treatment increased hedgehog signaling
target genes, Smo and Gli1 expression. Inhibition of Hh signaling by cyclopamine 
suppressed mitochondrial biogenesis and ESC osteogenesis. Subsequently,
oxysterol-induced Wnt/ß-catenin pathways were inhibited by repression of Hh
signaling and mitochondrial biogenesis. Transfection of ß-catenin specific siRNA 
decreased the protein levels of COLIA and OPN, as well as ALP activity.
Collectively, these data suggest that lipid-based oxysterols enhance
differentiation of ESCs toward the osteogenic lineage by regulating mitochondrial
activity, canonical Hh/Gli, and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25523141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Dec 13;18(3). pii: pyu071. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyu071.

Learning induces sonic hedgehog signaling in the amygdala which promotes
neurogenesis and long-term memory formation.

Hung HC(1), Hsiao YH(1), Gean PW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Department of Pharmacology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan (Drs Hung, Hsaio, and
Gean). (2)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Department of Pharmacology,
College of Medicine, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan (Drs Hung,
Hsaio, and Gean). powu@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: It is known that neurogenesis occurs throughout the life mostly in
the subgranular zone of the hippocampus and the subventricular zone of the
lateral ventricle. We investigated whether neurogenesis occurred in the amygdala 
and its function in fear memory formation.
METHODS: For detection of newborn neurons, mice were injected intraperitoneally
with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) 2h before receiving 15 tone-footshock
pairings, and newborn neurons were analyzed 14 and 42 days after training. To
determine the relationship between neurogenesis and memory formation, mice were
given a proliferation inhibitor methylazoxymethanol (MAM) or a DNA synthesis
inhibitor cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C). To test whether sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling was required for neurogenesis, Shh-small hairpin-interfering RNA
(shRNA) was inserted into a retroviral vector (Retro-Shh-shRNA).
RESULTS: The number of BrdU(+)/Neuronal nuclei (NeuN)(+) cells was significantly 
higher in the conditioned mice, suggesting that association of tone with
footshock induced neurogenesis. MAM and Ara-C markedly reduced neurogenesis and
impaired fear memory formation. Shh, its receptor patched 1 (Ptc1), and
transcription factor Gli1 protein levels increased at 1 day and returned to
baseline at 7 days after fear conditioning. Retro-Shh-shRNA, which knocked down
Shh specifically in the mitotic neurons, reduced the number of BrdU(+)/NeuN(+)
cells and decreased freezing responses.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that fear learning induces Shh signaling
activation in the amygdala, which promotes neurogenesis and fear memory
formation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMCID: PMC4360236
PMID: 25522410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):196-206. doi: 10.1242/dev.112714.

Enthesis fibrocartilage cells originate from a population of Hedgehog-responsive 
cells modulated by the loading environment.

Schwartz AG(1), Long F(2), Thomopoulos S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University in St Louis, St
Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University
in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Medicine, Washington
University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Developmental
Biology, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University in St Louis, St
Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University 
in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Mechanical Engineering &
Materials Science, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63110, USA
ThomopoulosS@wudosis.wustl.edu.

Tendon attaches to bone across a specialized tissue called the enthesis. This
tissue modulates the transfer of muscle forces between two materials, i.e. tendon
and bone, with vastly different mechanical properties. The enthesis for many
tendons consists of a mineralized graded fibrocartilage that develops
postnatally, concurrent with epiphyseal mineralization. Although it is well
described that the mineralization and development of functional maturity requires
muscle loading, the biological factors that modulate enthesis development are
poorly understood. By genetically demarcating cells expressing Gli1 in response
to Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, we discovered a unique population of Hh-responsive
cells in the developing murine enthesis that were distinct from tendon
fibroblasts and epiphyseal chondrocytes. Lineage-tracing experiments revealed
that the Gli1 lineage cells that originate in utero eventually populate the
entire mature enthesis. Muscle paralysis increased the number of Hh-responsive
cells in the enthesis, demonstrating that responsiveness to Hh is modulated in
part by muscle loading. Ablation of the Hh-responsive cells during the first week
of postnatal development resulted in a loss of mineralized fibrocartilage, with
very little tissue remodeling 5 weeks after cell ablation. Conditional deletion
of smoothened, a molecule necessary for responsiveness to Ihh, from the
developing tendon and enthesis altered the differentiation of enthesis progenitor
cells, resulting in significantly reduced fibrocartilage mineralization and
decreased biomechanical function. Taken together, these results demonstrate that 
Hh signaling within developing enthesis fibrocartilage cells is required for
enthesis formation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4299149
PMID: 25516975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 12;9(12):e114510. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114510.
eCollection 2014.

Combination of cyclopamine and tamoxifen promotes survival and migration of mcf-7
breast cancer cells--interaction of hedgehog-gli and estrogen receptor signaling 
pathways.

Sabol M(1), Trnski D(1), Uzarevic Z(2), Ozretic P(1), Musani V(1), Rafaj M(1),
Cindric M(1), Levanat S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Faculty of Education, Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek,
Croatia.

Hedgehog-Gli (Hh-Gli) signaling pathway is one of the new molecular targets found
upregulated in breast tumors. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) signaling has a key
role in the development of hormone-dependent breast cancer. We aimed to
investigate the effects of inhibiting both pathways simultaneously on breast
cancer cell survival and the potential interactions between these two signaling
pathways. ER-positive MCF-7 cells show decreased viability after treatment with
cyclopamine, a Hh-Gli pathway inhibitor, as well as after tamoxifen (an ERa
inhibitor) treatment. Simultaneous treatment with cyclopamine and tamoxifen on
the other hand, causes short-term survival of cells, and increased migration. We 
found upregulated Hh-Gli signaling under these conditions and protein profiling
revealed increased expression of proteins involved in cell proliferation and
migration. Therefore, even though Hh-Gli signaling seems to be a good potential
target for breast cancer therapy, caution must be advised, especially when
combining therapies. In addition, we also show a potential direct interaction
between the Shh protein and ERa in MCF-7 cells. Our data suggest that the Shh
protein is able to activate ERa independently of the canonical Hh-Gli signaling
pathway. Therefore, this may present an additional boost for ER-positive cells
that express Shh, even in the absence of estrogen.

PMCID: PMC4264763
PMID: 25503972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):3119-26. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2948-z. Epub 2014
Dec 14.

Gli-1 is crucial for hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
invasion of breast cancer.

Lei J(1), Fan L, Wei G, Chen X, Duan W, Xu Q, Sheng W, Wang K, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital Medical College
of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710061, China.

Hypoxia can induce HIF-1a expression and promote the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and invasion of cancer cells. However, their mechanisms remain
unclear. The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of Gli-1, an
effector of the Hedgehog pathway, in the hypoxia-induced EMT and invasion of
breast cancer cells. Human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with
HIF-1a or Gli-1-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) and cultured under a
normoxic or hypoxic condition. The relative levels of HIF-1a, Gli-1, E-cadherin, 
and vimentin in the cells were characterized by quantitative RT-PCR and Western
blot assays, and the invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells was determined. Data was
analyzed by Student T test, one-way ANOVA, and post hoc LSD test or Mann-Whitney 
U when applicable. We observed that hypoxia significantly upregulated the
relative levels of vimentin expression, but downregulated E-cadherin expression
and promoted the invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells, associated with upregulated HIF-1a
translation and Gil-1 expression. Knockdown of HIF-1a mitigated hypoxia-modulated
Gil-1, vimentin and E-cadherin expression, and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells.
Knockdown of Gil-1 did not significantly change hypoxia-upregulated HIF-1a
translation but completely eliminated hypoxia-modulated vimentin and E-cadherin
expression and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells. These data indicate that Gil-1 is
crucial for hypoxia-induced EMT and invasion of breast cancer cells and may be a 
therapeutic target for intervention of breast cancer metastasis.

PMID: 25501705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 1;21(5):1002-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1234.
Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Phase I dose-escalation trial of the oral investigational Hedgehog signaling
pathway inhibitor TAK-441 in patients with advanced solid tumors.

Goldman J(1), Eckhardt SG(2), Borad MJ(3), Curtis KK(3), Hidalgo M(4), Calvo
E(4), Ryan DP(5), Wirth LJ(5), Parikh A(6), Partyka J(7), Faessel H(7), Gangolli 
E(7), Stewart S(8), Rosen LS(8), Bowles DW(2).

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Hematology and Oncology, Santa Monica, California.
JWGoldman@mednet.ucla.edu. (2)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora,
Colorado. (3)Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona. (4)START Madrid, Centro Integral
Oncológico Clara Campal, Madrid, Spain. (5)Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Takeda Pharmaceuticals International Co., Deerfield,
Illinois. (7)Takeda Pharmaceuticals International Co., Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
(8)UCLA Hematology and Oncology, Santa Monica, California.

PURPOSE: This first-in-human study assessed safety, tolerability,
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and preliminary clinical activity of single
and multiple doses of TAK-441, an investigational inhibitor of the Hedgehog
signaling pathway.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients with advanced, solid tumors received daily oral
TAK-441 (50-1,600 mg/day); daily dose was doubled in each subsequent cohort until
the maximum tolerated/feasible dose (MTD/MFD) was reached. Blood was collected to
evaluate TAK-441 plasma concentrations. Skin biopsies were obtained to evaluate
suppression of the Hedgehog-regulated gene Gli1.
RESULTS: Thirty-four patients were enrolled (median age 59). The most common
diagnoses were colorectal cancer (26%), basal cell carcinoma (BCC, 21%), and
pancreatic cancer (9%). The MFD of 1,600 mg/day (based on tablet size and
strength) was considered the MTD. Dose-limiting toxicities included muscle spasms
and fatigue. Grade =3 treatment-emergent adverse events, regardless of causality,
occurred in 15 patients (44%), of which hyponatremia (n = 4) and fatigue (n = 3) 
were most common. Oral absorption was fairly rapid; median Tmax was 2.0 to 4.0
hours after a single dose. Mean elimination half-life was 13.5 to 22.6 hours.
Systemic exposure of TAK-441 based on the area under the plasma
concentration-time curve was linear across the dose range. Gli1 expression in
skin biopsies was strongly inhibited at all dose levels. Best response was
partial response (1 patient with BCC) and stable disease (7 patients with various
solid tumors).
CONCLUSIONS: TAK-441 was generally well tolerated up to MFD of 1,600 mg/day, with
preliminary antitumor activity. Further study of TAK-441 may be appropriate in
populations selected for tumors with ligand-dependent or independent Hedgehog
signaling.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25501576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Feb 25;228:100-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2014.12.002. Epub
2014 Dec 8.

Salinomycin exerts anticancer effects on human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cancer stem
cells via modulation of Hedgehog signaling.

Lu Y(1), Ma W(1), Mao J(2), Yu X(1), Hou Z(1), Fan S(1), Song B(1), Wang H(1), Li
J(1), Kang L(1), Liu P(3), Liu Q(3), Li L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, PR China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, PR China;
The Key Laboratory of Tumor Stem Cell Research of Liaoning Province, Dalian
Medical University, Dalian 116044, PR China. (3)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell,
Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, PR China. (4)Department of Pathology,
Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, PR China; The Key Laboratory of Tumor
Stem Cell Research of Liaoning Province, Dalian Medical University, Dalian
116044, PR China. Electronic address: lilianhong9177@163.com.

Breast cancer tissue contains a small population of cells that have the ability
to self-renew, these cells are known as breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs). The
Hedgehog signal transduction pathway plays a central role in stem cell
development, its aberrant activation has been shown to contribute to the
development of breast cancer, making this pathway an attractive therapeutic
target. Salinomycin (Sal) is a novel identified cancer stem cells (CSCs) killer, 
however, the molecular basis for its anticancer effects is not yet clear. In the 
current study, Sal's ability to modulate the activity of key elements in the
Hedgehog pathway was examined in the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7, as well
as in a subpopulation of cancer stem cells identified within this cancer cell
line. We show here that Sal inhibits proliferation, invasion, and migration while
also inducing apoptosis in MCF-7 cells. Interestingly, in a subpopulation of
MCF-7 cells with the CD44(+)/CD24(-) markers and high ALDH1 levels indicative of 
BCSCs, modulators of Hedgehog signaling Smo and Gli1 were significantly
down-regulated upon treatment with Sal. These results demonstrate that Sal also
inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis of BCSCs, further establishing it as
therapeutically relevant in the context of breast cancers and also indicating
that modulation of Hedgehog signaling is one potential mechanism by which it
exerts these anticancer effects.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25499043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Sci Signal. 2014 Dec 9;7(355):ra117. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005608.

The PPFIA1-PP2A protein complex promotes trafficking of Kif7 to the ciliary tip
and Hedgehog signaling.

Liu YC(1), Couzens AL(2), Deshwar AR(3), B McBroom-Cerajewski LD(2), Zhang X(3), 
Puviindran V(3), Scott IC(4), Gingras AC(5), Hui CC(4), Angers S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3M2, Canada. (2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum
Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. (4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. Program in
Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and
Learning, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada.
(5)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1X5, Canada. Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. (6)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3M2, Canada. Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.
stephane.angers@utoronto.ca.

The primary cilium is required for Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in vertebrates. Hh
leads to ciliary accumulation and activation of the transmembrane protein
Smoothened (Smo) and affects the localization of several pathway components,
including the Gli family of transcriptional regulators, within different regions 
of primary cilia. Genetic analysis indicates that the kinesin protein Kif7 both
promotes and inhibits mouse Hh signaling. Using mass spectrometry, we identified 
liprin-a1 (PPFIA1) and the protein phosphatase PP2A as Kif7-interacting proteins,
and we showed that they were important for the trafficking of Kif7 and Gli
proteins to the tips of cilia and for the transcriptional output of Hh signaling.
Our results suggested that PPFIA1 functioned with PP2A to promote the
dephosphorylation of Kif7, triggering Kif7 localization to the tips of primary
cilia and promoting Gli transcriptional activity.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25492966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Cell. 2014 Dec 8;26(6):797-812. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.021.

A BCL6/BCOR/SIRT1 complex triggers neurogenesis and suppresses medulloblastoma by
repressing Sonic Hedgehog signaling.

Tiberi L(1), Bonnefont J(1), van den Ameele J(1), Le Bon SD(1), Herpoel A(1),
Bilheu A(1), Baron BW(2), Vanderhaeghen P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Institute for Interdisciplinary Research 
(IRIBHM), and ULB Institute of Neuroscience (UNI), 808 Route de Lennik, 1070
Brussels, Belgium. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (3)Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Institute for
Interdisciplinary Research (IRIBHM), and ULB Institute of Neuroscience (UNI), 808
Route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium; Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology (WELBIO), Université Libre de Bruxelles, 808 Route de Lennik, 1070 
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: pierre.vanderhaeghen@ulb.ac.be.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):312-3.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Dec 8;26(6):773-4.

Disrupted differentiation during development can lead to oncogenesis, but the
underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we identify BCL6, a
transcriptional repressor and lymphoma oncoprotein, as a pivotal factor required 
for neurogenesis and tumor suppression of medulloblastoma (MB). BCL6 is necessary
for and capable of preventing the development of GNP-derived MB in mice, and can 
block the growth of human MB cells in vitro. BCL6 neurogenic and oncosuppressor
effects rely on direct transcriptional repression of Gli1 and Gli2 effectors of
the SHH pathway, through recruitment of BCOR corepressor and SIRT1 deacetylase.
Our findings identify the BCL6/BCOR/SIRT1 complex as a potent repressor of the
SHH pathway in normal and oncogenic neural development, with direct diagnostic
and/or therapeutic relevance for SHH MB.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25490446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(16):2485-6. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.946372.

Inducible drug modification: a new form of resistance.

Culjkovic-Kraljacic B(1), Zahreddine HA, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer & Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology; Université de Montréal ; Montréal , QC Canada.

PMCID: PMC4614680
PMID: 25486186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;74(24):7175-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607. Epub 
2014 Dec 4.

When will resistance be futile?

Borden KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Institute for Research in Immunology
and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
katherine.borden@umontreal.ca.

Cancer cells rapidly evolve a multitude of defense mechanisms to evade the
effects of the oncologist's drug arsenal. Unfortunately, clinical strategies to
overcome these lag far behind. This mismatch likely underlies our inability to
implement new durable treatment strategies. Here, a new form of multidrug
resistance, inducible drug glucuronidation, is discussed. This form was
discovered while developing means to target a specific oncogene, the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), with its inhibitor ribavirin. In two
clinical studies, ribavirin treatment led to substantial clinical responses, but 
all responding patients eventually relapsed. In most cases, this was due to the
overexpression of the sonic hedgehog transcription factor Gli1, which elevated
the UDP glucuronsyltransferase UGT1A enzymes. UGT1As add glucuronic acid to many 
drugs. Indeed, these cells are resistant to not only ribavirin, but also Ara-C,
and likely other drugs. Inhibition of Gli1 reduced UGT1As, eliminated drug
glucuronides, and renewed sensitivity to ribavirin and Ara-C. These studies
highlight that cancer cells and their resistant counterparts metabolize drugs
differently from each other as well as from normal cells. Likely, these inducible
modifications go beyond glucuronidation. Understanding the extent of inducible
drug modifications and the pathways that drive expression of the corresponding
enzymatic machinery will better position us to finally make resistance futile.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4268154
PMID: 25477336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. EMBO J. 2015 Jan 13;34(2):200-17. doi: 10.15252/embj.201489213. Epub 2014 Dec 4.

Gli1/DNA interaction is a druggable target for Hedgehog-dependent tumors.

Infante P(1), Mori M(1), Alfonsi R(2), Ghirga F(3), Aiello F(4), Toscano S(1),
Ingallina C(1), Siler M(2), Cucchi D(2), Po A(2), Miele E(1), D'Amico D(2),
Canettieri G(2), De Smaele E(5), Ferretti E(5), Screpanti I(2), Uccello Barretta 
G(4), Botta M(6), Botta B(7), Gulino A(8), Di Marcotullio L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Life NanoScience@Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rome,
Italy. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. 
(3)Dipartimento di Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, University La Sapienza,
Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Chemistry and Industrial Chemistry, University of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (5)Department of Experimental Medicine, University La
Sapienza, Rome, Italy. (6)Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Pharmacy,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (7)Dipartimento di 
Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy
lucia.dimarcotullio@uniroma1.it alberto.gulino@uniroma1.it
bruno.botta@uniroma1.it. (8)Center for Life NanoScience@Sapienza, Istituto
Italiano di Tecnologia, Rome, Italy Department of Molecular Medicine, University 
La Sapienza, Rome, Italy Istituto Pasteur, Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti -
University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy
lucia.dimarcotullio@uniroma1.it alberto.gulino@uniroma1.it
bruno.botta@uniroma1.it. (9)Department of Molecular Medicine, University La
Sapienza, Rome, Italy lucia.dimarcotullio@uniroma1.it alberto.gulino@uniroma1.it 
bruno.botta@uniroma1.it.

Hedgehog signaling is essential for tissue development and stemness, and its
deregulation has been observed in many tumors. Aberrant activation of Hedgehog
signaling is the result of genetic mutations of pathway components or other
Smo-dependent or independent mechanisms, all triggering the downstream effector
Gli1. For this reason, understanding the poorly elucidated mechanism of
Gli1-mediated transcription allows to identify novel molecules blocking the
pathway at a downstream level, representing a critical goal in tumor biology.
Here, we clarify the structural requirements of the pathway effector Gli1 for
binding to DNA and identify Glabrescione B as the first small molecule binding to
Gli1 zinc finger and impairing Gli1 activity by interfering with its interaction 
with DNA. Remarkably, as a consequence of its robust inhibitory effect on Gli1
activity, Glabrescione B inhibited the growth of Hedgehog-dependent tumor cells
in vitro and in vivo as well as the self-renewal ability and clonogenicity of
tumor-derived stem cells. The identification of the structural requirements of
Gli1/DNA interaction highlights their relevance for pharmacologic interference of
Gli signaling.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4298015
PMID: 25476449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 1;21(3):585-93. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1711.
Epub 2014 Dec 3.

A five-gene hedgehog signature developed as a patient preselection tool for
hedgehog inhibitor therapy in medulloblastoma.

Shou Y(1), Robinson DM(1), Amakye DD(2), Rose KL(2), Cho YJ(3), Ligon KL(4),
Sharp T(1), Haider AS(2), Bandaru R(1), Ando Y(5), Geoerger B(6), Doz F(7),
Ashley DM(8), Hargrave DR(9), Casanova M(10), Tawbi HA(11), Rodon J(12), Thomas
AL(13), Mita AC(14), MacDonald TJ(15), Kieran MW(16).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(2)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey. (3)Departments
of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California. (4)Pediatric Neuro-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston 
Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Department
of Pathology, Children's Hospital Boston, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Department of Medical Oncology and
Center for Molecular Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (5)Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan. (6)Institut Gustave 
Roussy, University Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France. (7)Institut Curie and University
Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France. (8)Deakin University/Barwon Health,
Melbourne, Australia. (9)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London.
(10)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy. (11)University
of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (12)Vall d'Hebron Institut d'Oncologia, and Universitat
Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (13)University of Leicester, Leicester, 
United Kingdom. (14)Cancer Therapy and Research Center, University of Texas
Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas. (15)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, 
Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia. (16)Pediatric Neuro-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and 
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
mark_kieran@dfci.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE: Distinct molecular subgroups of medulloblastoma, including hedgehog (Hh)
pathway-activated disease, have been reported. We identified and clinically
validated a five-gene Hh signature assay that can be used to preselect patients
with Hh pathway-activated medulloblastoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene characteristics of the Hh medulloblastoma subgroup were
identified through published bioinformatic analyses. Thirty-two genes shown to be
differentially expressed in fresh-frozen and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tumor samples and reproducibly analyzed by RT-PCR were measured in matched
samples. These data formed the basis for building a multi-gene logistic
regression model derived through elastic net methods from which the five-gene Hh 
signature emerged after multiple iterations. On the basis of signature gene
expression levels, the model computed a propensity score to determine Hh
activation using a threshold set a priori. The association between Hh activation 
status and tumor response to the Hh pathway inhibitor sonidegib (LDE225) was
analyzed.
RESULTS: Five differentially expressed genes in medulloblastoma (GLI1, SPHK1,
SHROOM2, PDLIM3, and OTX2) were found to associate with Hh pathway activation
status. In an independent validation study, Hh activation status of 25
medulloblastoma samples showed 100% concordance between the five-gene signature
and Affymetrix profiling. Further, in medulloblastoma samples from 50 patients
treated with sonidegib, all 6 patients who responded were found to have
Hh-activated tumors. Three patients with Hh-activated tumors had stable or
progressive disease. No patients with Hh-nonactivated tumors responded.
CONCLUSIONS: This five-gene Hh signature can robustly identify Hh-activated
medulloblastoma and may be used to preselect patients who might benefit from
sonidegib treatment.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25473003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Mar;401(1-2):115-31. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2299-5. Epub 
2014 Dec 4.

Alteration of hedgehog signaling by chronic exposure to different pesticide
formulations and unveiling the regenerative potential of recombinant sonic
hedgehog in mouse model of bone marrow aplasia.

Chaklader M(1), Law S.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research and Application Unit, Department of Biochemistry and
Medical Biotechnology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, 108, C.R Avenue,
Kolkata, 700073, West Bengal, India.

Chronic pesticide exposure-induced downregulation of hedgehog signaling and its
subsequent degenerative effects on the mammalian hematopoietic system have not
been investigated yet. However a number of concurrent studies have pointed out
the positive correlation between chronic pesticide exposure induced bone marrow
failure and immune suppression. Here, we have given an emphasis on the
recapitulation of human marrow aplasia like condition in mice by chronic mixed
pesticide exposures and simultaneously unravel the role of individual pesticides 
in the said event. Unlike the effect of mixed pesticide, individual pesticides
differentially alter the hedgehog signaling in the bone marrow primitive
hematopoietic compartment (Sca1 + compartment) and stromal compartment.
Individually, hexaconazole disrupted hematopoietic as well as stromal hedgehog
signaling activation through inhibiting SMO and facilitating PKC d expression. On
contrary, both chlorpyriphos and cypermethrin increased the sequestration and
degradation of GLI1 by upregulating SU(FU) and ßTrCP, respectively. However,
cypermethrin-mediated inhibition of hedgehog signaling has partly shown to be
circumvented by non-canonical activation of GLI1. Finally, we have tested the
regenerative response of sonic hedgehog and shown that in vitro supplemented
recombinant SHH protein augmented clonogenic stromal progenitors (CFU-F) as well 
as primitive multipotent hematopoietic clones including CFU-GEMM and CFU-GM of
mixed pesticide-induced aplastic marrow. It is an indication of the marrow
regeneration. Finally, our findings provide a gripping evidence that
downregulated hedgehog signaling contribute to pesticide-mediated bone marrow
aplasia but it could be recovered by proper supplementation of recombinant SHH
along with hematopoietic base cocktail. Furthermore, SU(FU) and GLI1 can be
exploited as future theradiagnostic markers for early marrow aplasia diagnosis.

PMID: 25472879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Jan 8;16(1):51-66. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.11.004. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

Perivascular Gli1+ progenitors are key contributors to injury-induced organ
fibrosis.

Kramann R(1), Schneider RK(2), DiRocco DP(3), Machado F(3), Fleig S(3), Bondzie
PA(4), Henderson JM(4), Ebert BL(5), Humphreys BD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of Nephrology and Clinical
Immunology and Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: rkramann@gmx.net. (2)Division of Hematology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. (5)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; 
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (6)Renal Division, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic
address: bhumphreys@partners.org.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Jan 8;16(1):3-4.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) reside in the perivascular niche of many organs,
including kidney, lung, liver, and heart, although their roles in these tissues
are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that Gli1 marks perivascular MSC-like
cells that substantially contribute to organ fibrosis. In vitro, Gli1(+) cells
express typical MSC markers, exhibit trilineage differentiation capacity, and
possess colony-forming activity, despite constituting a small fraction of the
platelet-derived growth factor-ß (PDGFRß)(+) cell population. Genetic lineage
tracing analysis demonstrates that tissue-resident, but not circulating, Gli1(+) 
cells proliferate after kidney, lung, liver, or heart injury to generate
myofibroblasts. Genetic ablation of these cells substantially ameliorates kidney 
and heart fibrosis and preserves ejection fraction in a model of induced heart
failure. These findings implicate perivascular Gli1(+) MSC-like cells as a major 
cellular origin of organ fibrosis and demonstrate that these cells may be a
relevant therapeutic target to prevent solid organ dysfunction after injury.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4289444
PMID: 25465115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Dev Cell. 2014 Nov 24;31(4):448-60. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.10.017. Epub 2014 
Nov 24.

A predictive model of bifunctional transcription factor signaling during
embryonic tissue patterning.

Junker JP(1), Peterson KA(2), Nishi Y(2), Mao J(3), McMahon AP(2), van
Oudenaarden A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physics and Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Hubrecht Institute, KNAW, and University Medical Center
Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and 
Stem Cell Research, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (4)Departments of Physics
and Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA;
Hubrecht Institute, KNAW, and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht,
the Netherlands. Electronic address: a.vanoudenaarden@hubrecht.eu.

Hedgehog signaling controls pattern formation in many vertebrate tissues. The
downstream effectors of the pathway are the bifunctional Gli transcription
factors, which, depending on hedgehog concentration, act as either
transcriptional activators or repressors. Quantitatively understanding the
interplay between Gli activator and repressor forms for patterning complex
tissues is an open challenge. Here, we describe a reductionist mathematical model
for how Gli activators and repressors are integrated in space and time to
regulate transcriptional outputs of hedgehog signaling, using the pathway
readouts Gli1 and Ptch1 as a model system. Spatially resolved measurements of
absolute transcript numbers for these genes allow us to infer spatiotemporal
variations of Gli activator and repressor levels. We validate our model by
successfully predicting expression changes of Gli1 and Ptch1 in mutants
at different developmental stages and in different tissues. Our results provide a
starting point for understanding gene regulation by bifunctional transcription
factors during mammalian development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25458012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Stem Cells. 2015 Mar;33(3):999-1012. doi: 10.1002/stem.1911.

Progenitors of secondary crest myofibroblasts are developmentally committed in
early lung mesoderm.

Li C(1), Li M, Li S, Xing Y, Yang CY, Li A, Borok Z, De Langhe S, Minoo P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Los Angeles
County+University of Southern California Medical Center and Childrens Hospital
Los Angeles.

Development of the mammalian lung is predicated on cross-communications between
two highly interactive tissues, the endodermally derived epithelium and the
mesodermally derived pulmonary mesenchyme. While much attention has been paid for
the lung epithelium, the pulmonary mesenchyme, partly due to lack of specific
tractable markers remains under-investigated. The lung mesenchyme is derived from
the lateral plate mesoderm and is the principal recipient of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling, a morphogenetic network that regulates multiple aspects of embryonic
development. Using the Hh-responsive Gli1-cre(ERT2) mouse line, we identified the
mesodermal targets of Hh signaling at various time points during embryonic and
postnatal lung development. Cell lineage analysis showed these cells serve as
progenitors to contribute to multiple lineages of mesodermally derived
differentiated cell types that include parenchymal or interstitial
myofibroblasts, peribronchial and perivascular smooth muscle as well as rare
populations of cells within the mesothelium. Most importantly, Gli1-cre(ERT2)
identified the progenitors of secondary crest myofibroblasts, a hitherto
intractable cell type that plays a key role in alveolar formation, a vital
process about which little is currently known. Transcriptome analysis of
Hh-targeted progenitor cells transitioning from the pseudoglandular to the
saccular phase of lung development revealed important modulations of key
signaling pathways. Among these, there was significant downregulation of
canonical WNT signaling. Ectopic stabilization of ß-catenin via inactivation of
Apc by Gli1-cre(ERT2) expanded the Hh-targeted progenitor pools, which caused the
formation of fibroblastic masses within the lung parenchyma. The Gli1-cre(ERT2)
mouse line represents a novel tool in the analysis of mesenchymal cell biology
and alveolar formation during lung development.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4650896
PMID: 25448080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell Signal. 2015 Feb;27(2):373-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.11.022. Epub 2014
Nov 27.

ErbB2 signaling activates the Hedgehog pathway via PI3K-Akt in human esophageal
adenocarcinoma: identification of novel targets for concerted therapy concepts.

Kebenko M(1), Drenckhan A(2), Gros SJ(2), Jücker M(3), Grabinski N(3), Ewald
F(3), Grottke A(3), Schultze A(1), Izbicki JR(2), Bokemeyer C(1), Wellbrock J(1),
Fiedler W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hubertus Wald Tumorzentrum, Department of Oncology-Hematology, Bone Marrow
Transplantation and Pneumology, University Cancer Center, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of General, Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical Center
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (4)Hubertus Wald Tumorzentrum, Department of
Oncology-Hematology, Bone Marrow Transplantation and Pneumology, University
Cancer Center, Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: fiedler@uke.de.

The Hedgehog pathway plays an important role in the pathogenesis of several tumor
types, including esophageal cancer. In our study, we show an expression of the
ligand Indian hedgehog (Ihh) and its downstream mediator Gli-1 in primary
resected adenocarcinoma tissue by immunohistochemistry and quantitative PCR in
fifty percent of the cases, while matching healthy esophagus mucosa was negative 
for both proteins. Moreover, a functionally important regulation of Gli-1 by
ErbB2-PI3K-mTORC signaling as well as a Gli-1-dependent regulation of Ihh in the 
ErbB2 amplified esophageal adenocarcinoma cell line OE19 was observed. Treatment 
of OE19 cells with the Her2 antibody trastuzumab, the PI3K-mTORC1 inhibitor NVP
BEZ235 (BEZ235) or the knockdown of Akt1 resulted in a downregulation of Gli-1
and Ihh as well as in a reduction of viable OE19 cells in vitro. Interestingly,
the Hedgehog receptor Smo, which acts upstream of Gli-1, was not expressed in
OE19 cells and in the majority of primary human esophageal adenocarcinoma,
suggesting a non-canonical upregulation of Gli-1 expression by the ErbB2-PI3K
axis. To translate our findings into a therapeutic concept, we targeted
ErbB2-PI3K-mTORC1 by trastuzumab and BEZ235, combining both compounds with the
Gli-1/2 inhibitor GANT61. The triple combination led to significantly stronger
reduction of tumor cell viability than cisplatinum or each biological alone.
Therefore, concomitant blockage of the ErbB2-PI3K pathway and the Hedgehog
downstream mediator Gli-1 may provide a new therapeutic strategy for esophageal
cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25435423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):368. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0368-y. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

Sonic hedgehog-Gli1 signals promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition in ovarian 
cancer by mediating PI3K/AKT pathway.

Ke Z(1), Caiping S, Qing Z, Xiaojing W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450002, Henan, People's Republic of China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been reported to play an important
role in distant metastasis in cancer-related disease. A large number of studies
have shown that sonic hedgehog-glioma-associated oncogene 1 (Shh-Gli1) signals
participate in the process of EMT; however, the role and mechanism of Shh-Gli1
signals in the progression of EMT in ovarian cancer remain largely unknown.
First, we investigated the occurrence of EMT and invasion and migration ability
in ovarian cancer cells stimulated by different concentration of Shh-Gli1 signals
agonist purmorphamine in vitro. Then, Akt siRNA was transfected into ovarian
cancer cells which already stimulated by purmorphamine to elucidate the molecular
mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of EMT in ovarian cancer. Gli1 expression
was significantly enhanced in ovarian cancer cells after stimulated by
purmorphamine. In addition, Gli1 up-regulation promoted EMT, invasion and
migration ability of ovarian cancer cells. Furthermore, we validated a cross talk
between Shh-Gli1 signals and PI3K-Akt pathway in the occurrence of EMT in ovarian
cancer cells. These findings revealed a novel role for Shh-Gli1 signals in EMT in
ovarian cancer and provided for us a potential therapeutic target for the
suppression of EMT, invasion and metastasis in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 25432698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 15;5(23):12151-65.

GLI inhibitor GANT-61 diminishes embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma growth
by inhibiting Shh/AKT-mTOR axis.

Srivastava RK(1), Kaylani SZ(2), Edrees N(2), Li C(1), Talwelkar SS(1), Xu J(1), 
Palle K(3), Pressey JG(2), Athar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, 35294-0019, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, 35294-0019,
USA. (3)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University
of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama 36604.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) typically arises from skeletal muscle. Currently, RMS in
patients with recurrent and metastatic disease have no successful treatment. The 
molecular pathogenesis of RMS varies based on cancer sub-types. Some embryonal
RMS but not other sub-types are driven by sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway.
However, Shh pathway inhibitors particularly smoothened inhibitors are not highly
effective in animals. Here, we show that Shh pathway effectors GLI1 and/or GLI2
are over-expressed in the majority of RMS cells and that GANT-61, a specific
GLI1/2 inhibitor dampens the proliferation of both embryonal and alveolar RMS
cells-derived xenograft tumors thereby blocking their growth. As compared to
vehicle-treated control, about 50% tumor growth inhibition occurs in mice
receiving GANT-61 treatment. The proliferation inhibition was associated with
slowing of cell cycle progression which was mediated by the reduced expression of
cyclins D1/2/3 & E and the concomitant induction of p21. GANT-61 not only reduced
expression of GLI1/2 in these RMS but also significantly diminished AKT/mTOR
signaling. The therapeutic action of GANT-61 was significantly augmented when
combined with chemotherapeutic agents employed for RMS therapy such as
temsirolimus or vincristine. Finally, reduced expression of proteins driving
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) characterized the residual tumors.

PMCID: PMC4322980
PMID: 25432075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 25;33:93. doi: 10.1186/s13046-014-0093-6.

CK2a, over-expressed in human malignant pleural mesothelioma, regulates the
Hedgehog signaling pathway in mesothelioma cells.

Zhang S(1,)(2), Yang YL(3), Wang Y(4), You B(5,)(6), Dai Y(7), Chan G(8), Hsieh
D(9), Kim IJ(10), Fang LT(11), Au A(12), Stoppler HJ(13), Xu Z(14), Jablons
DM(15), You L(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Fifth Hospital of Dalian, Dalian, 116021, 
P.R. China. zhangshulin830814@yahoo.com. (2)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory,
Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
zhangshulin830814@yahoo.com. (3)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of
Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
Yi-Lin.Yang@ucsfmedctr.org. (4)Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. Yucheng.Wang@ucsfmedctr.org. (5)Thoracic Oncology
Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
Yb2759@gmail.com. (6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, 
Affiliated with Capital University of Medical Science, Beijing, P.R. China.
Yb2759@gmail.com. (7)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Helen
Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. Yuyuan.Dai@ucsfmedctr.org. (8)Thoracic 
Oncology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, 
USA. Geraldine.c.chan@gmail.com. (9)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of
Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. david.hsieh4@gmail.com. 
(10)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. kimij@cc.ucsf.edu. (11)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory,
Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
ltfang@gmail.com. (12)Division of Diagnostic Pathology, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. Alfred.Au@ucsfmedctr.org. (13)Tissue Core,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. hubert.stoppler@ucsf.edu. (14)Thoracic Oncology
Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
Zhidong.Xu@ucsfmedctr.org. (15)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of
Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
David.Jablons@ucsfmedctr.org. (16)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of
Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA.
Liang.You@ucsfmedctr.org.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been implicated in stem cell 
maintenance and its activation is aberrant in several types of cancer including
mesothelioma. Protein kinase CK2 affects several cell signaling pathways through 
the mechanism of phosphorylation.
METHODS: Protein and mRNA levels of CK2a and Gli1 were tested by quantitative
RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry staining in mesothelioma samples and cell lines. 
Down-regulated Gli1 expression and transcriptional activity were demonstrated by 
RT-PCR, Western blot and luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: In this study, we show that CK2a is over-expressed and a positive
regulator of Hegdehog/Gli1 signaling in human malignant pleural mesothelioma.
First of all, we found that the mRNA levels of CK2a and Gli1 were broadly
elevated and correlated (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>52, r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.401, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), compared with LP9 (a
normal mesothelial cell line). We then investigated their expression at the
protein level, and found that all the 7 mesothelioma cell lines tested showed
positive staining in CK2a and Gli1 immunohistochemistry. Correlation analysis by 
Pearson test for CK2a and Gli1 expression in the 75 mesothelioma tumors and the 7
mesothelioma cell lines showed that the two protein expression was significantly 
correlated (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>82, r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.554, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Furthermore, we demonstrated that Gli1 
expression and transcriptional activity were down-regulated after CK2a was
silenced in two mesothelioma cell lines (H28 and H2052). CK2a siRNA also
down-regulated the expression of Hh target genes in these cell lines. Moreover,
treatment with a small-molecule CK2a inhibitor CX-4945 led to dose-dependent
inhibition of Gli1 expression and transcriptional activity. Conversely, forced
over-expression of CK2a resulted in an increase in Gli1 transcriptional activity 
in H28 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, we report for the first time that over-expressed CK2a
positively regulate Hh/Gli1 signaling in human mesothelioma.

PMCID: PMC4254219
PMID: 25422081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):2383-91. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2846-4. Epub 2014
Nov 22.

Epigenetic regulation of human hedgehog interacting protein in glioma cell lines 
and primary tumor samples.

Shahi MH(1), Zazpe I, Afzal M, Sinha S, Rebhun RB, Meléndez B, Rey JA, Castresana
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Biology Unit, University of Navarra School of Sciences, Pamplona, 
Spain.

Glioma constitutes one of the most common groups of brain tumors, and its
prognosis is influenced by different genetic and epigenetic modulations. In this 
study, we demonstrated low or no expression of hedgehog interacting protein
(HHIP) in most of the cell lines and primary glioma tumor samples. We further
proceeded to promoter methylation study of this gene in the same cell lines and
primary tumor samples and found 87 % (7/8) HHIP methylation in glioblastoma cell 
lines and 75 % (33/44) in primary tumor samples. These methylation pattern
correlates with low or unexpressed HHIP in both cell lines and primary tumor
samples. Our results suggest the possibility of epigenetic regulation of this
gene in glioma, similarly to medulloblastoma, gastric, hepatic, and pancreatic
cancers. Also, HHIP might be a diagnostic or prognostic marker in glioma and help
to the detection of these tumors in early stages of disease.

PMID: 25416442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cancer Sci. 2015 Jan;106(1):25-33. doi: 10.1111/cas.12571.

Receptor activator for nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B ligand signaling promotes
progesterone-mediated estrogen-induced mammary carcinogenesis.

Boopalan T(1), Arumugam A, Parada J, Saltzstein E, Lakshmanaswamy R.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Cancer Research, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center, El Paso, Texas, USA.

Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death in women. Prolonged
exposure to the ovarian hormones estrogen and progesterone increases the risk of 
breast cancer. Although estrogen is known as a primary factor in mammary
carcinogenesis, very few studies have investigated the role of progesterone.
Receptor activator for nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) ligand (RANKL) plays an
important role in progesterone-induced mammary carcinogenesis. However, the
molecular mechanism underlying RANKL-induced mammary carcinogenesis remains
unknown. In our current study, we show that RANKL induces glioma-associated
oncogene homolog 1 (GLI-1) in estrogen-induced progesterone-mediated mammary
carcinogenesis. In vivo experiments were carried out using ACI rats and in vitro 
experiments were carried out in MCF-7 cells. In ACI rats, mifepristone
significantly reduced the incidence of mammary tumors. Likewise, mifepristone
also inhibited the proliferation of MCF-7 cells. Hormone treatments induced
RANKL, receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK), and NF-<U+03BA>B in a protein kinase
B-dependent manner and inhibited apoptosis by activation of anti-apoptotic
protein Bcl2 in mammary tumors and MCF-7 cells. Mechanistic studies in MCF-7
cells reveal that RANKL induced upstream stimulatory factor-1 and NF-<U+03BA>B,
resulting in subsequent activation of their downstream target GLI-1. We have
identified that progesterone mediates estrogen-induced mammary carcinogenesis
through activation of GLI-1 in a RANKL-dependent manner.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317778
PMID: 25412610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug 26;94(32):2544-8.

[Intervention of glypican-3 genetic transcription on anti-proliferative effect of
hepatoma cells with high metastatic potentiality].

[Article in Chinese]

Yao M(1), Wang L(1), Shi Y(1), Qian Q(1), Yu D(1), Shi Y(1), Lu S(1), Yao D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Clinical Medicine, Nantong University, Nantong 226001,
China. (2)Research Center of Clinical Medicine, Nantong University, Nantong
226001, China. Email: yaodf@ahnmc.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the silencing glypican-3 (GPC-3) gene transcription by
specific small hairpin RNA (shRNA) on the inhibition of hepatoma cells with high 
metastatic potentiality and hepatoma growth.
METHODS: After MHCC-97H cells were transfected with higher effective GPC-3-shRNA,
GPC-3 mRNA was analyzed by multiple FG-RT-PCR or protein by Western blot. Cell
proliferation was detected by 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine and sulforhodamine B
assay, its migratory metastasis and invasiveness by wound healing or transwell
chamber system and cell apoptosis was detected by Caspase-Glo(®) 3/7 Luminescence
assay. Nude mice were subcutaneously injected with stable MHCC-97H cells for
observing the forming time or volume of xenograft tumors. And the expressions of 
GPC-3, ß-catenin, p-GSK3ß and CyclinD1 were analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: After shRNA1 transfection with high efficiency (>80%), the expression of
GPC-3 was down-regulated to 75.6% (t = 15.473, P < 0.001) at mRNA level in
accordance with its protein, inhibiting cell proliferation (71.1%, t = 10.468, P 
< 0.001) notably, decreasing its migration (80.1%, t = 32.697, P < 0.001) and
invasiveness (69.1%, t = 39.647, P < 0.001). ß-catenin was down-regulated (67.7%,
t = 18.4, P < 0.001) and Gli1 increased (53.5%, t = -4.824, P = 0.008) with its
protein. The average forming time of subcutaneous tumors was 11.2 days (d) in the
shRNA group and it was significantly longer (P < 0.01) than that in the control
(5.3 d) or shRNA-neg (5.5 d) group. And the average volume (65.5 mm(3)) of tumors
with decreased GPC-3, ß-catenin, p-GSK3ß, and cyclinD1 expressions in the shRNA
group was significantly smaller (P < 0.01) than that in the shRNA-neg (365.7
mm(3)) or control (404.8 mm(3)) group, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Specific shRNA might intervene effectively the GPC-3 gene
transcription and inhibit invasion and tumor growth. Thus GPC-3 may become a
potential molecular target for hepatoma gene therapy.

PMID: 25410930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Mar;11(3):2221-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2974. Epub 2014 Nov 18.

Apigenin inhibits the self-renewal capacity of human ovarian cancer SKOV3-derived
sphere-forming cells.

Tang AQ(1), Cao XC(2), Tian L(2), He L(2), Liu F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, The Maternal and Child Health
Hospital of Hunan Province, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China. (2)Laboratory of 
Medicine Engineering, Medical College, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan
410013, P.R. China.

Casein kinase 2 (CK2) is a protein kinase which is frequently activated in
cancer. The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in the stimulation of
cancer stem cell growth. Its aberrant activation has been validated in several
types of cancer, including ovarian cancer. In the present study, the
sphere-forming cells (SFCs) of the human ovarian cancer SKOV3 cell line were
observed to have self-renewal capacity, indicating the possession of ovarian
cancer stem-like cell properties. SKOV3-derived SFCs had higher levels of CK2a
and glioma-associated oncogene 1 (Gli1) proteins compared with those of parental 
cells. Apigenin, a common flavonoid, significantly inhibited the self-renewal
capacity and the protein expression of CK2a and Gli1 proteins in the
SKOV3-derived SFCs, which occurred in a concentration-dependent manner. In
addition, CK2a small interfering RNA downregulated the protein expression of CK2a
and Gli1 and synergistically inhibited the self-renewal capacity of the
SKOV3-derived SFCs with apigenin. However, forced overexpression of CK2a resulted
in an increase in the expression of CK2a and Gli1 and attenuated the
apigenin-inhibited self-renewal effect in the SKOV3-derived SFCs. These results
suggested that apigenin inhibited the self-renewal capacity of SKOV3-derived SFCs
and was involved in downregulating the expression of Gli1 by the inhibition of
CK2a.

PMID: 25405327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 13;9(11):e113105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113105.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide microarray expression and genomic alterations by array-CGH analysis
in neuroblastoma stem-like cells.

Ordóñez R(1), Gallo-Oller G(1), Martínez-Soto S(1), Legarra S(1), Pata-Merci
N(2), Guegan J(2), Danglot G(2), Bernheim A(2), Meléndez B(3), Rey JA(4),
Castresana JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Navarra School of
Sciences, Pamplona, Spain. (2)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(3)Molecular Pathology Research Unit, Department of Pathology, Virgen de la Salud
Hospital, Toledo, Spain. (4)IdiPaz Research Unit, La Paz University Hospital,
Madrid, Spain.

Neuroblastoma has a very diverse clinical behaviour: from spontaneous regression 
to a very aggressive malignant progression and resistance to chemotherapy. This
heterogeneous clinical behaviour might be due to the existence of Cancer Stem
Cells (CSC), a subpopulation within the tumor with stem-like cell properties: a
significant proliferation capacity, a unique self-renewal capacity, and
therefore, a higher ability to form new tumors. We enriched the CSC-like cell
population content of two commercial neuroblastoma cell lines by the use of
conditioned cell culture media for neurospheres, and compared genomic gains and
losses and genome expression by array-CGH and microarray analysis, respectively
(in CSC-like versus standard tumor cells culture). Despite the array-CGH did not 
show significant differences between standard and CSC-like in both analyzed cell 
lines, the microarray expression analysis highlighted some of the most relevant
biological processes and molecular functions that might be responsible for the
CSC-like phenotype. Some signalling pathways detected seem to be involved in
self-renewal of normal tissues (Wnt, Notch, Hh and TGF-ß) and contribute to CSC
phenotype. We focused on the aberrant activation of TGF-ß and Hh signalling
pathways, confirming the inhibition of repressors of TGF-ß pathway, as SMAD6 and 
SMAD7 by RT-qPCR. The analysis of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway showed
overexpression of PTCH1, GLI1 and SMO. We found overexpression of CD133 and CD15 
in SIMA neurospheres, confirming that this cell line was particularly enriched in
stem-like cells. This work shows a cross-talk among different pathways in
neuroblastoma and its importance in CSC-like cells.

PMCID: PMC4231109
PMID: 25392930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 1;21(5):1044-51. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1116.
Epub 2014 Nov 11.

A phase I study of PF-04449913, an oral hedgehog inhibitor, in patients with
advanced solid tumors.

Wagner AJ(1), Messersmith WA(2), Shaik MN(3), Li S(4), Zheng X(3), McLachlan
KR(3), Cesari R(5), Courtney R(3), Levin WJ(3), El-Khoueiry AB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
Andrew_Wagner@dfci.harvard.edu. (2)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, 
Colorado. (3)Pfizer Oncology, La Jolla, California. (4)Pfizer China Research and 
Development Center, Shanghai, China. (5)Pfizer Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(6)University of Southern California Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los
Angeles, California.

PURPOSE: To estimate the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of single-agent
PF-04449913, and to evaluate safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, and preliminary antitumor activity in patients with advanced
tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A 3+3 design was used in this open-label, multicenter, phase
I study and dose escalation/de-escalation applied until identification of the
MTD. PF-04449913 was orally administered once daily in continuous 28-day
treatment cycles. The starting dose was 80 mg.
RESULTS: A total of 23 patients were enrolled; 19 were evaluable for first-cycle 
dose-limiting toxicity (DLT). The first-cycle DLT rate at the 640 mg dose level
was 33.3%, and the MTD was estimated to be 320 mg once daily. The recommended
phase II dose was not determined. PF-04449913 was generally well tolerated at
doses of 80 to 320 mg once daily. The most common treatment-related adverse
events (AE) were grade 1-2 dysgeusia, fatigue, decreased appetite, nausea,
dizziness, dehydration, and diarrhea. Treatment-related grade 3 AEs only occurred
in patients receiving PF-04449913 640 mg once daily. No treatment-related grade
4-5 AEs were reported. Pharmacokinetic analysis indicated a generally
dose-proportional kinetics with biphasic elimination, supporting once-daily
dosing. PF-04449913 modulated hedgehog signaling at the dose levels tested, as
demonstrated by >80% downregulation of GLI1 expression in the skin of treated
patients. Eight patients (34.8%) achieved stable disease; none had complete or
partial response. Three patients with disease progression at enrollment had
prolonged disease stabilization (=6 months).
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained in this study support further evaluation of
PF-04449913 in patients with advanced solid tumors.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25388167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):2013-21. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2808-x. Epub 2014
Nov 12.

ß1 integrin mediates colorectal cancer cell proliferation and migration through
regulation of the Hedgehog pathway.

Song J(1), Zhang J, Wang J, Wang J, Guo X, Dong W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, 99
Zhi-Dong Zhang Road, Wuhan, 430060, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.

ß1 integrin (ITGB1) is the major expressed integrin protein of normal cells and
tumor-associated cells. It is often up-regulated in human malignancies and is
involved in many developmental processes, such as tumor progression and
metastasis. However, little is known about the function of ITGB1 in colorectal
cancer. We constructed lentiviral vectors expressing ITGB1 or ITGB1-specific RNA 
interference (RNAi) and an unrelated control vector. After infecting HT29 cells
in vitro, proliferation and migration were evaluated by Cell Counting Kit 8
(CCK-8) assays, transwell invasion assays, and Western blots. The influence of
lentivirus infection on the tumor development capacity of HT29 cells in vivo was 
examined by xenografting the tumor cells. The expression of ITGB1 in the
xenografted tumor cells was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. The up-regulation
of ITGB1 significantly increased the proliferation in HT29 cells in vitro.
Moreover, we found that the overexpression of ITGB1 up-regulated sonic hedgehog
(Shh) while down-regulating Gli1 and SuFu in HT29-ITGB1 cells compared to
controls. Moreover, the levels of c-myc and cyclin D1 proteins were up-regulated.
Transwell assays showed that the number of migrating HT29-RNAi cells was lower
than that in the other cell groups, indicating that ITGB1 significantly enhances 
the invasive ability of HT29 cells. In addition to these in vitro results, ITGB1 
was found to be a significantly effective growth factor in a xenografted tumor
mouse model. These results suggest that ITGB1 induces growth and invasion in a
human colorectal cancer cell line through the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway in 
vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 25387809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 11;9(11):e112700. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112700.
eCollection 2014.

p, p'-Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene induces colorectal adenocarcinoma cell
proliferation through oxidative stress.

Song L(1), Liu J(2), Jin X(2), Li Z(3), Zhao M(4), Liu W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Molecular
Engineering of National Ministry of Education, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China;
MOE Key Lab of Environmental Remediation and Ecosystem Health, College of
Environmental and Resource Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Molecular
Engineering of National Ministry of Education, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China.
(3)Institute of Biotechnology, Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Molecular
Engineering of National Ministry of Education, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China;
College of Life Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Research Center of Environmental Science, Zhejiang University of Technology,
Hangzhou, China. (5)MOE Key Lab of Environmental Remediation and Ecosystem
Health, College of Environmental and Resource Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.

p, p'-Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE), the major metabolite of
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), is an organochlorine pollutant and
associated with cancer progression. The present study investigated the possible
effects of p,p'-DDE on colorectal cancer and the involved molecular mechanism.
The results indicated that exposure to low concentrations of p,p'-DDE from
10(-10) to 10(-7) M for 96 h markedly enhanced proliferations of human colorectal
adenocarcinoma cell lines. Moreover, p,p'-DDE exposure could activate
Wnt/ß-catenin and Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling cascades, and the expression level of
c-Myc and cyclin D1 was significantly increased. Consistently, p,p'-DDE-induced
cell proliferation along with upregulated c-Myc and cyclin D1 were impeded by
ß-catenin siRNA or Gli1 siRNA. In addition, p,p'-DDE was able to activate NADPH
oxidase, generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reduce GSH content,
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and calatase (CAT) activities. Treatment with
antioxidants prevented p,p'-DDE-induced cell proliferation and signaling pathways
of Wnt/ß-catenin and Hedgehog/Gli1. These results indicated that p,p'-DDE
promoted colorectal cancer cell proliferation through Wnt/ß-catenin and
Hedgehog/Gli1 signalings mediated by oxidative stress. The finding suggests an
association between p,p'-DDE exposure and the risk of colorectal cancer
progression.

PMCID: PMC4227882
PMID: 25386960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 30;5(22):11681-94.

Suppressor of fused (Sufu) represses Gli1 transcription and nuclear accumulation,
inhibits glioma cell proliferation, invasion and vasculogenic mimicry, improving 
glioma chemo-sensitivity and prognosis.

Liu X(1), Wang X(1), Du W(1), Chen L(2), Wang G(1), Cui Y(1), Liu Y(1), Dou Z(1),
Wang H(1), Zhang P(1), Chang L(1), Yi L(1), Cai J(1), Jiang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China. Chinese Glioma Cooperation Group (CGCG). (2)Department
of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Glioblastoma are highly aggressive brain tumors with poor prognosis. While
various dysregulation of signaling pathways in gliomas have been described, the
identification of biomarkers and therapy targets remains an important task for
novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Here we described that the
Suppressor of fused (also known as Sufu) is significantly down-regulated in
high-grade gliomas, correlating with a poor prognosis. We demonstrated that
ectopic expression of Sufu inhibited cell proliferation, invasion and
vasculogenic mimicry. In addition, overexpression of Sufu reduced Gli reporter
gene transcription activity and prevented Gli1 nuclear accumulation, whereas
knockdown of Sufu reversed these effects. Furthermore, overexpressed Sufu
sensitized glioblastoma to Temozolomide and Cyclopamine. Thus, Sufu is potential 
tumor suppressor and therapeutic target in glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4294353
PMID: 25373737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 4;9(11):e111701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111701.
eCollection 2014.

CDO, an Hh-coreceptor, mediates lung cancer cell proliferation and tumorigenicity
through Hedgehog signaling.

Leem YE(1), Ha HL(1), Bae JH(1), Baek KH(1), Kang JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon, 440-746, Republic of
Korea.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays essential roles in various developmental processes,
and its aberrant regulation results in genetic disorders or malignancies in
various tissues. Hyperactivation of Hh signaling is associated with lung cancer
development, and there have been extensive efforts to investigate how to control 
Hh signaling pathway and regulate cancer cell proliferation. In this study we
investigated a role of CDO, an Hh co-receptor, in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Inhibition of Hh signaling by SANT-1 or siCDO in lung cancer cells
reduced proliferation and tumorigenicity, along with the decrease in the
expression of the Hh components. Histological analysis with NSCLC mouse tissue
demonstrated that CDO was expressed in advanced grade of the cancer, and
precisely co-localized with GLI1. These data suggest that CDO is required for
proliferation and survival of lung cancer cells via Hh signaling.

PMCID: PMC4219762
PMID: 25369201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Oct 27;13(4):8767-75. doi: 10.4238/2014.October.27.18.

Expression analysis of Gli1 and Gli2 in different tissues and muscle-derived
cells of Qinchuan cattle.

Liu Y(1), Wang H(1), Cheng G(1), Jiang B(1), Zan L(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China zanlinsen@163.com.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates the differentiation of many kinds
of cells and plays a critical role in many embryonic and postnatal developmental 
processes. Gli1 and Gli2 are two transcription factors of the Hh signaling
pathway. In this study, we used quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction 
to detect the relative expression of Gli1 and Gli2 in 13 tissues from three
two-year-old purebred Qinchuan cattle, as well as in different cell populations
derived from muscle and different stages of myogenic differentiation of
myoblasts. The expression levels of Gli1 and Gli2 in muscle were the lowest of
the 13 tissues (P < 0.05), and they declined predominantly from preplate (pp)1 to
pp6 cells. However, the expression of Gli2 was elevated during myogenic
differentiation until the 6th day. We speculated that Hh signaling was negatively
activated in myocytes and quiescent myoblasts. The increased expression of Gli1
and Gli2 in the early days of myogenic differentiation suggested that Hh
signaling would be activated when the quiescent bovine myoblast was stimulated to
initiate myogenic differentiation.

PMID: 25366768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Scand J Urol. 2014 Dec;48(6):523-32. doi: 10.3109/21681805.2014.898336. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Sonic hedgehog and androgen signaling in tumor and stromal compartments drives
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer.

Yamamichi F(1), Shigemura K, Behnsawy HM, Meligy FY, Huang WC, Li X, Yamanaka K, 
Hanioka K, Miyake H, Tanaka K, Kawabata M, Shirakawa T, Fujisawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine , Kobe ,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, androgens and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) are related to prostate cancer (PCa) progression. The aim of
this study was to investigate how Shh and androgen [dihydrotestosterone (DHT)]
signaling act in prostate epithelial and stromal compartments and whether this
signaling pathway drives EMT and promotes PCa progression.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: LNCaP, normal prostate fibroblast (NPF) and
cancer-associated prostate fibroblast (CPF) cells were studied with DHT and/or
the Shh signaling inhibitor cyclopamine. Real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to evaluate the
expressions of a potential Shh target gene, osteonectin (ON) and EMT-associated
markers (E-cadherin, N-cadherin and vimentin). Immunohistochemical studies using 
PCa prostatectomy samples were performed to assess the expression levels of ON,
Gli-1, androgen receptor, Shh, E-cadherin, N-cadherin and vimentin.
RESULTS: While DHT enhanced cell proliferation in CPF more than LNCaP or NPF,
cyclopamine inhibited cell proliferation enhanced by DHT in CPF. Real-time RT-PCR
showed whereas both Shh and DHT induced N-cadherin and vimentin, DHT also induced
the expression of osteonectin in LNCaP and cyclopamine blocked these expressions 
in osteonectin, N-cadherin and vimentin (p = 0.0084, 0.0002 and 0.0373,
respectively). Immunohistochemistry showed that high expression of stromal, but, 
not epithelial, ON was significantly correlated with serum prostate-specific
antigen (PSA) (p = 0.031), and high expression of Gli-1 and low expression of
stromal ON with PSA recurrence (p = 0.0114 and p = 0.0005, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Shh and androgen signaling in prostate tumor and stromal
compartments drives EMT, and thus may play some role in PCa progression.
Cyclopamine may be one therapeutic strategy for PCa.

PMID: 25356787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):e1004604. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004604.
eCollection 2014.

Foxf genes integrate tbx5 and hedgehog pathways in the second heart field for
cardiac septation.

Hoffmann AD(1), Yang XH(1), Burnicka-Turek O(1), Bosman JD(1), Ren X(2), Steimle 
JD(1), Vokes SA(3), McMahon AP(4), Kalinichenko VV(2), Moskowitz IP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Pathology, and Human Genetics, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio,
United States of America. (3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, United States
of America. (4)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.

The Second Heart Field (SHF) has been implicated in several forms of congenital
heart disease (CHD), including atrioventricular septal defects (AVSDs).
Identifying the SHF gene regulatory networks required for atrioventricular
septation is therefore an essential goal for understanding the molecular basis of
AVSDs. We defined a SHF Hedgehog-dependent gene regulatory network using whole
genome transcriptional profiling and GLI-chromatin interaction studies. The
Forkhead box transcription factors Foxf1a and Foxf2 were identified as SHF
Hedgehog targets. Compound haploinsufficiency for Foxf1a and Foxf2 caused
atrioventricular septal defects, demonstrating the biological relevance of this
regulatory network. We identified a Foxf1a cis-regulatory element that bound the 
Hedgehog transcriptional regulators GLI1 and GLI3 and the T-box transcription
factor TBX5 in vivo. GLI1 and TBX5 synergistically activated transcription from
this cis-regulatory element in vitro. This enhancer drove reproducible expression
in vivo in the posterior SHF, the only region where Gli1 and Tbx5 expression
overlaps. Our findings implicate Foxf genes in atrioventricular septation,
describe the molecular underpinnings of the genetic interaction between Hedgehog 
signaling and Tbx5, and establish a molecular model for the selection of the SHF 
gene regulatory network for cardiac septation.

PMCID: PMC4214600
PMID: 25356765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35494-502. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.595348. Epub
2014 Oct 29.

The BET bromodomain inhibitor I-BET151 acts downstream of smoothened protein to
abrogate the growth of hedgehog protein-driven cancers.

Long J(1), Li B(1), Rodriguez-Blanco J(1), Pastori C(2), Volmar CH(2), Wahlestedt
C(3), Capobianco A(4), Bai F(1), Pei XH(5), Ayad NG(6), Robbins DJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Oncology Program, The DeWitt Daughtry Family Department of 
Surgery and. (2)the Center for Therapeutic Innovation, Department of Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
Florida 33136 and. (3)the Center for Therapeutic Innovation, Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136 and the Sylvester Cancer Center and. (4)From the
Molecular Oncology Program, The DeWitt Daughtry Family Department of Surgery and 
the Sylvester Cancer Center and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Miami, Miami, Florida 33136. (5)From the Molecular Oncology
Program, The DeWitt Daughtry Family Department of Surgery and the Sylvester
Cancer Center and. (6)the Center for Therapeutic Innovation, Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136 and the Sylvester Cancer Center and
nayad@med.miami.edu. (7)From the Molecular Oncology Program, The DeWitt Daughtry 
Family Department of Surgery and the Sylvester Cancer Center and Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miami, Florida 33136
drobbins@med.miami.edu.

Epigenetic enzymes modulate signal transduction pathways in different biological 
contexts. We reasoned that epigenetic regulators might modulate the Hedgehog (HH)
signaling pathway, a main driver of cell proliferation in various cancers
including medulloblastoma. To test this hypothesis, we performed an unbiased
small-molecule screen utilizing an HH-dependent reporter cell line (Light2
cells). We incubated Light2 cells with small molecules targeting different
epigenetic modulators and identified four histone deacetylase inhibitors and a
bromodomain and extra terminal domain (BET) protein inhibitor (I-BET151) that
attenuate HH activity. I-BET151 was also able to inhibit the expression of HH
target genes in Sufu(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts, in which constitutive Gli 
activity is activated in a Smoothened (Smo)-independent fashion, consistent with 
it acting downstream of Smo. Knockdown of Brd4 (which encodes one of the BET
proteins) phenocopies I-BET151 treatment, suggesting that Brd4 is a regulator of 
the HH signaling pathway. Consistent with this suggestion, Brd4 associates with
the proximal promoter region of the Gli1 locus, and does so in a manner that can 
be reversed by I-BET151. Importantly, I-BET151 also suppressed the HH
activity-dependent growth of medulloblastoma cells, in vitro and in vivo. These
studies suggest that BET protein modulation may be an attractive therapeutic
strategy for attenuating the growth of HH-dependent cancers, such as
medulloblastoma.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271234
PMID: 25355313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. F1000Res. 2014 Oct 8;3:238. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.5324.1. eCollection 2014.

Back to the drawing board: Re-thinking the role of GLI1 in pancreatic
carcinogenesis.

Hogenson T(1), Lauth M(2), Pasca diMagliano M(3), Fernandez-Zapico M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps University,
Marburg, 35043, Germany. (3)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-5936, USA.

Aberrant activation of the transcription factor GLI1, a central effector of the
Hedgehog (HH) pathway, is associated with several malignancies, including
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), one of most deadly human cancers. GLI1
has been described as an oncogene in PDAC, making it a promising target for drug 
therapy. Surprisingly, clinical trials targeting HH/GLI1 axis in advanced PDAC
were unsuccessful, leaving investigators questioning the mechanism behind these
failures. Recent evidence suggests the loss of GLI1 in the later stages of PDAC
may actually accelerate disease. This indicates GLI1 may play a dual role in
PDAC, acting as an oncogene in the early stages of disease and a tumor-suppressor
in the late stages.

PMCID: PMC4207242
PMID: 25352983  [PubMed]


269. Med Oncol. 2014 Dec;31(12):294. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0294-z. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Association between polymorphism of GLI1 gene SNP rs2228226 and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia in Chinese population.

Li YY(1), Tian T, Zhang R, Wang L, Xu J, Fan L, Li JY, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, 210029, China.

A non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (rs2228226C>G), in exon 12 
of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) (Q1100E), encodes a change from
glutamine to glutamic acid (Q1100E). The variant GLI1 protein exhibited reduced
transactivation function in vivo, decreasing the ability of activating hedgehog
signal, which has been proposed as an unfavorable prognostic marker in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The GLI1 Q1100E (NCBI SNP ID: rs2228226) genotypes in
155 CLL patients were detected by direct sequencing. The difference between
frequencies of GLI1 Q1100E genotype among CLL patients and controls was
statistically significant (p < 0.001). Logistic regression analysis revealed that
in comparison with G/G, GLI1 SNP1100 C/C genotype was associated with a
significantly increased risk of CLL (OR 3.787, 95% CI 1.814-7.907, p < 0.001).
Compared with the SNP1100 C/G genotype, C/C genotype significantly increased the 
risk of CLL (OR 3.860, 95% CI 1.827-8.153, p < 0.001). In addition, combining C/G
with G/G, C/C genotype also significantly increased the risk of CLL (OR 3.820,
95% CI 1.885-7.742, p < 0.001). The comparison between frequencies of C and G
allele of GLI1 was also statistically significant (p = 0.004). In the entire
cohort, SNP1100 genotypes were found in association with Binet stage (p = 0.045) 
and trisomy 12 (p = 0.036). By comparing C/C with G allele (C/G+G/G) genotype,
there was a significant correlation with trisomy 12 (p = 0.013). This study
demonstrated that GLI1 Q1100E polymorphism was closely associated with CLL. C/C
genotype contributes to the risk of developing CLL and correlates with trisomy
12. Patients with trisomy 12 are susceptible group of CLL.

PMID: 25352360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2015 Apr;39(2):135-46. doi: 10.3109/01913123.2014.970723.
Epub 2014 Oct 28.

Immunolocalization of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 in non melanoma skin
cancer.

Bakry OA(1), Samaka RM, Shoeib MA, Megahed DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Andrology and STDs, Faculty of Medicine, Menoufiya 
University , Shibeen El Kom , Egypt and.

Glioma-associated oncogene homolog (GLI)1 is involved in controlling cell
proliferation and angiogenesis. The aim of this work was to explore its possible 
role in non-melanoma skin cancer pathogenesis through its immunohistochemical
(IHC) expression in skin biopsies of these diseases and correlating this
expression with the clinico-pathological parameters of the studied cases.
Seventy-six cutaneous specimens were studied; 30 cases with basal cell carcinoma 
(BCC), 30 cases with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and 16 normal skin samples,
from age- and gender-matched subjects, as a control group. GLI1 was expressed in 
all BCC cases and in 60% of SCC cases. All SCC cases showed cytoplasmic, while
70% of BCC cases showed nucleocytoplasmic immunoreactivity. It was over expressed
in BCC and SCC compared to normal skin (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01 and 0.0006, respectively).
Higher Histo (H) score in BCC cases was significantly associated with female
gender (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04), multiple lesions, desmoplastic stromal reaction and stromal
angiogenesis (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 for all). Higher H score in SCC cases was significantly
associated with scalp location, nodular type, recurrent lesions, high tumor
grade, lymphovascular invasion (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004 for all), inflammatory stromal reaction
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01), lymph node involvement and absence of calcification (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001 for
both). In conclusion, GLI1 may play a role in BCC pathogenesis through its role
in cell proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis. Its upregulation and
cytoplasmic localization in SCC may suggest that its role in tumor pathogenesis
is through mechanisms other than Hedgehog pathway activation. Further studies are
needed to clarify the exact molecular basis of its oncogenic action.

PMID: 25350271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Oct 27;14:418. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-418.

Attenuation of early liver fibrosis by herbal compound "Diwu Yanggan" through
modulating the balance between epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

Shen X, Cheng S, Peng Y, Song H, Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatic Disease Institute, Hubei Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Wuhan 430061, People's Republic of China. lihanmin69@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Diwu Yanggan (DWYG) is a Chinese compound herbal preparation which
consists of five Chinese herbs. This study investigates the preventative effects 
of DWYG on liver fibrosis induced by carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and explores its
possible mechanisms of action.
METHODS: Liver fibrosis was induced in male Wistar rats by injecting a 50%
CCl4/soybean oil solution subcutaneously twice a week for six weeks. After six
weeks of treatment, serum aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase
(ALT) assay, liver tissue histological assessment and hepatic hydroxyproline
assay were respectively carried out to examine the effects of DWYG on liver
function and fibrosis degree. The impacts of DWYG on the expression levels of
epithelial marker E-cadherin, mesenchymal marker Vimentin, transforming growth
factor ß1 (TGF-ß1) and bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7) were further examined
by quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. In addition, the
differences of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway activity between DWYG-treated and 
DWYG-untreated fibrotic liver tissues were also evaluated by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Upon DWYG treatment, the serum levels of ALT and AST, hepatic
hydroxyproline content and the degree of fibrosis in CCl4-induced fibrotic model 
rats were dramatically declined. In accompany with the alleviation of the degree 
of fibrosis, DWYG treatment provoked the reversal of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) to mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in the fibrotic
liver tissues, which was characterized with the up-regulation expression of
E-cadherin and down-regulation expression of Vimentin. Furthermore, we observed
that the expression level of TGF-ß1 was reduced whereas the expression level of
BMP-7 was enhanced in liver tissues of DWYG-treated rats, therefore the
expression ratio of TGF-ß1/BMP-7 was dramatically decreased compared to
CCl4-induced fibrosis model rats. In addition, quantitative real-time RT-PCR and 
Western blot analysis demonstrated that after DWYG treatment the expressions of
Hh ligand Shh, receptor Smo and Ptc, and transcription factor Gli1 in
CCl4-induced fibrotic liver tissues were dramatically repressed.
CONCLUSIONS: DWYG demonstrates therapeutic potential to prevent liver fibrosis by
modulating the balance between EMT and MET through reducing the expression ratio 
of TGF-ß1/BMP-7 and inhibiting the excessive activation of Hh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4218991
PMID: 25345787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 23;5:e1481. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.446.

A Smoothened receptor agonist is neuroprotective and promotes regeneration after 
ischemic brain injury.

Chechneva OV(1), Mayrhofer F(2), Daugherty DJ(1), Krishnamurty RG(1), Bannerman
P(2), Pleasure DE(3), Deng W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, CA 95817, USA. (2)Institute for Pediatric
Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, 2425 Stockton Boulevard, 
Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. (3)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95817, USA [2] 
Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children,
2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. (4)1] Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California, Davis, CA 95817, USA [2] Institute for Pediatric Regenerative
Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, 2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento,
CA 95817, USA [3] Medical College, Hubei University of Arts and Science,
Xiangyang, Hubei 441053, China.

Ischemic stroke occurs as a result of blood supply interruption to the brain
causing tissue degeneration, patient disabilities or death. Currently, treatment 
of ischemic stroke is limited to thrombolytic therapy with a narrow time window
of administration. The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway has a fundamental
role in the central nervous system development, but its impact on neural cell
survival and tissue regeneration/repair after ischemic stroke has not been well
investigated. Here we report the neuroprotective properties of a small-molecule
agonist of the Shh co-receptor Smoothened, purmorphamine (PUR), in the middle
cerebral artery occlusion model of ischemic stroke. We found that intravenous
administration of PUR at 6<U+2009>h after injury was neuroprotective and restored
neurological deficit after stroke. PUR promoted a transient upregulation of
tissue-type plasminogen activator in injured neurons, which was associated with a
reduction of apoptotic cell death in the ischemic cortex. We also observed a
decrease in blood-brain barrier permeability after PUR treatment. At 14<U+2009>d
postinjury, attenuation of inflammation and reactive astrogliosis was found in
PUR-treated animals. PUR increased the number of newly generated neurons in the
peri-infarct and infarct area and promoted neovascularization in the ischemic
zone. Notably, PUR treatment did not significantly alter the ischemia-induced
level of Gli1, a Shh target gene of tumorigenic potential. Thus our study reports
a novel pharmacological approach for postischemic treatment using a
small-molecule Shh agonist, providing new insights into hedgehog
signaling-mediated mechanisms of neuroprotection and regeneration after stroke.

PMCID: PMC4649529
PMID: 25341035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Tumour Biol. 2015 Feb;36(2):1143-54. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2707-1. Epub 2014
Oct 21.

Inactivation of PTCH1 is associated with the development of cervical carcinoma:
clinical and prognostic implication.

Chakraborty C(1), Dutta S, Mukherjee N, Samadder S, Roychowdhury A, Roy A, Mondal
RK, Basu P, Roychoudhury S, Panda CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, 700026, India.

The aim of this study was to analyze the alterations of PTCH1 (deletion/promoter 
methylation/mutation/expression) during the development of cervical cancer
(CACX). For this purpose, deletion/methylation of PTCH1 were analyzed in HPV16
positive exfoliated asymptomatic cervical swabs (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>74), cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>32), CACX (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>174) samples, and two CACX
cell lines. The deletion of PTCH1 increased significantly from CIN (11.5%) to
stage I/II (42%) and comparable in stage III/IV (46%). Low frequency (14-16%) of 
PTCH1 methylation was seen in the asymptomatic exfoliated cervical cells and in
the normal epithelium adjacent to the tumor followed by a significant increase in
CIN (31%) to stage I/II (57%) and comparable in stage III/IV (58%). The overall
alterations (deletion/methylation) of PTCH1 significantly increased from CIN
(34%) to stage I/II (70%) and comparable in stage III/IV (69%). Interestingly, in
the normal epithelium, methylation of PTCH1 was high in basal/parabasal layers
(83%), followed by decrease in the spinous layer (33 %), and showed significant
inverse correlation with its expression. Reduced expression of PTCH1 seen in
tumors showed a significant association with its alterations
(deletion/methylation). The expression pattern of PTCH1 showed an inverse
correlation with the nuclear expression of GLI1 in the normal epithelium as well 
as in the tumors. High nuclear expression of HPV16, E6, and E7 were seen in
basal/parabasal layers of the normal epithelium and also in tumors. The PTCH1
alterations (deletion and/or methylation) in tumors and its methylation in
adjacent normal epithelium were associated with poor prognosis of patients. Thus,
our data suggests that activation of the Hedgehog pathway due to PTCH1
inactivation along with HPV infection is important in CACX development.

PMID: 25330948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 14;9(10):e109597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109597.
eCollection 2014.

Gli1 haploinsufficiency leads to decreased bone mass with an uncoupling of bone
metabolism in adult mice.

Kitaura Y(1), Hojo H(1), Komiyama Y(1), Takato T(2), Chung UI(3), Ohba S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sensory and Motor System Medicine, The University of Tokyo
Graduate School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Division of Clinical
Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Sensory and Motor System Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Division of
Clinical Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Bioengineering, The University of Tokyo
Graduate School of Engineering, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays important roles in various development processes.
This signaling is necessary for osteoblast formation during endochondral
ossification. In contrast to the established roles of Hh signaling in embryonic
bone formation, evidence of its roles in adult bone homeostasis is not complete. 
Here we report the involvement of Gli1, a transcriptional activator induced by Hh
signaling activation, in postnatal bone homeostasis under physiological and
pathological conditions. Skeletal analyses of Gli1+/- adult mice revealed that
Gli1 haploinsufficiency caused decreased bone mass with reduced bone formation
and accelerated bone resorption, suggesting an uncoupling of bone metabolism.
Hh-mediated osteoblast differentiation was largely impaired in cultures of
Gli1+/- precursors, and the impairment was rescued by Gli1 expression via
adenoviral transduction. In addition, Gli1+/- precursors showed premature
differentiation into osteocytes and increased ability to support
osteoclastogenesis. When we compared fracture healing between wild-type and
Gli1+/- adult mice, we found that the Gli1+/- mice exhibited impaired fracture
healing with insufficient soft callus formation. These data suggest that Gli1,
acting downstream of Hh signaling, contributes to adult bone metabolism, in which
this molecule not only promotes osteoblast differentiation but also represses
osteoblast maturation toward osteocytes to maintain normal bone homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4196929
PMID: 25313900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Gastroenterology. 2015 Jan;148(1):170-180.e6. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.10.006. 
Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Stromal Indian hedgehog signaling is required for intestinal adenoma formation in
mice.

Büller NV(1), Rosekrans SL(1), Metcalfe C(2), Heijmans J(1), van Dop WA(1),
Fessler E(3), Jansen M(4), Ahn C(2), Vermeulen JL(1), Westendorp BF(1),
Robanus-Maandag EC(5), Offerhaus GJ(6), Medema JP(3), D'Haens GR(1), Wildenberg
ME(1), de Sauvage FJ(2), Muncan V(1), van den Brink GR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research and Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Molecular Oncology Department, Genentech, South San Francisco,
California. (3)Laboratory for Experimental Oncology and Radiobiology (LEXOR),
Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center (AMC),
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and the London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (6)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (7)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research
and Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: g.r.vandenbrink@amc.nl.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Indian hedgehog (IHH) is an epithelial-derived signal in the
intestinal stroma, inducing factors that restrict epithelial proliferation and
suppress activation of the immune system. In addition to these rapid effects of
IHH signaling, IHH is required to maintain a stromal phenotype in which
myofibroblasts and smooth muscle cells predominate. We investigated the role of
IHH signaling during development of intestinal neoplasia in mice.
METHODS: Glioma-associated oncogene (Gli1)-CreERT2 and Patched (Ptch)-lacZ
reporter mice were crossed with Apc(Min) mice to generate
Gli1CreERT2-Rosa26-ZSGreen-Apc(Min) and Ptch-lacZ-Apc(Min) mice, which were used 
to identify hedgehog-responsive cells. Cyp1a1Cre-Apc (Apc(HET)) mice, which
develop adenomas after administration of ß-naphthoflavone, were crossed with mice
with conditional disruption of Ihh in the small intestine epithelium. Apc(Min)
mice were crossed with mice in which sonic hedgehog (SHH) was overexpressed
specifically in the intestinal epithelium. Intestinal tissues were collected and 
analyzed histologically and by immunohistochemistry and quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. We also analyzed levels of IHH
messenger RNA and expression of IHH gene targets in intestinal tissues from
patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (n = 18) or sessile serrated
adenomas (n = 15) and normal colonic tissue from control patients (n = 12).
RESULTS: Expression of IHH messenger RNA and its targets were increased in
intestinal adenomas from patients and mice compared with control colon tissues.
In mice, IHH signaling was exclusively paracrine, from the epithelium to the
stroma. Loss of IHH from Apc(HET) mice almost completely blocked adenoma
development, and overexpression of SHH increased the number and size of adenomas 
that developed. Loss of IHH from Apc(HET) mice changed the composition of the
adenoma stroma; cells that expressed a-smooth muscle actin or desmin were lost,
along with expression of cyclooxygenase-2, and the number of vimentin-positive
cells increased.
CONCLUSIONS: Apc mutant epithelial cells secrete IHH to maintain an intestinal
stromal phenotype that is required for adenoma development in mice.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25307863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 1;74(23):7024-36. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1346. Epub
2014 Oct 8.

Hedgehog signaling drives radioresistance and stroma-driven tumor repopulation in
head and neck squamous cancers.

Gan GN(1), Eagles J(2), Keysar SB(2), Wang G(2), Glogowska MJ(2), Altunbas C(1), 
Anderson RT(2), Le PN(2), Morton JJ(2), Frederick B(1), Raben D(1), Wang XJ(3),
Jimeno A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado. (3)Department of
Pathology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado. Charles
C. Gates Center for Stem Cell Biology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado. (4)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado. Charles C. Gates
Center for Stem Cell Biology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colorado. Department of Otolaryngology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado. Antonio.Jimeno@ucdenver.edu.

Local control and overall survival in patients with advanced head and neck
squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) remains dismal. Signaling through the Hedgehog (Hh) 
pathway is associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and activation
of the Hh effector transcription factor Gli1 is a poor prognostic factor in this 
disease setting. Here, we report that increased GLI1 expression in the leading
edge of HNSCC tumors is further increased by irradiation, where it contributes to
therapeutic inhibition. Hh pathway blockade with cyclopamine suppressed GLI1
activation and enhanced tumor sensitivity to radiotherapy. Furthermore,
radiotherapy-induced GLI1 expression was mediated in part by the mTOR/S6K1
pathway. Stroma exposed to radiotherapy promoted rapid tumor repopulation, and
this effect was suppressed by Hh inhibition. Our results demonstrate that Gli1
that is upregulated at the tumor-stroma intersection in HNSCC is elevated by
radiotherapy, where it contributes to stromal-mediated resistance, and that Hh
inhibitors offer a rational strategy to reverse this process to sensitize HNSCC
to radiotherapy.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4253591
PMID: 25297633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Jan;68(1):6-11. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2014-202434. Epub 2014
Oct 8.

Sonic hedgehog signalling proteins are frequently expressed in retinoblastoma and
are associated with aggressive clinicopathological features.

Choe JY(1), Yun JY(1), Jeon YK(2), Kim SH(3), Choung HK(4), Oh S(5), Park M(6),
Kim JE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University, College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Gyeonggi-Do, Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University,
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Yonsei Unversity, 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Seoul National
University Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of Biostatistics, Seoul 
National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Pathology,
Seoul National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (7)Department of
Pathology, Seoul National University, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.

AIMS: This study aimed to examine the expression of Sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signalling proteins in retinoblastoma and to evaluate its clinical significance.
METHODS: Seventy-nine enucleated retinoblastoma tumours were investigated
immunohistochemically using antibodies against SHH pathway proteins, such as SHH,
glioma-associated oncogene homologue (GLI) 1, GLI2, GLI3 and ABC binding cassette
G2 (ABCG2). Western blotting of SHH signalling proteins was performed in two
retinoblastoma cell lines.
RESULTS: SHH was expressed in most retinoblastoma cases (78 of 79, 98.7%), with
21 cases (26.6%) showing strong expression. GLI1 and GLI2 were also frequently
expressed: 67 of 78 cases (85.9%) and 71 of 77 cases (92.2%), respectively. GLI3,
a transcriptional repressor, was expressed at low levels in 23 of the 78 cases
(29.5%). High ABCG2 expression was found in 23 of the 78 cases (29.5%). High
expression levels of these proteins in retinoblastoma cell lines were confirmed
by western blotting. The expression of SHH was associated with advanced stages,
local invasion and metastasis (all p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: SHH signalling molecules were frequently expressed in retinoblastoma
tumour cells, and high SHH expression was closely related to an advanced disease 
status. Our results suggest that the SHH signalling pathway may play a role in
the progression of retinoblastoma.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25296932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Oncol Lett. 2014 Nov;8(5):2203-2208. Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Hedgehog-glioma-associated oncogene homolog-1 signaling in colon cancer cells and
its role in the celecoxib-mediated anti-cancer effect.

Wang H(1), Ke F(1), Zheng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210009, P.R. China.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is activated in numerous malignant tumors, but its role
in human colorectal cancer remains uncertain. Celecoxib, a selective
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, has been shown to exhibit chemoprevention in
colorectal cancer, however, the effects of celecoxib on Hh signaling remain
unknown. The current study presents an evaluation of Hh signaling in colon cancer
cell lines and the effects of celecoxib in vitro. Active Hh signaling was
observed in LoVo and HT-29 cells, with particularly high levels in the LoVo
cells. However, Hh signaling activity was absent in HCT-116 cells. Quantitative
polymerase chain reaction indicated that the expression of Hh receptor patched
homolog 1 (PTCH1) was absent in the LoVo cells, but that they exhibited high
levels of glioma-associated oncogene homolog-1 (GLI1) expression, while high
expression levels of PTCH1 and low expression levels of smoothened (SMO) and GLI1
were observed in the HCT-116 cells. The HCT-116 cells were extremely sensitive to
celecoxib, whereas the LoVo cells were resistant to the anticancer effect of the 
drug. Celecoxib downregulated the expression of GLI1 in the HCT-116 and HT-29
cells, but did not change the expression of GLI1 in the LoVo cells. The results
presented in this study indicated that the anticancer effect of celecoxib is
selective in colon cancer cells; celecoxib may target cancer cells via the
SMO-independent modulation of GLI1 activity, and Hh signaling may be significant 
in maintaining the malignant state of LoVo cells. These findings may aid in
improving our understanding of the carcinogenesis of colon cancer and the
development of novel approaches for the targeted therapy of this disease.

PMCID: PMC4186616
PMID: 25295109  [PubMed]


279. Development. 2014 Oct;141(20):3978-87. doi: 10.1242/dev.111906.

BMP-mediated induction of GATA4/5/6 blocks somitic responsiveness to SHH.

Daoud G(1), Kempf H(1), Kumar D(1), Kozhemyakina E(1), Holowacz T(1), Kim DW(1), 
Ionescu A(1), Lassar AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Bldg C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department
of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Bldg 
C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA
andrew_lassar@hms.harvard.edu.

The relative timing of SHH and BMP signals controls whether presomitic mesoderm
(PSM) cells will adopt either a chondrogenic or lateral plate mesoderm fate. Here
we document that SHH-mediated induction of Nkx3.2 maintains the competence of
somitic cells to initiate chondrogenesis in response to subsequent BMP signals by
repressing BMP-dependent induction of GATA genes. Conversely, administration of
BMP signals to PSM or forced expression of GATA family members in chick PSM
explants blocks induction of hedgehog-dependent gene expression. We demonstrate
that GATA factors can interact with Gli factors and can recruit the
transcriptional co-factor FOG1 (ZFPM1) to the regulatory region of the mouse Gli1
gene, repressing the induction of Gli1 by SHH by binding to both GATA and Gli
binding sites. Knockdown of FOG1 reverses the ability of GATA factors to repress 
Gli1 expression. Our findings uncover a novel role for GATA transcription factors
as repressors of hedgehog signaling, and document that NKX3.2 maintains the
ability of sclerotomal cells to express SHH transcriptional targets in the
presence of BMP signals by repressing the induction of Gata4/5/6.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197703
PMID: 25294942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. ASN Neuro. 2014 Sep 23;6(5). pii: 1759091414551782. doi:
10.1177/1759091414551782. Print 2014.

Comparison of cortical and white matter traumatic brain injury models reveals
differential effects in the subventricular zone and divergent Sonic hedgehog
signaling pathways in neuroblasts and oligodendrocyte progenitors.

Mierzwa AJ(1), Sullivan GM(2), Beer LA(1), Ahn S(3), Armstrong RC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA Center for Neuroscience and
Regenerative Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA Center for
Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the
Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA Program in Molecular and Cell Biology,
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Department of
Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA Center for Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine,
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA Program
in Molecular and Cell Biology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA regina.armstrong@usuhs.edu.

The regenerative capacity of the central nervous system must be optimized to
promote repair following traumatic brain injury (TBI) and may differ with the
site and form of damage. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) maintains neural stem cells and
promotes oligodendrogenesis. We examined whether Shh signaling contributes to
neuroblast (doublecortin) or oligodendrocyte progenitor (neural/glial antigen 2
[NG2]) responses in two distinct TBI models. Shh-responsive cells were heritably 
labeled in vivo using Gli1-CreER(T2);R26-YFP bitransgenic mice with tamoxifen
administration on Days 2 and 3 post-TBI. Injury to the cerebral cortex was
produced with mild controlled cortical impact. Yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)
cells decreased in cortical lesions. Total YFP cells increased in the
subventricular zone (SVZ), indicating Shh pathway activation in SVZ cells,
including doublecortin-labeled neuroblasts. The alternate TBI model produced
traumatic axonal injury in the corpus callosum. YFP cells decreased within the
SVZ and were rarely double labeled as NG2 progenitors. NG2 progenitors increased 
in the cortex, with a similar pattern in the corpus callosum. To further test the
potential of NG2 progenitors to respond through Shh signaling, Smoothened agonist
was microinjected into the corpus callosum to activate Shh signaling. YFP cells
and NG2 progenitors increased in the SVZ but were not double labeled. This result
indicates that either direct Smoothened activation in NG2 progenitors does not
signal through Gli1 or that Smoothened agonist acts indirectly to increase NG2
progenitors. Therefore, in all conditions, neuroblasts exhibited differential Shh
pathway utilization compared with oligodendrocyte progenitors. Notably, cortical 
versus white matter damage from TBI produced opposite responses of Shh-activated 
cells within the SVZ.

© The Author(s) 2014 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

PMCID: PMC4187014
PMID: 25290062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Oncol Lett. 2014 Nov;8(5):1973-1979. Epub 2014 Aug 12.

PKM2 regulates Gli1 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu Q(1), Liu X(2), Zheng X(3), Yao Y(3), Liu Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical 
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China ; Emergency
Department, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310014,
P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical 
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling and the pyruvate kinase isoenzyme M2 (PKM2 or M2-PK) are 
often involved in tumorigenesis and growth. Aberrant activation of Hh signaling
is found in a variety of malignancies. In tumor cells, PKM2 determines whether
glucose is used for the synthesis of cellular building blocks or the production
of lactate for energy regeneration; it associated with the Warburg effect. Gli1
is a downstream molecule of the Hh signaling pathway; however, the association
between Hh signaling and PKM2 is not well understood. In the present study, it
was identified that PKM2 and Gli1 expression levels were significantly elevated
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) compared with para-carcinoma. In vitro study
revealed that overexpression of PKM2 in HepG2 cells upregulated the transcription
of Gli1, while the ablation of PKM2 by shRNA caused the downregulation of Gli1
gene expression. Gli1 transcription could be rescued by PKM2. Overall, these
findings suggest that PKM2 is a regulator of Gli1 gene expression in HCC, and may
contribute to tumorigenesis through Gli1.

PMCID: PMC4186579
PMID: 25289083  [PubMed]


282. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Jan;55(1):51-61. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0395-3. Epub 2014
Oct 4.

Evaluation of cytotoxic properties of a cyclopamine glucuronide prodrug in rat
glioblastoma cells and tumors.

Bensalma S(1), Chadeneau C, Legigan T, Renoux B, Gaillard A, de Boisvilliers M,
Pinet-Charvet C, Papot S, Muller JM.

Author information: 
(1)"Récepteurs, Régulations et Cellules Tumorales" (2RCT) Group, Université de
Poitiers, 1 Rue Georges Bonnet, 86022, Poitiers, France,
souheyla.bensalma@univ-poitiers.fr.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain
tumor. Activation of the developmental hedgehog (Hh) pathway is observed in GBM, 
particularly in the so-called glioma stem cells (GSCs). An inhibitor of this
pathway is the steroidal alkaloid cyclopamine, an antagonist of the Hh coreceptor
Smoothened (SMO). To limit the toxicity of cyclopamine toward Hh-dependent
non-tumor cells, our group previously reported the synthesis of a prodrug (called
1b), designed to deliver cyclopamine in the presence of ß-glucuronidase, an
enzyme found in the necrotic area of GBM. Here, we aimed to analyze the in vitro,
ex vivo, and in vivo cytotoxic properties of this prodrug in the C6 rat GBM
cells. In the presence of ß-glucuronidase, the activated prodrug 1b was toxic and
downregulated expression of Gli1, a Hh target gene, in C6 cells and C6-GSCs, but 
not in normal rat astrocytes in which the Hh pathway is weakly activated. In the 
absence of ß-glucuronidase, prodrug 1b displayed no obvious toxicity toward rat
brain tissue explants while cyclopamine clearly affected brain tissue viability. 
When administered to rats bearing fluorescent C6-derived GBM, the prodrug 1b
reduced the tumor density more efficiently than cyclopamine. Prodrug 1b thus
appears as a promising concept to optimize confinement of cyclopamine
cytotoxicity within the tumors, with more limited effects in the surrounding
normal brain tissue.

PMID: 25280457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 1;20(23):5937-45. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1269.
Epub 2014 Oct 2.

Pilot clinical trial of hedgehog pathway inhibitor GDC-0449 (vismodegib) in
combination with gemcitabine in patients with metastatic pancreatic
adenocarcinoma.

Kim EJ(1), Sahai V(2), Abel EV(3), Griffith KA(4), Greenson JK(5), Takebe N(6),
Khan GN(1), Blau JL(5), Craig R(5), Balis UG(5), Zalupski MM(1), Simeone DM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department 
of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Translational 
Oncology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Translational
Oncology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (4)Center for
Cancer Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. (6)Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. (7)Translational Oncology Program, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. simeone@med.umich.edu.

PURPOSE: The hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is a key regulator in tumorigenesis 
of pancreatic adenocarcinoma and is upregulated in pancreatic adenocarcinoma
cancer stem cells (CSCs). GDC-0449 is an oral small-molecule inhibitor of the HH 
pathway. This study assessed the effect of GDC-0449-mediated HH inhibition in
paired biopsies, followed by combined treatment with gemcitabine, in patients
with metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Twenty-five patients were enrolled of which 23 underwent
core biopsies at baseline and following 3 weeks of GDC-0449. On day 29, 23
patients started weekly gemcitabine while continuing GDC-0449. We evaluated GLI1 
and PTCH1 inhibition, change in CSCs, Ki-67, fibrosis, and assessed tumor
response, survival and toxicity.
RESULTS: On pretreatment biopsy, 75% of patients had elevated sonic hedgehog
(SHH) expression. On posttreatment biopsy, GLI1 and PTCH1 decreased in 95.6% and 
82.6% of 23 patients, fibrosis decreased in 45.4% of 22, and Ki-67 in 52.9% of 17
evaluable patients. No significant changes were detected in CSCs pre- and
postbiopsy. The median progression-free and overall survival for all treated
patients were 2.8 and 5.3 months. The response and disease control rate was 21.7%
and 65.2%. No significant correlation was noted between CSCs, fibrosis, SHH,
Ki-67, GLI1, PTCH1 (baseline values or relative change on posttreatment biopsy), 
and survival. Grade = 3 adverse events were noted in 56% of patients.
CONCLUSION: We show that GDC-0449 for 3 weeks leads to downmodulation of GLI1 and
PTCH1, without significant changes in CSCs compared with baseline. GDC-0449 and
gemcitabine were not superior to gemcitabine alone in the treatment of metastatic
pancreatic cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4254161
PMID: 25278454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 29;9(9):e108248. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108248.
eCollection 2014.

Downregulation of the gli transcription factors regulator Kif7 facilitates cell
survival and migration of choriocarcinoma cells.

Ho J(1), Du Y(1), Wong OG(1), Siu MK(2), Chan KK(2), Cheung AN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, 
China. (3)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China;
Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong - Shenzhen Hospital,
Shenzhen, China.

The kinesin protein Kif7 has been recognized as an integral component of hedgehog
signalling. Aberrant activation of hedgehog signalling has been implicated in
many human solid tumours. Gestational trophoblastic disease includes frankly
malignant choriocarcinoma and potentially malignant hydatidiform mole. Here we
investigated the hedgehog signalling components expression profiles in
gestational trophoblastic disease. Downregulation of Gli1, Gli2, Gli3 and Kif7
was demonstrated in clinical samples of choriocarcinoma and hydatidiform moles as
well as choriocarcinoma cell lines when compared with normal placentas. Ectopic
expression of Kif7 in two choriocarcinoma cell lines JAR and JEG-3 led to a
decrease in cell growth and increase in apoptosis demonstrated by MTT and TUNEL
assays, respectively. Overexpression of Kif7 also led to suppressed cell
migration through transwell assay. In contrast, knocking down Kif7 in
HTR-8/SVneo, an immortalized trophoblast cell line, increased cell number over
time and increased the migratory ability of the cells. Taken together, Kif7 may
contribute to pathogenesis of gestational trophoblastic disease through enhancing
survival and promoting dissemination of trophoblasts.

PMCID: PMC4180749
PMID: 25265279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Jul;52(7):518-22.

[The role of Gli1 in the invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Sheng W(1), Dong M(2), Zhou J, Liu Q, Li X, Dong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, the First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, China. (2)Email: cmudongming@sohu.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role and possible mechanism of glioma-associated
oncogene-1 (Gli1) in regulating the cell invasion and migration of pancreatic
cancer cells.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time (qRT) -PCR was used to detect the effect of siRNA
interference on Gli1, murine double minute 2 (MDM2) and p53 genes. Cell invasion 
and migration assays were used to observe the effect of Gli1, MDM2 and p53
silence on cell invasion and migration in p53 wild-type Capan-2 pancreatic cancer
cells, respectively. Meanwhile, immunoblotting (IB) was used to detect the
protein level of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) -9, phospho-excelluar
signal-regulated kinase (pERK) and phosphorylation protein kinase B (pAKT) in
Gli1-silencing Capan-2 cells. The data were analyzed by paired t-test.
RESULTS: qRT-PCR showed that the expression of Gli1, MDM2 and p53 is
down-regulated 70.5% and 74.5%, 61.8% and 65.3%, and 73.8% and 78.2% after siRNA 
interference, compared with the mock and siRNA control groups, respectively. Cell
invasion (94 ± 8) and migration (143 ± 8) in p53 wild-type Capan-2 cells
transfected with Gli1siRNA were significantly decreased, compared with the siRNA 
control group (150 ± 7, 190 ± 10) (t = 6.584, P = 0.022; t = 8.266, P = 0.014) , 
while MDM2 silence inhibited cell invasion (experiment group:85 ± 12, control
group: 138 ± 6) and migration (experiment group: 127 ± 9, control group:180 ± 10)
in the same cells, respectively (t = 5.097, P = 0.036;t = 4.860, P = 0.040).
However, cell invasion (experiment group: 153 ± 11, control group: 106 ± 7) and
migration (experiment group: 209 ± 13, control group: 164 ± 8) in p53-silencing
Capan-2 cells were significantly enhanced (t = 4.669, P = 0.043; t = 4.990, P =
0.038). IB showed that Gli1 silence down-regulated MMP-9 but not pERK and pAKT
protein expression.
CONCLUSION: Gli1 might contribute to the cell invasion and migration in
pancreatic cancer via the regulation of MDM2, p53 and MMP-9 expression.

PMID: 25262609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2014 Sep;27(5 Suppl):1661-7.

Influence of smoothened siRNA on human esophageal cancer cell line EC9706
proliferation and apoptosis.

Hui W(1), Kuisheng C(2), Hongxin Z(2), Yanzhi D(3), Zhihua Z(2), Hu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, P. R. China. (3)Department of Pathology,
Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, P. R. China.

Apply siRNA technology to take Smoothened (Smo) genetic locus, the possibility of
Hhsignaling pathway, and also inhibits esophageal squamous carcinoma cell
proliferation and induction of apoptosis. Utilizing SmosiRNA transfected
esophageal squamous carcinoma EC9706 cells, adopting RT-PCR and Western blot
technology to detect Smo, Gli1 mRNA and protein expression in each group of
cells, employing MTT and FCM to detect the influence of SmosiRNA on cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Compared with each control group, after transfected 
SmosiRNA transfected cell for 24h, 48 h and 72 h, SmosiRNA and Gli1 mRNA
expression was evenly reduced obviously, Smo and Gli1 protein expression level
was also reduced clearly. SmosiRNA could inhabit cell proliferation, and even
promote cell apoptosis. Smo gene played a role in regulating and controlling
esophageal squamous carcinoma cell proliferation and apoptosis and Smo was likely
to be an effective target spot for tumor gene therapy.

PMID: 25262515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31513-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.606483. Epub 2014
Sep 24.

Gli1 protein regulates the S-phase checkpoint in tumor cells via Bid protein, and
its inhibition sensitizes to DNA topoisomerase 1 inhibitors.

Tripathi K(1), Mani C(1), Barnett R(1), Nalluri S(1), Bachaboina L(1), Rocconi
RP(1), Athar M(2), Owen LB(1), Palle K(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute,
University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama 36604 and. (2)the Department of
Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294.
(3)From the Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute,
University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama 36604 and
kpalle@health.southalabama.edu.

Aberrant expression of hedgehog molecules, particularly Gli1, is common in
cancers of many tissues and is responsible for their aggressive behavior and
chemoresistance. Here we demonstrate a novel and tumor-specific role for aberrant
Gli1 in the regulation of the S-phase checkpoint that suppresses replication
stress and resistance to chemotherapy. Inhibition of Gli1 in tumor cells induced 
replication stress-mediated DNA damage response, attenuated their clonogenic
potential, abrogated camptothecin (CPT)-induced Chk1 phosphorylation, and
potentiated its cytotoxicity. However, in normal fibroblasts, Gli1 siRNAs showed 
no significant changes in CPT-induced Chk1 phosphorylation. Further analysis of
ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR)/Chk1 signaling cascade genes
in tumor cells revealed an unexpected mechanism whereby Gli1 regulates
ATR-mediated Chk1 phosphorylation by transcriptional regulation of the BH3-only
protein Bid. Consistent with its role in DNA damage response, Bid down-regulation
in tumor cells abolished CPT-induced Chk1 phosphorylation and sensitized them to 
CPT. Correspondingly, Gli1 inhibition affected the expression of Bid and the
association of replication protein A (RPA) with the ATR- interacting protein
(ATRIP)-ATR complex, and this compromised the S-phase checkpoint. Conversely,
complementation of Bid in Gli1-deficient cells restored CPT-induced Chk1
phosphorylation. An in silico analysis of the Bid promoter identified a putative 
Gli1 binding site, and further studies using luciferase reporter assays confirmed
Gli1-dependent promoter activity. Collectively, our studies established a novel
connection between aberrant Gli1 and Bid in the survival of tumor cells and their
response to chemotherapy, at least in part, by regulating the S-phase checkpoint.
Importantly, our data suggest a novel drug combination of Gli1 and Top1
inhibitors as an effective therapeutic strategy in treating tumors that expresses
Gli1.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4223349
PMID: 25253693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 25;16(5):444. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0444-4.

Significance of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) expression in
claudin-low breast cancer and crosstalk with the nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF<U+03BA>B) pathway.

Colavito SA, Zou MR, Yan Q, Nguyen DX, Stern DF.

INTRODUCTION: The recently identified claudin-low subtype of breast cancer is
enriched for cells with stem-like and mesenchymal-like characteristics. This
subtype is most often triple-negative (lacking the estrogen and progesterone
receptors (ER, PR) as well as lacking epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)
amplification) and has a poor prognosis. There are few targeted treatment options
available for patients with this highly aggressive type of cancer.
METHODS: Using a high throughput inhibitor screen, we identified high expression 
of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), the effector molecule of the
hedgehog (Hh) pathway, as a critical determinant of cell lines that have
undergone an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT).
RESULTS: High GLI1 expression is a property of claudin-low cells and tumors and
correlates with markers of EMT and breast cancer stem cells. Knockdown of GLI1
expression in claudin-low cell lines resulted in reduced cell viability,
motility, clonogenicity, self-renewal, and reduced tumor growth of orthotopic
xenografts. We observed non-canonical activation of GLI1 in claudin-low and EMT
cell lines, and identified crosstalk with the NF<U+03BA>B pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: This work highlights the importance of GLI1 in the maintenance of
characteristics of metastatic breast cancer stem cells. Remarkably, treatment
with an inhibitor of the NF<U+03BA>B pathway reproducibly reduces GLI1 expression and
protein levels. We further provide direct evidence for the binding of the NF<U+03BA>B
subunit p65 to the GLI1 promoter in both EMT and claudin-low cell lines. Our
results uncover crosstalk between NF<U+03BA>B and GLI1 signals and suggest that
targeting these pathways may be effective against the claudin-low breast cancer
subtype.

PMCID: PMC4303124
PMID: 25252859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cerebellum. 2015 Apr;14(2):72-85. doi: 10.1007/s12311-014-0596-x.

Exogenous Sonic hedgehog modulates the pool of GABAergic interneurons during
cerebellar development.

De Luca A(1), Parmigiani E, Tosatto G, Martire S, Hoshino M, Buffo A, Leto K,
Rossi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience Rita Levi Montalcini, University of Turin, via
Cherasco 15, 10026, Turin, Italy.

All cerebellar GABAergic interneurons were derived from a common pool of
precursor cells residing in the embryonic ventricular zone (VZ) and migrating in 
the prospective white matter (PWM) after birth, where both intrinsic and
extrinsic factors contribute to regulate their amplification. Among the
environmental factors, we focused on Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a morphogen well known
to regulate neural progenitor cell proliferation. We asked if and how exogenous
Shh treatment affects the lineage of cerebellar GABAergic interneurons. To
address these issues, exogenous Shh was administered to embryonic and postnatal
organotypic slices. We found that Shh is able to expand the pool of interneuron
progenitors residing in the embryonic epithelium and in the postnatal PWM. In
particular, Shh signalling pathway was highly mitogenic at early developmental
stages of interneuron production, whereas its effect decreased after the first
postnatal week. Gene expression analysis of sorted cells and in situ
hybridization further showed that immature interneurons express both the Shh
receptor patched and the Shh target gene Gli1. Thus, within the interneuron
lineage, Shh might exert regulatory functions also in postmitotic cells. On the
whole, our data enlighten the role of Shh during cerebellar maturation and
further broaden our knowledge on the amplification mechanisms of the interneuron 
progenitor pool.

PMID: 25245619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2015 Oct;23(10):3055-61. doi:
10.1007/s00167-014-3306-9. Epub 2014 Sep 20.

In vivo length change patterns of the medial and lateral collateral ligaments
along the flexion path of the knee.

Hosseini A(1), Qi W(1,)(2), Tsai TY(1), Liu Y(2), Rubash H(1), Li G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA,
02114, USA. (2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China. (3)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department 
of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55
Fruit Street, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA, 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org.

PURPOSE: The knowledge of the function of the collateral ligaments-i.e.,
superficial medial collateral ligament (sMCL), deep medial collateral ligament
(dMCL) and lateral collateral ligament (LCL)-in the entire range of knee flexion 
is important for soft tissue balance during total knee arthroplasty (TKA). The
objective of this study was to investigate the length changes of different
portions (anterior, middle and posterior) of the sMCL, dMCL and LCL during in
vivo weightbearing flexion from full extension to maximal knee flexion.
METHODS: Using a dual fluoroscopic imaging system, eight healthy knees were
imaged while performing a lunge from full extension to maximal flexion. The
length changes of each portion of the collateral ligaments were measured along
the flexion path of the knee.
RESULTS: All anterior portions of the collateral ligaments were shown to have
increasing length with flexion except that of the sMCL, which showed a reduction 
in length at high flexion. The middle portions showed minimal change in lengths
except that of the sMCL, which showed a consistent reduction in length with
flexion. All posterior portions showed reduction in lengths with flexion.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicated that every portion of the ligaments may play
important roles in knee stability at different knee flexion range. The soft
tissue releasing during TKA may need to consider the function of the ligament
portions along the entire flexion path including maximum flexion.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: III.

PMCID: PMC4368498 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25239504  [PubMed - in process]


291. Dev Biol. 2014 Nov 15;395(2):255-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.09.011. Epub 2014 
Sep 18.

Mouse limb skeletal growth and synovial joint development are coordinately
enhanced by Kartogenin.

Decker RS(1), Koyama E(2), Enomoto-Iwamoto M(2), Maye P(3), Rowe D(3), Zhu S(4), 
Schultz PG(5), Pacifici M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Program in Pediatric Orthopaedics, Division of
Orthopaedic Surgery, The Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3615 Civic Center
Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: DeckerR@email.chop.edu.
(2)Translational Research Program in Pediatric Orthopaedics, Division of
Orthopaedic Surgery, The Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3615 Civic Center
Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Department of Reconstructive Sciences,
University of Connecticut Health Center School of, Dental Medicine, 263
Farmington Ave, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (4)California Institute for Biomedical
Research, 11119 North Torrey Pines Road, Suite 100, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(5)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Limb development requires the coordinated growth of several tissues and
structures including long bones, joints and tendons, but the underlying
mechanisms are not wholly clear. Recently, we identified a small drug-like
molecule - we named Kartogenin (KGN) - that greatly stimulates chondrogenesis in 
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and enhances cartilage repair in
mouse osteoarthritis (OA) models. To determine whether limb developmental
processes are regulated by KGN, we tested its activity on committed preskeletal
mesenchymal cells from mouse embryo limb buds and whole limb explants. KGN did
stimulate cartilage nodule formation and more strikingly, boosted digit
cartilaginous anlaga elongation, synovial joint formation and interzone
compaction, tendon maturation as monitored by ScxGFP, and interdigit
invagination. To identify mechanisms, we carried out gene expression analyses and
found that several genes, including those encoding key signaling proteins, were
up-regulated by KGN. Amongst highly up-regulated genes were those encoding
hedgehog and TGFß superfamily members, particularly TFGß1. The former response
was verified by increases in Gli1-LacZ activity and Gli1 mRNA expression.
Exogenous TGFß1 stimulated cartilage nodule formation to levels similar to KGN,
and KGN and TGFß1 both greatly enhanced expression of lubricin/Prg4 in articular 
superficial zone cells. KGN also strongly increased the cellular levels of
phospho-Smads that mediate canonical TGFß and BMP signaling. Thus, limb
development is potently and harmoniously stimulated by KGN. The growth effects of
KGN appear to result from its ability to boost several key signaling pathways and
in particular TGFß signaling, working in addition to and/or in concert with the
filamin A/CBFß/RUNX1 pathway we identified previously to orchestrate overall limb
development. KGN may thus represent a very powerful tool not only for OA therapy,
but also limb regeneration and tissue repair strategies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4253021
PMID: 25238962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 17;9(9):e107616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107616.
eCollection 2014.

A synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-Im inhibits tumorsphere formation by regulating
stem cell signaling pathways in triple-negative breast cancer.

So JY(1), Lin JJ(1), Wahler J(1), Liby KT(2), Sporn MB(2), Suh N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Biology, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire, 
United States of America. (3)Department of Chemical Biology, Ernest Mario School 
of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey,
United States of America; Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, 
New Jersey, United States of America.

Triple-negative breast cancer is associated with poor prognosis because of a high
rate of tumor recurrence and metastasis. Previous studies demonstrated that the
synthetic triterpenoid, CDDO-Imidazolide (CDDO-Im) induced cell cycle arrest and 
apoptosis in triple-negative breast cancer. Since a small subpopulation of cancer
stem cells has been suggested to be responsible for drug resistance and
metastasis of tumors, our present study determined whether the effects of CDDO-Im
in triple-negative breast cancer are due to the inhibition of a cancer stem cell 
subpopulation. CDDO-Im treatment markedly induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M-phase
and apoptosis in the triple-negative breast cancer cell lines, SUM159 and
MDA-MB-231. Because SUM159 cells were more sensitive to CDDO-Im than MDA-MB-231
cells, the effects of CDDO-Im on the cancer stem cell subpopulation were further 
investigated in SUM159 cells. SUM159 cells formed tumorspheres in culture, and
the cancer stem cell subpopulation, CD24-/EpCAM+ cells, was markedly enriched in 
SUM159 tumorspheres. The CD24-/EpCAM+ cells in SUM159 tumorspheres were
significantly inhibited by CDDO-Im treatment. CDDO-Im also significantly
decreased sphere forming efficiency and tumorsphere size in both primary and
secondary sphere cultures. PCR array of stem cell signaling genes showed that
expression levels of many key molecules in the stem cell signaling pathways, such
as Notch, TGF-ß/Smad, Hedgehog and Wnt, were significantly down-regulated by
CDDO-Im in SUM159 tumorspheres. Protein levels of Notch receptors (c-Notch1,
Notch1 and Notch3), TGF-ß/Smad (pSmad2/3) and Hedgehog downstream effectors
(GLI1) also were markedly reduced by CDDO-Im. In conclusion, the present study
demonstrates that the synthetic triterpenoid, CDDO-Im, is a potent anti-cancer
agent against triple-negative breast cancer cells by targeting the cancer stem
cell subpopulation.

PMCID: PMC4167992
PMID: 25229616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):7065-80.

Proteasome inhibition reverses hedgehog inhibitor and taxane resistance in
ovarian cancer.

Steg AD(1), Burke MR(2), Amm HM(3), Katre AA(4), Dobbin ZC(4), Jeong DH(5),
Landen CN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL. McWhorter School of Pharmacy, Samford University, Birmingham, AL.
These authors contributed equally to this work. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. These authors
contributed equally to this work. (3)Institute of Oral Health Research,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. (4)Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Busan Paik Hospital, Inje University, 
Gimhae, South Korea. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA. These authors contributed equally to this work.

The goal of this study was to determine whether combined targeted therapies,
specifically those against the Notch, hedgehog and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways,
could overcome ovarian cancer chemoresistance. Chemoresistant ovarian cancer
cells were exposed to gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSI-I, Compound E) or the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, alone and in combination with the hedgehog
antagonist, LDE225. Bortezomib, alone and in combination with LDE225, was
evaluated for effects on paclitaxel efficacy. Cell viability and cell cycle
analysis were assessed by MTT assay and propidium iodide staining, respectively. 
Proteasome activity and gene expression were determined by luminescence assay and
qPCR, respectively. Studies demonstrated that GSI-I, but not Compound E,
inhibited proteasome activity, similar to bortezomib. Proteasome inhibition
decreased hedgehog target genes (PTCH1, GLI1 and GLI2) and increased LDE225
sensitivity in vitro. Bortezomib, alone and in combination with LDE225, increased
paclitaxel sensitivity through apoptosis and G2/M arrest. Expression of the
multi-drug resistance gene ABCB1/MDR1 was decreased and acetylation of a-tubulin,
a marker of microtubule stabilization, was increased following bortezomib
treatment. HDAC6 inhibitor tubastatin-a demonstrated that microtubule effects are
associated with hedgehog inhibition and sensitization to paclitaxel and LDE225.
These results suggest that proteasome inhibition, through alteration of
microtubule dynamics and hedgehog signaling, can reverse taxane-mediated
chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4196184
PMID: 25216523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Apr;230(4):922-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24823.

Novel hedgehog agonists promote osteoblast differentiation in mesenchymal stem
cells.

Nakamura T(1), Naruse M, Chiba Y, Komori T, Sasaki K, Iwamoto M, Fukumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Oral Health and Development
Sciences, Sendai, Japan; Liaison Center for Innovative Dentistry, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) family members are involved in multiple cellular processes
including proliferation, migration, differentiation, and cell fate determination.
Recently, the novel Hh agonists Hh-Ag 1.3 and 1.7 were identified in a
high-throughput screening of small molecule compounds that activate the
expression of Gli1, a target of Hh signaling. This study demonstrates that Hh-Ag 
1.3 and 1.7 strongly activate the expression of endogenous Gli1 and promote
osteoblast differentiation in the mesenchymal stem cell line C3H10T1/2. Both
compounds stimulated alkaline phosphatase activity in a dose-dependent manner,
and induced osteoblast marker gene expression in C3H10T1/2 cells, which indicated
that they had acquired an osteoblast identity. Of the markers, the expression of 
osterix/Sp7, a downstream target of runt-related transcription factor (Runx)2,
was induced by Hh-Ag 1.7, which also rescued the osteoblast differentiation
defect of RD-127, a mesenchymal cell line from Runx2-deficient mice. Hh-Ags also 
activated canonical Wnt signaling and synergized with low doses of BMP-2 to
enhance osteoblastic potential. Thus, Hh-Ag 1.7 could be useful for bone healing 
in individuals with abnormalities in osteogenesis, such as osteoporosis patients 
and the elderly, and can contribute to the development of novel therapeutics for 
the treatment of bone fractures and defects.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25215620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 28;9(8):e106106. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106106.
eCollection 2014.

Gli regulates MUC5AC transcription in human gastrointestinal cells.

Kageyama-Yahara N(1), Yamamichi N(1), Takahashi Y(1), Nakayama C(1), Shiogama
K(2), Inada K(2), Konno-Shimizu M(1), Kodashima S(1), Fujishiro M(1), Tsutsumi
Y(2), Ichinose M(3), Koike K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (2)1st Department of Pathology, Fujita Health
University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. (3)Second Department of
Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical College, Kimiidera, Wakayama, Japan.

MUC5AC is a well-known gastric differentiation marker, which has been frequently 
used for the classification of stomach cancer. Immunohistochemistry revealed that
expression of MUC5AC decreases accompanied with increased malignant property of
gastric mucosa, which further suggests the importance of MUC5AC gene regulation. 
Alignment of the 5'-flanking regions of MUC5AC gene of 13 mammal species denoted 
high homology within 200 bp upstream of the coding region. Luciferase activities 
of the deletion constructs containing upstream 451 bp or shorter fragments
demonstrated that 15 bp region between -111 and -125 bp plays a critical role on 
MUC5AC promoter activity in gastrointestinal cells. We found a putative
Gli-binding site in this 15 bp sequence, and named this region a highly conserved
region containing a Gli-binding site (HCR-Gli). Overexpression of Gli homologs
(Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) clearly enhanced MUC5AC promoter activity. Exogenous
modulation of Gli1 and Gli2 also affected the endogenous MUC5AC gene expression
in gastrointestinal cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that
Gli1 directly binds to HCR-Gli: Gli regulates MUC5AC transcription via direct
protein-DNA interaction. Conversely, in the 30 human cancer cell lines and
various normal tissues, expression patterns of MUC5AC and Gli did not coincide
wholly: MUC5AC showed cell line-specific or tissue-specific expression whereas
Gli mostly revealed ubiquitous expression. Luciferase promoter assays suggested
that the far distal MUC5AC promoter region containing upstream 4010 bp seems to
have several enhancer elements for gene transcription. In addition, treatments
with DNA demethylation reagent and/or histone deacetylase inhibitor induced
MUC5AC expression in several cell lines that were deficient in MUC5AC expression.
These results indicated that Gli is necessary but not sufficient for MUC5AC
expression: namely, the multiple regulatory mechanisms should work in the distal 
promoter region of MUC5AC gene.

PMCID: PMC4148389
PMID: 25166306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Nov;135(2):305-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.08.026. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Prognostic impact of the expression of Hedgehog proteins in cervical carcinoma
FIGO stages I-IV treated with radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy.

Bohr Mordhorst L(1), Ahlin C(1), Sorbe B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Örebro University Hospital, SE-701 85 Örebro, Sweden. 
(2)Department of Oncology, Örebro University Hospital, SE-701 85 Örebro, Sweden. 
Electronic address: bengt.sorbe@orebroll.se.

OBJECTIVE: Hedgehog signaling proteins were assessed in patients with cervical
carcinoma receiving chemoradiation. Associations between five Hedgehog proteins
and prognosis were studied.
METHODS: In all, 131 cases of cervical carcinomas (FIGO stages I-IV) were
immunohistochemically (IHC) analyzed for Patched (PTCH), Smoothened (SMO), and
GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 protein expression. Associations between Hedgehog protein
expressions, clinicopathological factors, and clinical outcome data were
examined.
RESULTS: Positive IHC staining for the five Hedgehog proteins was recorded in 8% 
to 37% of the tumor cells. The highest frequency was noted for SMO and the lowest
for GLI1. There was a significant association between low SMO- and
GLI2-expression and KRAS-mutation. Tumors with overexpressed SMO had a higher
frequency of residual tumor or local recurrences than tumors with low SMO
expression. Patients with tumors expressing PTCH in more than 75% of the cells
had significantly (P=0.023) better recurrence-free survival than patients with
tumors with low expression. The opposite situation was true for SMO. For GLI2,
there was a statistically significant difference with regard to overall (P=0.004)
and distant (P=0.015) relapse rate for groups with expression of GLI2 in the
range of 5-25% compared to higher rates.
CONCLUSIONS: A predictive and prognostic value was found for PTCH, SMO, and GLI2 
with regard to residual carcinoma, local recurrences, and for GLI2 distant
relapses. The Hedgehog signaling pathway also seems to play an important role in 
cervical carcinogenesis together with HPV16-infection and KRAS-mutation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25158038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 2;111(35):12871-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1323292111. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Primary cilia signaling mediates intraocular pressure sensation.

Luo N(1), Conwell MD(1), Chen X(2), Kettenhofen CI(3), Westlake CJ(3), Cantor
LB(1), Wells CD(4), Weinreb RN(5), Corson TW(6), Spandau DF(7), Joos KM(8),
Iomini C(9), Obukhov AG(2), Sun Y(10).

Author information: 
(1)Glick Eye Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202; Department of Ophthalmology. (2)Department of Cellular and Integrative
Physiology. (3)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, 
MD 21702-1201; (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. (5)Department
of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037;
(6)Glick Eye Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202; Department of Ophthalmology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology. (7)Department of Dermatology, and. (8)Vanderbilt Eye Institute,
Nashville, TN 37212; and. (9)Department of Ophthalmology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029. (10)Glick Eye Institute, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202; Department of Ophthalmology, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Dermatology, and
sunyo@iupui.edu.

Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked congenital disease that presents with congenital
cataracts and glaucoma, as well as renal and cerebral dysfunction. OCRL, an
inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase, is mutated in Lowe syndrome. We previously 
showed that OCRL is involved in vesicular trafficking to the primary cilium.
Primary cilia are sensory organelles on the surface of eukaryotic cells that
mediate mechanotransduction in the kidney, brain, and bone. However, their
potential role in the trabecular meshwork (TM) in the eye, which regulates
intraocular pressure, is unknown. Here, we show that TM cells, which are
defective in glaucoma, have primary cilia that are critical for response to
pressure changes. Primary cilia in TM cells shorten in response to fluid flow and
elevated hydrostatic pressure, and promote increased transcription of TNF-a,
TGF-ß, and GLI1 genes. Furthermore, OCRL is found to be required for primary
cilia to respond to pressure stimulation. The interaction of OCRL with transient 
receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4), a ciliary mechanosensory channel,
suggests that OCRL may act through regulation of this channel. A novel
disease-causing OCRL allele prevents TRPV4-mediated calcium signaling. In
addition, TRPV4 agonist GSK 1016790A treatment reduced intraocular pressure in
mice; TRPV4 knockout animals exhibited elevated intraocular pressure and
shortened cilia. Thus, mechanotransduction by primary cilia in TM cells is
implicated in how the eye senses pressure changes and highlights OCRL and TRPV4
as attractive therapeutic targets for the treatment of glaucoma. Implications of 
OCRL and TRPV4 in primary cilia function may also shed light on mechanosensation 
in other organ systems.

PMCID: PMC4156748
PMID: 25143588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. World J Surg Oncol. 2014 Aug 21;12:268. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-12-268.

The effects of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway components on non-small-cell lung
cancer progression and clinical outcome.

Hwang J, Kang MH, Yoo YA, Quan YH, Kim HK(1), Oh SC, Choi YH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology/Hematology, Departments of Internal Medicine, Korea
University Guro Hospital, Korea University College of Medicine, 97 Guro-dong kil,
Guro-ku, Seoul 152-703, Republic of Korea. kimhyunkoo@korea.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Researchers in recent studies have reported that the sonic hedgehog
(Shh) signaling pathway plays a crucial role during tumorigenesis, angiogenesis
and cellular differentiation. We investigated the clinical and pathological
significances of the Shh pathway and of its lymphangiogenic components in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), namely, Shh, glioma-associated oncogene
homolog zinc finger protein 1 (Gli1), lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan
receptor 1 (LYVE-1) and vascular endothelial growth factor D (VEGF-D).
METHODS: The expression of Shh, Gli1, LYVE-1 and VEGF-D in primary NSCLC tissue
from 40 patients was examined using immunohistochemical assays, and relationships
between expression and clinicopathological data, such as age, gender, histology, 
tumor size, nodal stage, visceral pleural invasion, lymphatic thromboembolism,
recurrence and overall survival were investigated.
RESULTS: Of the 40 specimens examined, 25 (62.5%), 20 (50.0%), 11 (27.5%) and 20 
(50.0%) were positive for Shh, Gli1, LYVE-1 or VEGF-D expression, respectively.
The expression of Gli1 and LYVE-1 were significantly associated (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011), and 
Shh and LYVE-1 expression was related to visceral pleural invasion and lymphatic 
thromboembolism, respectively (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Shh expression levels compared on
survival curves were statistically significant in univariate logrank analysis
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020). However, other clinicopathological factors did not reveal any
statistical significance in univariate and multivariate analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this the first report of the relationship between 
components of the Shh signaling pathway and prognosis in NSCLC. The expression of
Shh, Gli1 and LYVE-1 was found to be associated with clinicopathological factors 
and survival. Thus, the overexpression of the Shh signaling pathway could serve
as a predictor of malignant behavior, including lymphangiogenesis, in NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4155123
PMID: 25141859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 Apr;52(4):418-28. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0108OC.

Reemergence of hedgehog mediates epithelial-mesenchymal crosstalk in pulmonary
fibrosis.

Hu B(1), Liu J, Wu Z, Liu T, Ullenbruch MR, Ding L, Henke CA, Bitterman PB, Phan 
SH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan; and.

Hedgehog signaling plays important roles in cell development and differentiation.
In this study, the ability of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) to induce myofibroblast
differentiation was analyzed in isolated human lung fibroblasts, and its in vivo 
significance was evaluated in rodent bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. The
results showed that SHH could induce myofibroblast differentiation in human lung 
fibroblasts in a Smo- and Gli1-dependent manner. Gel shift analysis, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, and site-directed mutagenesis revealed that a Gli1
binding consensus in the a-SMA gene promoter was important for mediating
SHH-induced myofibroblast differentiation. Analysis of Hedgehog reemergence in
vivo revealed that of all three Hedgehog isoforms, only SHH was significantly
induced in bleomycin-injured lung along with Gli1. The induction of SHH was only 
noted in epithelial cells, and its expression was undetectable in lung
fibroblasts or macrophages. transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß induced SHH
significantly in cultured alveolar epithelial cells, whereas SHH induced TGF-ß in
lung fibroblasts. Pulmonary fibrosis and a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) expression
were significantly reduced in mice that were Smo deficient only in type I
collagen-expressing cells. Thus, the reemergence of SHH in epithelial cells could
result in induction of myofibroblast differentiation in a Smo-dependent manner
and subsequent Gli1 activation of the a-SMA promoter.

PMCID: PMC4491120
PMID: 25140582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. BMC Cancer. 2014 Aug 18;14:600. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-600.

The impact of S6K1 kinase on neuroblastoma cell proliferation is independent of
GLI1 signaling.

Diao Y, Rahman MF, Villegas VE, Wickström M, Johnsen JI, Zaphiropoulos PG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden. peter.zaphiropoulos@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: The crosstalk between Hedgehog (HH) signaling and other signal
transduction cascades has been extensively studied in different cancers. In
neuroblastoma, mTOR/S6K1 signaling is known to have a role in the development of 
this disease and recent evidence also implicates the HH pathway. Moreover, S6K1
kinase has been shown to phosphorylate GLI1, the effector of HH signaling,
promoting GLI1 transcriptional activity and oncogenic function in esophageal
adenocarcinoma. In this study, we examined the possible interplay of S6K1 and
GLI1 signaling in neuroblastoma.
METHODS: siRNA knockdowns were used to suppress S6K1 and GLI1 expression, and the
siRNA effects were validated by real-time PCR and Western blotting. Cell
proliferation analysis was performed with the EdU incorporation assay. Cytotoxic 
analysis with increasing concentrations of PI3K/mTOR and GLI inhibitors,
individually and in combination, was used to determine drug response.
RESULTS: Although knockdown of either S6K1 or GLI1 reduces the cellular
proliferation of neuroblastoma cells, there is little effect of S6K1 on the
expression of GLI1 mRNA and protein and on the capacity of GLI1 to activate
target genes. No detectable phosphorylation of GLI1 is observed prior or
following S6K1 knockdown. GLI1 overexpression can not rescue the reduced
proliferation elicited by S6K1 knockdown. Moreover, inhibitors of PI3K/mTOR and
GLI signaling reduced neuroblastoma cell growth, but no additional growth
inhibitory effects were detected when the two classes of drugs were combined.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that the impact of S6K1 kinase on
neuroblastoma cells is not mediated through modulation of GLI1
expression/activity.

PMCID: PMC4152578
PMID: 25134527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Prostate. 2014 Oct;74(14):1400-10. doi: 10.1002/pros.22855. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Determinants of Gli2 co-activation of wildtype and naturally truncated androgen
receptors.

Li N(1), Chen M, Truong S, Yan C, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Gli2, a transcription factor in the Hedgehog pathway, is
overexpressed in castrate-resistant prostate cancer (PCa). Previously we showed
that Gli2 overexpression increased transcriptional activity of androgen receptor 
(AR) and conferred androgen growth-independence to normally growth-dependent PCa 
cells. Here we localized the regions of AR-Gli2 protein interaction and
determined the domains within Gli2 needed for AR co-activation.
METHODS: Co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pulldown assays were used to define
AR-Gli binding domains. Co-activation assays using androgen-responsive promoter
reporters were used to define Gli2 regions needed for AR co-activation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were used to confirm nuclear interactions of
Gli2 with AR in PCa cells.
RESULTS: The Gli2 C-terminal domain (CTD) is sufficient for AR co-activation. Two
elements within the CTD were required: (1) an AR binding domain within aa628-897;
and (2) at least part of the Gli2 transactivation domain within aa1252-1586. In
turn, Gli2 binds the tau5/AF5 ligand-independent activation domain in the AR
N-terminus. Mutations in the WxxLF motif in tau5/AF5 greatly diminished binding
to Gli2-CTD. Gli2 interaction with AR tau5/AF5 was further substantiated by the
ability of Gli2/Gli2-CTD to co-activate truncated AR splice variants
(AR-V7/ARV567es). ChIP assays confirmed that Gli2 associates with chromatin at
androgen response elements found near androgen-responsive genes in LNCaP cells.
These assays also showed that AR associates with chromatin containing a
Gli-response element near a Gli-responsive gene.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that Gli2 overexpression in PCa cells might
support development of castration resistant PCa through AR co-activation and
suggests that AR might modulate transcription from Gli2.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25132524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Jul 15;7(7):1786-93. eCollection 2014.

Aberrant sonic hedgehog signaling pathway and STAT3 activation in papillary
thyroid cancer.

Dong W(1), Cui J(1), Tian X(1), He L(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang P(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thyroid Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University Shenyang, China.

The sonic hedgehog (SHH) and STAT3 signaling pathways play important roles during
carcinogenesis with possible interaction. To determine the association of the
activation of SHH signaling pathway and STAT3 pathway in carcinogenesis of human 
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), we examined the expression of SHH signaling
pathway molecules including SHH, Patched (PTCH), Smoothened (SMO) and GLI1
(glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1), as well as p-STAT3 (phosphorylation at
Tyr705) by immunohistochemistry in 164 cases of PTC. In PTC, 70.12%, 64.02%,
68.90%, 64.02%, and 56.71% and in the adjacent normal thyroid tissues, 18.29%,
18.90%, 26.83%, 14.63%, and 10.98% of the specimens stained positive for SHH,
PTCH, SMO, GLI1, and p-STAT3, respectively. Significant difference were found for
the positive rate of SHH, PTCH, SMO, and GLI1 as well as p-STAT3 expression
between PTC and adjacent normal thyroid tissues. There was a high accordance rate
between SHH, PTCH, SMO, and GLI1 expression and all of them positively correlated
with larger tumor size, the presence of ETE and LNM, and higher TNM stage.
P-STAT3 expression positively correlated with the presence of ETE and LNM, and
higher TNM stage but not age, gender, tumor size of the PTC patients. Signifi
cant positive correlation between p-STAT3 and SHH, PTCH, SMO and GLI expression
was found in PTC. These findings suggest that the SHH and STAT3 signaling
pathways are frequently activated in PTC, interact with each other and may
therefore be indicators for prognosis or potential targets for therapy against
PTC.

PMCID: PMC4132145
PMID: 25126181  [PubMed]


303. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jun 15;7(7):4531-8. eCollection 2014.

Expression of Gli1 and Wnt2B correlates with progression and clinical outcome of 
pancreatic cancer.

Jiang H(1), Li F(1), He C(2), Wang X(3), Li Q(1), Gao H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine 
Shanghai 200120, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Institute of Digestive
Diseases, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine Shanghai 200065, 
China. (3)Department of Intensive Care Unit, East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine Shanghai 200120, China. (4)Department of Gastroenterology,
Institute of Digestive Diseases, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine Shanghai 200065, China ; National Engineering Center for Biochip at
Shanghai Shanghai 201203, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the expression and clinical
significance of Gli1 and Wnt2B in pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: We have constructed a formalin-fixed paraffin embedded pancreatic tissue
microarrays 180 cylindrical tissue cores of human pancreatic cancer and its
paracancerous nonmalignant pancreatic specimens (NMPs) from 90 patients. Levels
of Gli1 and Wnt2B were measured by immunohistochemistry. We analyzed the
correlations between the expression of these factors and clinicopathological
parameters including prognosis.
RESULTS: The expressions of both Gli1 and Wnt2B in human pancreatic cancer
tissues were significantly higher than those of normal pancreatic tissues
(P=0.000, P=0.004 respectively). The analysis showed that the high cytoplasmic
expression levels of Gli1 in pancreatic cancer tissues had significant
correlation with lymph node metastasis (P=0.036) and Wnt2B had significant
correlation with perineural invasion (P=0.045). Gli1 and Wnt2B have no positive
correlation. Survival analysis by Kaplan-Meier demonstrated that elevated Wnt2B
expression in cancer tissue predicted worse overall survival (OS) compared with
group in lower expression (P=0.024). No correlation was found between the
expression of Gli1 and overall survival of pancreatic cancer patients (P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, these results indicate that the high-expression
levels of Gli1 and Wnt2B might play a pivotal role during tumorigenesis of
pancreatic cancer, and the high expression of Wnt2B might be associated with poor
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4129084
PMID: 25120849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 26;111(34):12438-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321425111. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Primary cilia are required in a unique subpopulation of neural progenitors.

Tong CK(1), Han YG(2), Shah JK(3), Obernier K(3), Guinto CD(3), Alvarez-Buylla
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery and The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143; Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158; and. (2)Department of Neurological Surgery and The Eli and
Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University
of California, San Francisco, CA 94143; Department of Developmental Neurobiology,
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105. (3)Department of
Neurological Surgery and The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143;
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery and The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143; Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158; and abuylla@stemcell.ucsf.edu.

The apical domain of embryonic (radial glia) and adult (B1 cells) neural stem
cells (NSCs) contains a primary cilium. This organelle has been suggested to
function as an antenna for the detection of morphogens or growth factors. In
particular, primary cilia are essential for Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, which plays 
key roles in brain development. Their unique location facing the ventricular
lumen suggests that primary cilia in NSCs could play an important role in
reception of signals within the cerebrospinal fluid. Surprisingly, ablation of
primary cilia using conditional alleles for genes essential for intraflagellar
transport [kinesin family member 3A (Kif3a) and intraflagellar transport 88
(Ift88)] and Cre drivers that are activated at early [Nestin; embryonic day 10.5 
(E10.5)] and late [human glial fibrillary acidic protein (hGFAP); E13.5] stages
of mouse neural development resulted in no apparent developmental defects.
Neurogenesis in the ventricular-subventricular zone (V-SVZ) shortly after birth
was also largely unaffected, except for a restricted ventral domain previously
known to be regulated by Hh signaling. However, Kif3a and Ift88 genetic ablation 
also disrupts ependymal cilia, resulting in hydrocephalus by postnatal day 4. To 
directly study the role of B1 cells' primary cilia without the confounding
effects of hydrocephalus, we stereotaxically targeted elimination of Kif3a from a
subpopulation of radial glia, which resulted in ablation of primary cilia in a
subset of B1 cells. Again, this experiment resulted in decreased neurogenesis
only in the ventral V-SVZ. Primary cilia ablation led to disruption of Hh
signaling in this subdomain. We conclude that primary cilia are required in a
specific Hh-regulated subregion of the postnatal V-SVZ.

PMCID: PMC4151724
PMID: 25114218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 Nov;54(3):331-41. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0392-6. Epub 2014 
Aug 12.

Structural and morphometric comparison of the molar teeth in pre-eruptive
developmental stage of PACAP-deficient and wild-type mice.

Sandor B(1), Fintor K, Felszeghy S, Juhasz T, Reglodi D, Mark L, Kiss P, Jungling
A, Fulop BD, Nagy AD, Hashimoto H, Zakany R, Nagy A, Tamas A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Medical School,
University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) is a pleiotropic
neuropeptide with widespread distribution. It plays pivotal role in neuronal
development. PACAP-immunoreactive fibers have been found in the tooth pulp, and
recently, it has been shown that PACAP may also play a role in the regeneration
of the periodontium after luxation injuries. However, there is no data about the 
effect of endogenous PACAP on tooth development. Ectodermal organogenesis
including tooth development is regulated by different members of bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), hedgehog (HH), and
Wnt families. There is also a growing evidence to support the hypothesis that
PACAP interacts with sonic hedgehog (SHH) receptor (PTCH1) and its downstream
target (Gli1) suggesting its role in tooth development. Therefore, our aim was to
study molar tooth development in mice lacking endogenous PACAP. In this study
morphometric, immunohistochemical and structural comparison of molar teeth in
pre-eruptive developmental stage was performed on histological sections of
7-day-old wild-type and PACAP-deficient mice. Further structural analysis was
carried out with Raman microscope. The morphometric comparison of the 7-day-old
samples revealed that the dentin was significantly thinner in the molars of
PACAP-deficient mice compared to wild-type animals. Raman spectra of the enamel
in wild-type mice demonstrated higher diversity in secondary structure of enamel 
proteins. In the dentin of PACAP-deficient mice higher intracrystalline
disordering in the hydroxyapatite molecular structure was found. We also obtained
altered SHH, PTCH1 and Gli1 expression level in secretory ameloblasts of
PACAP-deficient mice compared to wild-type littermates suggesting that PACAP
might play an important role in molar tooth development and matrix mineralization
involving influence on SHH signaling cascade.

PMID: 25112419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 Nov;54(3):555-73. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0389-1. Epub 2014 
Aug 12.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) signalling enhances
osteogenesis in UMR-106 cell line.

Juhász T(1), Matta C, Katona É, Somogyi C, Takács R, Hajdú T, Helgadottir SL,
Fodor J, Csernoch L, Tóth G, Bakó É, Reglodi D, Tamás A, Zákány R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032, Debrecen, Hungary.

Presence of the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)
signalling has been proved in various peripheral tissues. PACAP can activate
protein kinase A (PKA) signalling via binding to pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating polypeptide type I receptor (PAC1), vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide receptor (VPAC) 1 or VPAC2 receptor. Since little is known about the 
role of this regulatory mechanism in bone formation, we aimed to investigate the 
effect of PACAP on osteogenesis of UMR-106 cells. PACAP 1-38 as an agonist and
PACAP 6-38 as an antagonist of PAC1 were added to the culture medium.
Surprisingly, both substances enhanced protein expressions of collagen type I,
osterix and alkaline phosphatase, along with higher cell proliferation rate and
an augmented mineralisation. Although expression of PKA was elevated, no
alterations were detected in the expression, phosphorylation and nuclear presence
of CREB, but increased nuclear appearance of Runx2, the key transcription factor 
of osteoblast differentiation, was shown. Both PACAPs increased the expressions
of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) 2, 4, 6, 7 and Smad1 proteins, as well as
that of Sonic hedgehog, PATCH1 and Gli1. Data of our experiments indicate that
activation of PACAP pathway enhances bone formation of UMR-106 cells and PKA, BMP
and Hedgehog signalling pathways became activated. We also found that PACAP 6-38 
did not act as an antagonist of PACAP signalling in UMR-106 cells.

PMID: 25112418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 3;289(40):27727-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.556563. Epub 2014
Aug 7.

The transcription factor GLI1 modulates the inflammatory response during
pancreatic tissue remodeling.

Mathew E(1), Collins MA(1), Fernandez-Barrena MG(2), Holtz AM(3), Yan W(4), Hogan
JO(5), Tata Z(5), Allen BL(6), Fernandez-Zapico ME(2), di Magliano MP(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (2)the Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905. (3)From the Program in Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, the Medical Scientist
Training Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (4)the 
Department of Pathology, Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, and.
(5)Departments of Surgery, and. (6)From the Program in Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (7)From
the Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, the Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109 Departments of Surgery, and
marinapa@umich.edu.

Pancreatic cancer, one of the deadliest human malignancies, is almost uniformly
associated with a mutant, constitutively active form of the oncogene Kras.
Studies in genetically engineered mouse models have defined a requirement for
oncogenic KRAS in both the formation of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias,
the most common precursor lesions to pancreatic cancer, and in the maintenance
and progression of these lesions. Previous work using an inducible model allowing
tissue-specific and reversible expression of oncogenic Kras in the pancreas
indicates that inactivation of this GTPase at the pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia stage promotes pancreatic tissue repair. Here, we extend these findings
to identify GLI1, a transcriptional effector of the Hedgehog pathway, as a
central player in pancreatic tissue repair upon Kras inactivation. Deletion of a 
single allele of Gli1 results in improper stromal remodeling and perdurance of
the inflammatory infiltrate characteristic of pancreatic tumorigenesis.
Strikingly, this partial loss of Gli1 affects activated fibroblasts in the
pancreas and the recruitment of immune cells that are vital for tissue recovery. 
Analysis of the mechanism using expression and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays identified a subset of cytokines, including IL-6, mIL-8, Mcp-1, and M-csf 
(Csf1), as direct GLI1 target genes potentially mediating this phenomenon.
Finally, we demonstrate that canonical Hedgehog signaling, a known regulator of
Gli1 activity, is required for pancreas recovery. Collectively, these data
delineate a new pathway controlling tissue repair and highlight the importance of
GLI1 in regulation of the pancreatic microenvironment during this cellular
process.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4183809
PMID: 25104358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. World J Surg Oncol. 2014 Aug 8;12:253. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-12-253.

Expression of the GLI family genes is associated with tumor progression in
advanced lung adenocarcinoma.

Ishikawa M(1), Sonobe M, Imamura N, Sowa T, Shikuma K, Date H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, 54
Shogoin-kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. mishi@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in
various cancers. Expression of the GLI family of genes, which encode for
transcriptional factors of the Hh pathway, has not been fully assessed in
clinical samples of advanced lung adenocarcinoma. In this study, we
retrospectively evaluated the expression of the GLI family of genes in advanced
stage lung adenocarcinoma samples and determined their relation to patient
survival.
METHODS: The levels of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 mRNA expression were measured by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction in surgically obtained tissue
samples from stage II-IV lung adenocarcinoma patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>102). Pairwise
comparisons between all three GLI mRNA expression were performed, and after
dichotomizing the patients into low and high expression groups according to each 
GLI mRNA expression level, survival curves were calculated and multivariate
analyses were conducted.
RESULTS: Significant positive correlation was found between GLI1 and GLI3 mRNA
expression (P <0.001). Tumors with higher expression (upper 15%) of GLI1 or GLI3 
mRNA were associated with poor survival in stage II-IV (5-year overall survival
rates: GLI1 mRNA low, 41.7% vs. high, 20.0%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0074; GLI3 mRNA low, 43.1% vs.
high, 13.3%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0062) and stage III-IV (5-year overall survival rates: GLI1
mRNA low, 34.0% vs. high, 0%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0012; GLI3 mRNA low, 33.4% vs. high, 7.7%,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.057) lung adenocarcinoma patients. GLI2 mRNA expression did not appear to
have great clinical significance. Multivariate analysis revealed higher GLI1 mRNA
expression as an independent factor for unfavorable patient survival (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0030,
hazard ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.1, 95% confidence interval<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.5-6.2), as well as tumor
differentiation and stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of GLI1 and GLI3 mRNA was strongly correlated, and their 
overexpression, especially that of GLI1, was found to be predictive of aggressive
tumor behavior. This study indicates that the Hh pathway may be a key oncogenic
signaling network in tumor pathogenesis and, thus, a potential therapeutic target
in advanced lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4249769
PMID: 25103784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Br J Cancer. 2014 Sep 9;111(6):1168-79. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.421. Epub 2014 Aug 
5.

Inhibition of Hedgehog signalling by NVP-LDE225 (Erismodegib) interferes with
growth and invasion of human renal cell carcinoma cells.

D'Amato C(1), Rosa R(1), Marciano R(1), D'Amato V(1), Formisano L(1), Nappi L(1),
Raimondo L(1), Di Mauro C(1), Servetto A(1), Fulciniti F(2), Cipolletta A(2),
Bianco C(3), Ciardiello F(4), Veneziani BM(5), De Placido S(1), Bianco R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia,
Università di Napoli "Federico II", Via S. Pansini 5, Napoli 80131, Italy.
(2)Anatomia Patologica e Citopatologia, Istituto Nazionale Tumori 'Fondazione G. 
Pascale', IRCCS, Napoli 80131, Italy. (3)Radioterapia, Istituto Nazionale Tumori 
'Fondazione G. Pascale', IRCCS, Napoli 80131, Italy. (4)Dipartimento
Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale 'F. Magrassi e A.
Lanzara', II Universitá degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli 80131, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di
Napoli "Federico II", Napoli 80131, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Multiple lines of evidence support that the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling 
has a role in the maintenance and progression of different human cancers.
Therefore, inhibition of the Hh pathway represents a valid anticancer therapeutic
approach for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients. NVP-LDE225 is a Smoothened
(Smo) antagonist that induces dose-related inhibition of Hh and Smo-dependent
tumour growth.
METHODS: We assayed the effects of NVP-LDE225 alone or in combination with
everolimus or sunitinib on the growth and invasion of human RCC models both in
vitro and in vivo. To this aim, we used a panel of human RCC models, comprising
cells with acquired resistance to sunitinib - a multiple tyrosine kinase
inhibitor approved as a first-line treatment for RCC.
RESULTS: NVP-LDE225 cooperated with either everolimus or sunitinib to inhibit
proliferation, migration, and invasion of RCC cells even in sunitinib-resistant
(SuR) cells. Some major transducers involved in tumour cell motility, including
paxillin, were also efficiently inhibited by the combination therapy, as
demonstrated by western blot and confocal microscopy assays. Moreover, these
combined treatments inhibited tumour growth and increased animal survival in nude
mice xenografted with SuR RCC cells. Finally, lung micrometastasis formation was 
reduced when mice were treated with NVP-LDE225 plus everolimus or sunitinib, as
evidenced by artificial metastatic assays.
CONCLUSIONS: Hedgehog inhibition by NVP-LDE225 plus sunitinib or everolimus
bolsters antitumour activity by interfering with tumour growth and metastatic
spread, even in SuR cells. Thus, this new evidence puts forward a new promising
therapeutic approach for RCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4453852
PMID: 25093491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;99(11):E2178-87. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1844.
Epub 2014 Jul 31.

The sonic hedgehog signaling pathway maintains the cancer stem cell self-renewal 
of anaplastic thyroid cancer by inducing snail expression.

Heiden KB(1), Williamson AJ, Doscas ME, Ye J, Wang Y, Liu D, Xing M, Prinz RA, Xu
X.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of General Surgery (K.B.H., X.X.) and Anatomy and Cell Biology
(M.E.D., J.Y., Y.W., X.X.), Rush Medical College (A.J.W.), Chicago, Illinois
60612; Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism (D.L., M.X.), Department of
Medicine, the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21287; and Department of Surgery (R.A.P.), NorthShore University Health System,
Evanston, Illinois 60201.

CONTEXT: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been recently identified in thyroid
neoplasm. Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) contains a higher percentage of CSCs
than well-differentiated thyroid cancer. The signaling pathways and the
transcription factors that regulate thyroid CSC self-renewal remain poorly
understood.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to use two ATC cell lines (KAT-18 and
SW1736) as a model to study the role of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway in
maintaining thyroid CSC self-renewal and to understand its underlying molecular
mechanisms.
DESIGN: The expression and activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), a marker
for thyroid CSCs, was analyzed by Western blot and ALDEFLUOR assay, respectively.
The effect of three Shh pathway inhibitors (cyclopamine, HhAntag, GANT61), Shh,
Gli1, Snail knockdown, and Gli1 overexpression on thyroid CSC self-renewal was
analyzed by ALDEFLUOR assay and thyrosphere formation. The sensitivity of
transfected KAT-18 cells to radiation was evaluated by a colony survival assay.
RESULTS: Western blot analysis revealed that ALDH protein levels in five thyroid 
cancer cell lines (WRO82, a follicular thyroid cancer cell line; BCPAP and TPC1, 
two papillary thyroid cancer cell lines; KAT-18 and SW1736, two ATC cell lines)
correlated with the percentage of the ALDH(High) cells as well as Gli1 and Snail 
expression. The Shh pathway inhibitors, Shh and Gli1 knockdown, in KAT-18 cells
decreased thyroid CSC self-renewal and increased radiation sensitivity. In
contrast, Gli1 overexpression led to increased thyrosphere formation, an
increased percentage of ALDH(High) cells, and increased radiation resistance in
KAT-18 cells. Inhibition of the Shh pathway by three specific inhibitors led to
decreased Snail expression and a decreased number of ALDH(High) cells in KAT-18
and SW1736. Snail gene knockdown decreased the number of ALDH(High) cells in
KAT-18 and SW1736 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The Shh pathway promotes the CSC self-renewal in ATC cell lines by
Gli1-induced Snail expression.

PMID: 25078145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 29;9(7):e96441. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096441. eCollection
2014.

Sonic hedgehog-Gli1 signaling pathway regulates the epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT) by mediating a new target gene, S100A4, in pancreatic cancer
cells.

Xu X(1), Su B(2), Xie C(3), Wei S(3), Zhou Y(1), Liu H(1), Dai W(1), Cheng P(1), 
Wang F(1), Xu X(1), Guo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Tenth People's Hospital of Shanghai,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Endocrinology, the Tenth
People's Hospital of Shanghai, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (3)Department 
of Gastroenterology, the Second Hospital of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang Province, China.

AIMS: The hedgehog signaling pathway plays an important role in EMT of pancreatic
cancer cells, but the precise mechanisms remain elusive. Because S100A4 as a key 
EMT moleculer marker was found to be upregulated upon Gli1 in pancreatic cancer
cells, we focused on the relationship between Shh-Gli1 signals and S100 genes
family.
METHODS: On the base of cDNA microarray data, we investigated regulating
mechanism of Gli1 to some members of S100A genes family in pancreatic cancer cell
lines firstly. Then, the regulation of Gli1 to S100A4 gene was studied by
molecular biology assays and the pro-metastasis effection of Gli1-dependent
S100A4 was investigated in vitro. Finally, the expressions of Shh, Gli1, S100A4
and E-cadherin in pancreatic cancer tissues were studied by using
immunohistochemistry assays.
RESULTS: Five members of the S100 genes family, S100A2, S100A4, S100A6, S100A11, 
and S100A14 were found to be downregulated significantly upon Gli1 knockdown.
Gli1 enhancer prediction combining with in vitro data demonstrated that Gli1
primarily regulates S100A family members via cis-acting elements. Indeed, the
data indicate S100A4 and vimentin genes were upregulated significantly by
Shh/Gli1-expression increasing and E-cadherin was significantly reduced at the
same time. Migration of PC cells was increased significantly in a dose-dependent 
manner of Gli1 expression (P<0.05) and siS100A4 significantly reversed the
response of PC cells induced by L-Shh transduction (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Our data establish a novel connection between Shh-Gli1 signaling and 
S100A4 regulation, which imply that S100A4 might be one of the key factors in EMT
mediated by Shh-Gli1 signaling in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4114558
PMID: 25072505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Oct;10(4):1717-24. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2417. Epub 2014 Jul
23.

A novel anti-cancer effect of resveratrol: reversal of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in prostate cancer cells.

Li J(1), Chong T(1), Wang Z(1), Chen H(1), Li H(1), Cao J(1), Zhang P(1), Li
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P.R. China.

Carcinoma progression is associated with the loss of epithelial features and the 
acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype, a process known as epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Resveratrol, a natural polyphenolic compound found in grapes,
berries and peanuts, has a wide range of pharmacological properties, including
anti-tumor metastasis properties. The underlying mechanism through which
resveratrol inhibits metastasis of prostate cancer (PCa) is not yet fully
understood; however, it is thought to be associated with the disruption of EMT.
In the present study, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was used to trigger EMT in PC-3
and LNCaP PCa cell lines, and the cell lines were subsequently treated with
resveratrol. The results demonstrated that exposure of PC-3 and LNCaP cells to
LPS resulted in morphological alterations characteristic of EMT, as well as an
increase in the expression of the mesenchymal marker vimentin and a decrease in
the expression of E-cadherin. In addition, LPS exposure resulted in an increase
in cell motility, along with an upregulation of the transcription factor
glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1). However, treatment with resveratrol 
inhibited LPS-induced morphological changes, decreased the expression of
LPS-induced markers of EMT and inhibited the expression of Gli1, resulting in the
inhibition of in vitro cell motility and invasiveness. These results provide a
novel perspective for the anti-invasion mechanism of resveratrol, suggesting that
the effect is in part due to its ability to inhibit the EMT process through the
Hedgehog signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4148361
PMID: 25069516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e102764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102764.
eCollection 2014.

Differential peripheral blood gene expression profile based on Her2 expression on
primary tumors of breast cancer patients.

Tudoran O(1), Virtic O(2), Balacescu L(1), Pop L(2), Dragla F(1), Eniu A(1),
Fetica B(3), Balacescu O(1), Berindan-Neagoe I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology
Institute I. Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (2)Research Center for Functional
Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (3)Department of Pathology, The
Oncology Institute I. Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. (4)Department of
Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, The Oncology Institute I.
Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; Research Center for Functional Genomics,
Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; Department of Immunology, Iuliu Hatieganu
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e110962.

Breast cancer prognosis and treatment is highly dependent on the molecular
features of the primary tumors. These tumors release specific molecules into the 
environment that trigger characteristic responses into the circulatory cells. In 
this study we investigated the expression pattern of 84 genes known to be
involved in breast cancer signaling in the peripheral blood of breast cancer
patients with ER-, PR- primary tumors. The patients were grouped according to
Her2 expression on the primary tumors in Her2+ and Her2- cohorts. Transcriptional
analysis revealed 15 genes to be differentially expressed between the two groups 
highlighting that Her2 signaling in primary tumors could be associated with
specific blood gene expression. We found CCNA1 to be up-regulated, while ERBB2,
RASSF1, CDH1, MKI67, GATA3, GLI1, SFN, PTGS2, JUN, NOTCH1, CTNNB1, KRT8, SRC, and
HIC1 genes were down-regulated in the blood of triple negative breast cancer
patients compared to Her2+ cohort. IPA network analysis predicts that the
identified genes are interconnected and regulate each other. These genes code for
cell cycle regulators, cell adhesion molecules, transcription factors or signal
transducers that modulate immune signaling, several genes being also associated
with cancer progression and treatment response. These results indicate an altered
immune signaling in the peripheral blood of triple negative breast cancer
patients. The involvement of the immune system is necessary in favorable
treatment response, therefore these results could explain the low response rates 
observed for triple negative breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4113305
PMID: 25068292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Nov;396(1-2):257-68. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2161-9. Epub 
2014 Jul 27.

Activated hedgehog pathway is a potential target for pharmacological intervention
in biliary tract cancer.

Kiesslich T(1), Mayr C, Wachter J, Bach D, Fuereder J, Wagner A, Alinger B,
Pichler M, Di Fazio P, Ocker M, Berr F, Neureiter D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Paracelsus Medical University/Salzburger
Landeskliniken (SALK), Salzburg, Austria.

Hedgehog (Hh) signalling contributes to carcinogenesis and represents a valid
druggable target in human cancers, possibly also in biliary tract cancer (BTC).
We analysed the expression of Hh components in BTC using eight heterogeneously
differentiated cell lines, xenograft tumours and a human tissue microarray. The
dose-, time- and cell line-dependent effects of two Hh inhibitors (cyclopamine
and Gant-61) were analysed in vitro for survival, apoptosis, cell cycle
distribution and possible synergism with conventional chemotherapeutic agents. In
human BTC samples, the sonic Hh ligand and the Gli1 transcription factor showed
increased expression in tumours compared to normal adjacent tissue and were
significantly associated with high tumour grade and positive lymph node status.
In BTC cell lines, we could confirm the Hh component expression at varying extent
within the employed cell lines in vitro and in vivo indicating non-canonical
signalling. Both Hh inhibitors showed dose-dependent cytotoxicity above 5 µM with
a stronger effect for Gant-61 inducing apoptosis whereas cyclopamine rather
inhibited proliferation. Cytotoxicity was associated with low cytokeratin
expression and higher mesenchymal marker expression such as vimentin.
Additionally, drug combinations of Gant-61 with conventional chemotherapy
(cisplatin) exerted synergistic effects. In conclusion, Hh pathway is
significantly activated in human BTC tissue compared to normal adjacent tissue.
The current data demonstrate for the first time an effective anticancer activity 
of especially Gant-61 in BTC and suggest second generation Hh pathway inhibitors 
as a potential novel treatment strategy in BTC.

PMID: 25064451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Tumour Biol. 2014 Oct;35(10):10523-8. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2365-3. Epub 2014
Jul 25.

Expression and clinical significance of Shh/Gli-1 in papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Bian XH(1), Sun H, Xue H, Zhang G, Zhang CH, Liu XL, Su J, Li SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thyroid Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun, 130022, People's Republic of China, bxhaiatlanta@gmail.com.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathway affects cancer initiation, progression, and
metastasis, but its role in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) remains elusive. To
characterize expression and clinical significance of Shh and the transcription
factor Gli-1-the key elements of the Shh pathway in PTC tissues-we
immunohistochemically examined Shh/Gli-1 expression in PTC tissues from 142
patients, along with adjacent non-cancerous tissues as controls. We reviewed 142 
patients' clinical characteristics and analyzed their relationship with
expression of Shh/Gli-1. Shh and Gli-1 were expressed in 64.1 % (91/142) and 47.9
% (68/142) in PTC tissues, respectively, compared with 16.9 % (24/142) and 9.2 % 
(13/142) of adjacent non-cancerous tissues. Gli-1 expression was significantly
associated with patients' ages (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and lymph node metastasis (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
Increased Shh and Gli-1 expression was significantly associated with
tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) stage (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Shh and Gli-1 were expressed in
79.2 and 60.4 %, respectively, of PTC tumors larger than 10 mm. Shh was
significantly associated with tumor size (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Shh and Gli-1 were expressed
in 72.5 and 65.2 %, respectively, of patients with lymph node metastasis.
Overall, we found increased expression of the main initiator Shh and
transcription factor Gli-1 in Shh pathway in PTC tissues. The expression of
Shh/Gli-1 was significantly associated with tumor size, clinical staging, and
lymph node metastasis, indicating that aberrant activation of the Shh pathway is 
important to PTC occurrence and progression. Potentially, Shh/Gli-1 could be a
diagnostic indicator and a marker of therapeutic response.

PMID: 25060182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Blood. 2014 Sep 25;124(13):2061-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-557298. Epub 2014 
Jul 21.

A critical role of autocrine sonic hedgehog signaling in human CD138+ myeloma
cell survival and drug resistance.

Liu Z(1), Xu J(1), He J(1), Zheng Y(1), Li H(1), Lu Y(1), Qian J(1), Lin P(1),
Weber DM(1), Yang J(1), Yi Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, Division of Cancer Medicine, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Sep 25;124(13):2008-9.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in the oncogenesis of B-cell
malignancies such as multiple myeloma (MM). However, the source of Hh ligand
sonic hedgehog (SHH) and its target cells remains controversial. Previous studies
showed that stromally induced Hh signaling is essential for the tumor cells and
that CD19(+)CD138(-) MM stem cells are the target cells of Hh signaling. Here we 
demonstrate that SHH was mainly secreted by human myeloma cells but not by
stromal cells in MM bone marrow. Autocrine SHH enhanced CD138(+) myeloma cell
proliferation and protected myeloma cells from spontaneous and stress-induced
apoptosis. More importantly, autocrine SHH protected myeloma cells against
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Combinational treatment with
chemotherapy and SHH-neutralizing antibody displayed synergistic antimyeloma
effects. Mechanistic studies showed that SHH signaling activated the
SHH/GLI1/BCL-2 axis, leading to the inhibition of myeloma cell apoptosis. Thus,
this study identifies the myeloma autocrine Hh signaling pathway as a potential
target for the treatment of MM. Targeting this pathway may improve the efficacy
of chemotherapy in MM patients.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4186536
PMID: 25049282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biomech. 2014 Sep 22;47(12):3100-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2014.06.034. Epub
2014 Jul 5.

Glenohumeral joint cartilage contact in the healthy adult during scapular plane
elevation depression with external humeral rotation.

Massimini DF(1), Warner JJ(2), Li G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Shoulder Biomotion Laboratory, 55 Fruit
Street, GRJ-1223, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, 
USA. (2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Shoulder Biomotion Laboratory, 55 Fruit
Street, GRJ-1223, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck St, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Massachusetts General Hospital, Shoulder Biomotion
Laboratory, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ-1223, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Harvard Medical
School, 25 Shattuck St, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
gli1@partners.org.

The shoulder (glenohumeral) joint has the greatest range of motion of all human
joints; as a result, it is particularly vulnerable to dislocation and injury. The
ability to non-invasively quantify in-vivo articular cartilage contact patterns
of joints has been and remains a difficult biomechanics problem. As a result,
little is known about normal in-vivo glenohumeral joint contact patterns or the
consequences that surgery has on altering them. In addition, the effect of
quantifying glenohumeral joint contact patterns by means of proximity mapping,
both with and without cartilage data, is unknown. Therefore, the objectives of
this study are to (1) describe a technique for quantifying in-vivo glenohumeral
joint contact patterns during dynamic shoulder motion, (2) quantify normal
glenohumeral joint contact patterns in the young healthy adult during scapular
plane elevation depression with external humeral rotation, and (3) compare
glenohumeral joint contact patterns determined both with and without articular
cartilage data. Our results show that the inclusion of articular cartilage data
when quantifying in-vivo glenohumeral joint contact patterns has significant
effects on the anterior-posterior contact centroid location, the
superior-inferior contact centroid range of travel, and the total contact path
length. As a result, our technique offers an advantage over glenohumeral joint
contact pattern measurement techniques that neglect articular cartilage data.
Likewise, this technique may be more sensitive than traditional
6-Degree-of-Freedom (6-DOF) joint kinematics for the assessment of overall
glenohumeral joint health. Lastly, for the shoulder motion tested, we found that 
glenohumeral joint contact was located on the anterior-inferior glenoid surface.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25047740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Hepatol. 2014 Dec;61(6):1260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.07.015. Epub 2014 Jul 
18.

Gli1 activation and protection against hepatic encephalopathy is suppressed by
circulating transforming growth factor ß1 in mice.

McMillin M(1), Galindo C(1), Pae HY(1), Frampton G(1), Di Patre PL(2), Quinn
M(1), Whittington E(1), DeMorrow S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center College of
Medicine, TX, United States. (2)Department of Pathology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center College of Medicine, TX, United States; Department of Pathology, Baylor
Scott & White Health, TX, United States. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
Texas A&M Health Science Center College of Medicine, TX, United States; Digestive
Disease Research Center, TX, United States; Central Texas Veterans Health Care
System, Temple, TX, United States. Electronic address:
demorrow@medicine.tamhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a neurologic disorder that
develops during liver failure. Few studies exist investigating systemic-central
signalling during HE outside of inflammatory signalling. The transcription factor
Gli1, which can be modulated by hedgehog signalling or transforming growth factor
ß1 (TGFß1) signalling, has been shown to be protective in various neuropathies.
We measured Gli1 expression in brain tissues from mice and evaluated how
circulating TGFß1 and canonical hedgehog signalling regulate its activation.
METHODS: Mice were injected with azoxymethane (AOM) to induce liver failure and
HE in the presence of Gli1 vivo-morpholinos, the hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine, 
Smoothened vivo-morpholinos, a Smoothened agonist, or TGFß-neutralizing
antibodies. Molecular analyses were used to assess Gli1, hedgehog signalling, and
TGFß1 signalling in the liver and brain of AOM mice and HE patients.
RESULTS: Gli1 expression was increased in brains of AOM mice and in HE patients. 
Intra-cortical infusion of Gli1 vivo-morpholinos exacerbated the neurologic
deficits of AOM mice. Measures to modulate hedgehog signalling had no effect on
HE neurological decline. Levels of TGFß1 increased in the liver and serum of mice
following AOM administration. TGFß neutralizing antibodies slowed neurologic
decline following AOM administration without significantly affecting liver
damage. TGFß1 inhibited Gli1 expression via a SMAD3-dependent mechanism.
Conversely, inhibiting TGFß1 increased Gli1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Cortical activation of Gli1 protects mice from induction of HE.
TGFß1 suppresses Gli1 in neurons via SMAD3 and promotes the neurologic decline.
Strategies to activate Gli1 or inhibit TGFß1 signalling might be developed to
treat patients with HE.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4253574
PMID: 25046848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Urol. 2014 Dec;192(6):1842-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.07.013. Epub 2014 Jul
18.

DHH is an independent prognosticator of oncologic outcome of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma.

Jäger W(1), Thomas C(2), Fazli L(3), Hurtado-Coll A(3), Li E(3), Janssen C(1),
Gust KM(3), So AI(3), Hainz M(4), Schmidtmann I(5), Roos FC(2), Thüroff JW(2),
Brenner W(2), Black PC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urologic Sciences, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Urology,
Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. (2)Department of Urology, Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. (3)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department
of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (4)Institute of Pathology, Johannes Gutenberg University,
Mainz, Germany. (5)Institute of Medical Biostatistics, Epidemiology and
Informatics, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. (6)Vancouver Prostate
Centre and Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: pblack@mail.ubc.ca.

PURPOSE: Aberrant HH signaling has proved important in the pathogenesis of
several solid cancers. Limited in vitro analyses suggested an oncogenic role for 
HH in renal cell carcinoma. In this explorative study we sought to validate
aberrant HH expression in patients with renal cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A tissue microarray was constructed from 140 radical
nephrectomy specimens of patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma. We
performed immunohistochemistry for Ki67 and HH pathway biomarkers, including
PTCH1, Smo, SHH, IHH, DHH, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Staining intensity was measured
by automated image processing and related to tumor stage and grade. The impact of
biomarker expression on cancer specific survival was determined by univariate and
multivariate Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: Gli3, PTCH1, DHH and SHH demonstrated markedly higher expression in high
than in low grade tumors. Tumor stage was not associated with marker expression. 
On univariate analysis DHH expression, and tumor grade and stage were associated 
with cancer specific survival. Multivariate analysis revealed that DHH, grade and
stage were independent predictors of cancer specific survival.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge we report for the first time that a biomarker
of the HH pathway is associated with adverse pathological features and poor
disease outcomes in patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma. DHH may serve 
as an independent predictor of cancer specific survival in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma cases. This supports further evaluation of HH signaling to validate the
pathway as a target for novel therapy.

Copyright © 2014 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25046620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Jul 17;16(4):R152. doi: 10.1186/ar4614.

Naproxen affects osteogenesis of human mesenchymal stem cells via regulation of
Indian hedgehog signaling molecules.

Salem O, Wang HT, Alaseem AM, Ciobanu O, Hadjab I, Gawri R, Antoniou J, Mwale F.

INTRODUCTION: We previously showed that type X collagen, a marker of late stage
chondrocyte hypertrophy (associated with endochondral ossification), is
constitutively expressed by mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) from osteoarthritis
patients and this may be related to Naproxen (Npx), a nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug used for therapy. Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays an
important role during the development of bone. We tested the hypothesis that Npx 
affected osteogenic differentiation of human MSCs through the expression of
Indian hedgehog (IHH), Patched-1 (PTC1) and GLI family members GLI1, GLI2, GLI3
in vitro.
METHODS: MSCs were cultured in osteogenic differentiation medium without
(control) or with 0.5 µM Npx. The expression of collagen type X, alpha 1
(COL10A1), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteopontin (OPN), osteocalcin (OC),
collagen type I, alpha 1 (COL1A1) was analyzed with real-time reverse
transcription (RT) PCR, and the ALP activity was measured. The osteogenesis of
MSCs was monitored by mineral staining and quantification with alizarin red S. To
examine whether Npx affects osteogenic differentiation through HH signaling, the 
effect of Npx on the expression of IHH, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3 and PTC1 was analyzed
with real-time RT PCR. The effect of cyclopamine (Cpn), a HH signaling inhibitor,
on the expression of COL10A1, ALP, OC and COL1A1 was also determined.
RESULTS: When MSCs were cultured in osteogenic differentiation medium, Npx
supplementation led to a significant decrease in ALP gene expression as well as
its activity, and had a tendency to decrease mineral deposition. It also
decreased the expression of COL1A1 significantly. In contrast, the gene
expression of COL10A1 and OPN were upregulated significantly by Npx. No
significant effect was found on OC expression. The expression of IHH, PTC1, GLI1,
and GLI2 was increased by Npx, while no significant difference was observed on
GLI3 expression. Cpn reversed the effect of Npx on the expression of COL10A1,
ALP, OPN and COL1A1.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that Npx can affect gene expression during
osteogenic differentiation of MSCs, and downregulate mineral deposition in the
extracellular matrix through IHH signaling. Therefore, Npx could affect
MSC-mediated repair of subchondral bone in OA patients.

PMCID: PMC4223691
PMID: 25034046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 5;289(36):24898-910. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570507. Epub
2014 Jul 15.

Indian hedgehog signaling regulates transcription and expression of collagen type
X via Runx2/Smads interactions.

Amano K(1), Densmore M(2), Nishimura R(3), Lanske B(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oral Medicine, Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School 
of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and the Departments of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery and. (2)From the Department of Oral Medicine, Infection,
and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (4)From the Department of Oral Medicine,
Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts
02115 and beate_lanske@hsdm.harvard.edu.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is essential for chondrocyte differentiation and
endochondral ossification and acts with parathyroid hormone-related peptide in a 
negative feedback loop to regulate early chondrocyte differentiation and entry to
hypertrophic differentiation. Independent of this function, we and others
recently reported independent Ihh functions to promote chondrocyte hypertrophy
and matrix mineralization in vivo and in vitro. However, the molecular mechanisms
for these actions and their functional significance are still unknown. We
recently discovered that Ihh overexpression in chondrocytes stimulated the
expression of late chondrocyte differentiation markers and induced matrix
mineralization. Focusing on collagen type X (Col10a1) expression and
transcription, we observed that hedgehog downstream transcription factors
GLI-Krüppel family members (Gli) 1/2 increased COL10A1 promoter activity and
identified a novel Gli1/2 response element in the 250-bp basic promoter. In
addition, we found that Ihh induced Runx2 expression in chondrocytes without
up-regulating other modulators of chondrocyte maturation such as Mef2c, Foxa2,
and Foxa3. Runx2 promoted Col10a1 expression in cooperation with Ihh. Further
analyses using promoter assays, immunofluorescence, and binding assays showed the
interaction of Gli1/2 in a complex with Runx2/Smads induces chondrocyte
differentiation. Finally, we could demonstrate that Ihh promotes in vitro matrix 
mineralization using similar molecular mechanisms. Our data provide an in vitro
mechanism for Ihh signaling to positively regulate Col10a1 transcription. Thus,
Ihh signaling could be an important player for not only early chondrocyte
differentiation but maturation and calcification of chondrocytes.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4155658
PMID: 25028519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 15;23(24):6512-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu370. Epub 2014 Jul
15.

Deficiency of patched 1-induced Gli1 signal transduction results in astrogenesis 
in Swedish mutated APP transgenic mice.

He P(1), Staufenbiel M(2), Li R(3), Shen Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Therapeutic Strategies for Brain Disorders and.
(2)Novartis Pharm Ltd, Nervous System Research, Basel CH-4002, Switzerland and.
(3)Center for Hormone Advanced Science and Education, The Roskamp Institute,
Sarasota, FL 34243, USA, yshen@rfdn.org rli@rfdn.org. (4)Center for Advanced
Therapeutic Strategies for Brain Disorders and, Department of Neurology,
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville FL32610, USA
yshen@rfdn.org rli@rfdn.org.

Normally, sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling induces high levels of Patched 1 (Ptc1) 
and its associated transcription factor Gli1 with genesis of specific neuronal
progeny. But their roles in the neural stem cells (NSCs), including glial
precursor cells (GPCs), of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are unclear. Here, we show
that Ptc1 and Gli1 are significantly deficits in the hippocampus of an aged AD
transgenic mouse mode, whereas these two molecules are highly elevated at young
ages. Our similar findings in autopsied AD brains validate the discovery in AD
mouse models. To examine whether Aß peptides, which are a main component of the
amyloid plaques in AD brains, affected Ptc1-Gli1 signaling, we treated GPCs with 
Aß peptides, we found that high dose of Aß1-42 but not Aß1-40 significantly
decreased Ptc1-Gli1, while Shh itself was elevated in hippocampal NSCs/GPCs.
Furthermore, we found that deficits of Ptc1-Gli1 signaling induced NSCs/GPCs into
asymmetric division, which results in an increase in the number of dividing cells
including transit-amplifying cells and neuroblasts. These precursor cells commit 
to apoptosis-like death under the toxic conditions. By this way, adult neural
precursor cell pool is exhausted and defective neurogenesis happens in AD brains.
Our findings suggest that Ptc1-Gli1 signaling deregulation resulting abnormal
loss of GPCs may contribute to a cognition decline in AD brains. The novel
findings elucidate a new molecular mechanism of adult NSCs/GPCs on neurogenesis
and demonstrate a regulatory role for Ptc1-Gli1 in adult neural circuit integrity
of the brain.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4296204
PMID: 25027328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 29;111(30):11061-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1322362111. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Arhgap36-dependent activation of Gli transcription factors.

Rack PG(1), Ni J(1), Payumo AY(1), Nguyen V(2), Crapster JA(1), Hovestadt V(3),
Kool M(4), Jones DT(4), Mich JK(5), Firestone AJ(1), Pfister SM(6), Cho YJ(7),
Chen JK(8).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemical and Systems Biology. (2)Departments of Pediatrics
andNeurosurgery, Eli and Edythe Broad Institute for Stem Cell Research and
Regenerative Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143;
(3)Divisions of Molecular Genetics and. (4)Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer
Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; and. (5)Biochemistry, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305; (6)Pediatric Neurooncology,
German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; andDepartment of
Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, and Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Neurology and Neurological Sciences,Neurosurgery.
(8)Departments of Chemical and Systems Biology,Developmental Biology, and
jameschen@stanford.edu.

Hedgehog (Hh) pathway activation and Gli-dependent transcription play critical
roles in embryonic patterning, tissue homeostasis, and tumorigenesis. By
conducting a genome-scale cDNA overexpression screen, we have identified the Rho 
GAP family member Arhgap36 as a positive regulator of the Hh pathway in vitro and
in vivo. Arhgap36 acts in a Smoothened (Smo)-independent manner to inhibit Gli
repressor formation and to promote the activation of full-length Gli proteins.
Arhgap36 concurrently induces the accumulation of Gli proteins in the primary
cilium, and its ability to induce Gli-dependent transcription requires kinesin
family member 3a and intraflagellar transport protein 88, proteins that are
essential for ciliogenesis. Arhgap36 also functionally and biochemically
interacts with Suppressor of Fused. Transcriptional profiling further reveals
that Arhgap36 is overexpressed in murine medulloblastomas that acquire resistance
to chemical Smo inhibitors and that ARHGAP36 isoforms capable of Gli activation
are up-regulated in a subset of human medulloblastomas. Our findings reveal a new
mechanism of Gli transcription factor activation and implicate ARHGAP36
dysregulation in the onset and/or progression of GLI-dependent cancers.

PMCID: PMC4121843
PMID: 25024229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Sep;34(3):733-41. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1847. Epub 2014 Jul 
10.

The transcriptional activity of Gli1 is negatively regulated by AMPK through
Hedgehog partial agonism in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu Q(1), Liu X(2), Zheng X(1), Yao Y(1), Wang M(2), Liu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical 
College of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College
of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

The aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been
implicated in a variety of malignancies, including hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). The mammalian 5' adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
plays a crucial role in cellular energy homeostasis. However, the interaction
between the Hh and AMPK signaling pathways has not been investigated to date. In 
the present study, to the best of our knowlege, we report for the first time the 
negative regulation of glioma-associated oncogene 1 (Gli1), an important
downstream effector of Hh, by the AMPK signal transduction pathway.
Immunoprecipitation and GST-pull down assay showed a direct interaction between
AMPK and Gli1. The overexpression of AMPK induced the downregulation of Gli1
expression, while the knockdown of AMPK upregulated Gli1 expression in a
relatively short period of time (24 h or less). Our data suggest that AMPK may
function as an upstream molecule that regulates Gli1 expression. Therefore, AMPK 
may play a role in the Hh signaling pathway, through which it regulates
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4121351
PMID: 25017332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):732-40. doi: 10.1038/nm.3613. Epub 2014 Jun 29.

Epigenetic targeting of Hedgehog pathway transcriptional output through BET
bromodomain inhibition.

Tang Y(1), Gholamin S(2), Schubert S(1), Willardson MI(3), Lee A(4),
Bandopadhayay P(5), Bergthold G(6), Masoud S(7), Nguyen B(7), Vue N(7), Balansay 
B(7), Yu F(1), Oh S(1), Woo P(7), Chen S(7), Ponnuswami A(7), Monje M(7), Atwood 
SX(4), Whitson RJ(4), Mitra S(2), Cheshier SH(2), Qi J(8), Beroukhim R(9), Tang
JY(4), Wechsler-Reya R(10), Oro AE(4), Link BA(3), Bradner JE(9), Cho YJ(11).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. [2] Department of Neurosurgery,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (2)Department 
of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA. (4)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (5)1] Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2]
Pediatric Neuro-oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [4] 
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (6)1]
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Pediatric Neuro-oncology, Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Division 
of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (7)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (8)Department 
of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)1] Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (10)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research, La
Jolla, California, USA. (11)1] Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. [2] Department
of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA. [3] Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California, USA.

Hedgehog signaling drives oncogenesis in several cancers, and strategies
targeting this pathway have been developed, most notably through inhibition of
Smoothened (SMO). However, resistance to Smoothened inhibitors occurs by genetic 
changes of Smoothened or other downstream Hedgehog components. Here we overcome
these resistance mechanisms by modulating GLI transcription through inhibition of
bromo and extra C-terminal (BET) bromodomain proteins. We show that BRD4 and
other BET bromodomain proteins regulate GLI transcription downstream of SMO and
suppressor of fused (SUFU), and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies reveal that
BRD4 directly occupies GLI1 and GLI2 promoters, with a substantial decrease in
engagement of these sites after treatment with JQ1, a small-molecule inhibitor
targeting BRD4. Globally, genes associated with medulloblastoma-specific GLI1
binding sites are downregulated in response to JQ1 treatment, supporting direct
regulation of GLI activity by BRD4. Notably, patient- and GEMM (genetically
engineered mouse model)-derived Hedgehog-driven tumors (basal cell carcinoma,
medulloblastoma and atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor) respond to JQ1 even when
harboring genetic lesions rendering them resistant to Smoothened antagonists.
Altogether, our results reveal BET proteins as critical regulators of Hedgehog
pathway transcriptional output and nominate BET bromodomain inhibitors as a
strategy for treating Hedgehog-driven tumors with emerged or a priori resistance 
to Smoothened antagonists.

PMCID: PMC4108909
PMID: 24973920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Oncotarget. 2014 Jun 30;5(12):4492-503.

Mode and specificity of binding of the small molecule GANT61 to GLI determines
inhibition of GLI-DNA binding.

Agyeman A(1), Jha BK, Mazumdar T, Houghton JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH.

The GLI genes, GLI1 and GLI2, are transcription factors that regulate target
genes at the distal end of the canonical Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway
(SHH->PTCH->SMO->GLI), tightly regulated in embryonic development, tissue
patterning and differentiation. Both GLI1 and GLI2 are oncogenes, constitutively 
activated in many types of human cancers. In colon cancer cells oncogenic
KRAS-GLI signaling circumvents the HH-SMO-GLI axis to channel through and
activate GLI in the transcriptional regulation of target genes. We have observed 
extensive cell death in a panel of 7 human colon carcinoma cell lines using the
small molecule GLI inhibitor GANT61. Using computational docking and experimental
confirmation by Surface Plasmon Resonance, GANT61 binds to the 5-zinc finger GLI1
protein between zinc fingers 2 and 3 at sites E119 and E167, independent of the
GLI-DNA binding region, and conserved between GLI1 and GLI2. GANT61 does not bind
to other zinc finger transcription factors (KLF4, TFIIß). Mutating the predicted 
GANT61 binding sites in GLI1 significantly inhibits GANT61-GLI binding and
GLI-luciferase activity. Data establish the specificity of GANT61 for targeting
GLI, and substantiate the critical role of GLI in cancer cell survival. Thus,
targeting GLI in cancer therapeutics may be of high impact.

PMCID: PMC4147340
PMID: 24962990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Acta Histochem. 2014 Oct;116(8):1501-8. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2014.06.001. Epub
2014 Jun 21.

Stable knockdown of protein kinase CK2-alpha (CK2a) inhibits migration and
invasion and induces inactivation of hedgehog signaling pathway in hepatocellular
carcinoma Hep G2 cells.

Wu D(1), Sui C(1), Meng F(1), Tian X(1), Fu L(1), Li Y(1), Qi X(1), Cui H(2), Liu
Y(3), Jiang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotherapy, Cancer Research Institute, The First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, People's
Republic of China. (2)College of Nursing, Liaoning Medical University, Jinzhou,
Liaoning 121001, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Medical Oncology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
110001, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Biotherapy, Cancer Research 
Institute, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang,
Liaoning 110001, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
cmu1hjiangyouhong@163.com.

Protein kinase CK2-alpha (CK2a), one isoform of the catalytic subunits of
serine/threonine kinase CK2, has been indicated to participate in tumorigenesis
of various malignancies, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In the present
study, in order to explore the potential role of CK2a in human HCC, we employed
short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated RNA interference (RNAi) technology to inhibit 
the endogenous CK2a expression in HCC cells and established a Hep G2 cell line
with stable knockdown of CK2a. Results from wound healing and transwell invasion 
assays indicated that stable knockdown of CK2a markedly inhibited Hep G2 cell
migration and invasion as compared with those transfected with a negative control
plasmid. This alteration was accompanied with expression down-regulation of
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9, Snail, Slug, Vimentin, and up-regulation
of epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin). Moreover, CK2a silencing also induced
inactivation of Hedgehog signaling pathway by inhibiting Gli1 and Patched homolog
1 (PTCH1) expressions in HCC cells. Collectively, these results demonstrate that 
knockdown of CK2a can suppress cell migration and invasion, reduces expression of
MMPs, inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and induces
inactivation of Hedgehog pathway in HCC cells in vitro. Our study provides in
vitro evidence to demonstrate that the pathogenesis of human HCC may be
correlated with the high expression of CK2a.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24958341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Oral Pathol Med. 2014 Sep;43(8):619-26. doi: 10.1111/jop.12180. Epub 2014 Jun
14.

Transcriptional profiles of SHH pathway genes in keratocystic odontogenic tumor
and ameloblastoma.

Gurgel CA(1), Buim ME, Carvalho KC, Sales CB, Reis MG, de Souza RO, de Faro
Valverde L, de Azevedo RA, Dos Santos JN, Soares FA, Ramos EA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry of the Federal University of Bahia, Bahia, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway activation has been identified as a key 
factor in the development of many types of tumors, including odontogenic tumors. 
Our study examined the expression of genes in the SHH pathway to characterize
their roles in the pathogenesis of keratocystic odontogenic tumors (KOT) and
ameloblastomas (AB).
METHODS: We quantified the expression of SHH, SMO, PTCH1, SUFU, GLI1, CCND1, and 
BCL2 genes by qPCR in a total of 23 KOT, 11 AB, and three non-neoplastic oral
mucosa (NNM). We also measured the expression of proteins related to this pathway
(CCND1 and BCL2) by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We observed overexpression of SMO, PTCH1, GLI1, and CCND1 genes in both 
KOT (23/23) and AB (11/11). However, we did not detect expression of the SHH gene
in 21/23 KOT and 10/11 AB tumors. Low levels of the SUFU gene were expressed in
KOT (P = 0.0199) and AB (P = 0.0127) relative to the NNM. Recurrent KOT exhibited
high levels of SMO (P = 0.035), PTCH1 (P = 0.048), CCND1 (P = 0.048), and BCL2 (P
= 0.045) transcripts. Using immunolabeling of CCND1, we observed no statistical
difference between primary and recurrent KOT (P = 0.8815), sporadic and NBCCS-KOT
(P = 0.7688), and unicystic and solid AB (P = 0.7521).
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of upstream (PTCH1 and SMO) and downstream (GLI1,
CCND1 and BCL2) genes in the SHH pathway leads to the constitutive activation of 
this pathway in KOT and AB and may suggest a mechanism for the development of
these types of tumors.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24930892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Chin J Integr Med. 2014 Oct;20(10):776-81. doi: 10.1007/s11655-014-1817-3. Epub
2014 Jun 13.

Effects of quercetin on hedgehog signaling in chronic myeloid leukemia KBM7
cells.

Li W(1), Zhao Y, Tao B, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Harbin Commercial University, Harbin, 150076, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of quercetin on Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in 
chronic myeloid leukemia KBM7 cells.
METHODS: The KBM7 cells were treated with 50, 100 and 200 µmol/L quercetin for 48
h respectively. And then the trypan blue assay was used to examine the
proliferative inhibition of quercetin. Apoptotic cells and cell cycle were
measured by flow cytometry. The mRNA and protein expression were detected by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blot,
respectively.
RESULTS: Quercetin significantly inhibited KBM7 cell proliferation, induced cell 
apoptosis, and blocked cell cycle at G1 phase, which were in dose-dependent
manners. The mRNA and protein expression of Smoothened and Glioma1 (Gli1), the
members of Hh pathway decreased after treatment with quercetin. The Bcl-2 and
Cyclin D1, targets of Hh signaling, also decreased after treatment with
quercetin, respectively. Quercetin also could increase p53 and Caspase-3
expression. Bcr-abl mRNA copies decreased, but no changes of phosphorylated
Bcr-abl and Bcr-abl proteins were observed, after treatment with quercetin.
CONCLUSION: Quercetin could inhibit Hh signaling and its downstream targets in
the KBM7 cells. And it might be one of mechanisms of inducing apoptosis and
inhibiting cell cycle by quercetin.

PMID: 24928376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Oncol Rep. 2014 Aug;32(2):469-74. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3257. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Gli1 contributes to cellular resistance to cisplatin through altered cellular
accumulation of the drug.

Amable L(1), Fain J(2), Gavin E(2), Reed E(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Mitchell Cancer Institute,
University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.

Cellular resistance to platinum anticancer compounds is governed by no less than 
two molecular processes; DNA repair and cellular accumulation of drug. Gli1 is an
upstream regulator of nucleotide excision repair, effecting this process through 
c-jun. We, therefore, investigated whether Gli1 plays a role in cellular
accumulation of cisplatin. Using a Gli1-specific shRNA, we explored the role of
Gli1 in the cellular accumulation and efflux of cisplatin, in cisplatin-resistant
A2780-CP70 human ovarian cancer cells. When Gli1 is inhibited, cellular uptake of
cisplatin was approximately 33% of the level of uptake under control conditions. 
When Gli1 is inhibited, cellular efflux of cisplatin was completely abrogated,
over a 12-h period of observation. We assayed nuclear lysates from these cells,
for the ability to bind the DNA sequence that is the Gli-binding site (GBS) in
the 5'UTR for each of five known cisplatin transmembrane transporters. Four of
these transporters are active in cisplatin uptake; and, one is active in
cisplatin efflux. In each case, nuclear lysate from A2780-CP70 cells binds the
GBS of the respective cisplatin transport gene. We conclude that Gli1 plays a
strong role in total cellular accumulation of cisplatin in these cells; and, that
the combined effects on cellular accumulation of drug and on DNA repair may
indicate a role for Gli1 in protecting cellular DNA from lethal types of DNA
damage.

PMCID: PMC4091882
PMID: 24926795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Int J Obes (Lond). 2015 Feb;39(2):321-30. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2014.102. Epub 2014
Jun 12.

Changes in morphology and function of adrenal cortex in mice fed a high-fat diet.

Swierczynska MM(1), Mateska I(1), Peitzsch M(2), Bornstein SR(3), Chavakis T(3), 
Eisenhofer G(2), Lamounier-Zepter V(3), Eaton S(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden,
Germany [2] Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Carl Gustav 
Carus, Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. (2)Department of
Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital Carl Gustav
Carus, Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden University 
of Technology, Dresden, Germany. (4)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell
Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Obesity is a major risk factor for the development of type
2 diabetes and other debilitating diseases. Obesity and diabetes are intimately
linked with altered levels of adrenal steroids. Elevated levels of these hormones
induce insulin resistance and cause cardiovascular diseases. The mechanisms
underlying obesity-related alterations in adrenal steroids are still not well
understood. Here, we investigated how diet-induced obesity affects the morphology
and function of the mouse adrenal cortex.
METHODS: We fed animals either a high-fat diet (HFD) or a normal diet (60% kcal
from fat or 10% kcal from fat, respectively) for 18 weeks. We then assessed
various aspects of adrenal gland morphology and function, as well as basal plasma
concentrations of steroid hormones and ACTH.
RESULTS: We show that adrenal glands of mice fed a HFD release more
corticosterone and aldosterone, resulting in higher plasma levels. This increase 
is driven by adrenal cortical hyperplasia, and by increased expression of
multiple genes involved in steroidogenesis. We demonstrate that diet-induced
obesity elevates Sonic hedgehog signaling in Gli1-positive progenitors, which
populate the adrenal capsule and give rise to the steroidogenic cells of the
adrenal cortex. Feeding animals with a HFD depletes Gli1-positive progenitors, as
the adrenal cortex expands.
CONCLUSIONS: This work provides insight into how diet-induced obesity changes the
biology of the adrenal gland. The association of these changes with increased Shh
signaling suggests possible therapeutic strategies for obesity-related steroid
hormone dysfunction.

PMID: 24919565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Med Oncol. 2014 Jul;31(7):41. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0041-5. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Sonic hedgehog signaling may promote invasion and metastasis of oral squamous
cell carcinoma by activating MMP-9 and E-cadherin expression.

Fan HX(1), Wang S, Zhao H, Liu N, Chen D, Sun M, Zheng JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Basic Medical Science College, Harbin Medical
University, 194 Xuefu-Road, Harbin, 150081, People's Republic of China.

The aim of this study was to investigate sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway
components (Shh and Gli-1), E-cadherin, and MMP-9 expression in human oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and to evaluate their role in prognosis.
Expression of Shh, Gli-1, and MMP-9 was significantly upregulated in 74 OSCC
samples compared with non-cancerous tissue samples (Shh IOD: 162.44 ± 29.35 and
608.82 ± 170.99; Gli-1 IOD: 203.50 ± 71.57 and 831.11 ± 242.352; MMP-9 IOD:
196.69 ± 64.48 and 721.64 ± 197.99 in non-cancerous and tumor tissues,
respectively, P < 0.01), whereas E-cadherin expression was downregulated
(E-cadherin IOD: 1,006.19 ± 230.42 and 442.20 ± 156.11; in non-cancerous and
tumor tissues, respectively, P < 0.01). Highly expressed proteins were associated
with lymph node metastasis; moreover, overexpression of Gli-1 was related to
tumor recurrence and cancer clinical staging. Spearman's analysis indicated that 
the expression of Gli-1 and MMP-9 was positively correlated, whereas expression
of Shh/Gli-1 and E-cadherin was negatively correlated. Kaplan-Meier results
revealed that patients with low Shh, Gli-1, and MMP-9 expression survived longer 
than those with high expression. In contrast, low E-cadherin expression was
associated with poor prognosis (P < 0.01). In conclusions, transcription factor
Gli-1 of the SHH signaling pathway may be an important mediator of invasion and
metastasis of OSCC through induced expression of MMP-9 and E-cadherin and may
serve as a new prognostic marker.

PMID: 24915900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Oct 15;23(20):2501-12. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0604. Epub 2014
Jul 14.

IGF2BP1 expression in human mesenchymal stem cells significantly affects their
proliferation and is under the epigenetic control of TET1/2 demethylases.

Mahaira LG(1), Katsara O, Pappou E, Iliopoulou EG, Fortis S, Antsaklis A,
Fotinopoulos P, Baxevanis CN, Papamichail M, Perez SA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Cancer Immunology and Immunotherapy Center, Saint Savas Cancer Hospital ,
Athens, Greece .

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are a population of cells harboring in many tissues
with the ability to differentiate toward many different lineages. Unraveling the 
molecular profile of MSCs is of great importance due to the fact that these cells
are very often used in preclinical and clinical studies. We have previously
reported the expression of insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA binding protein 1
(IGF2BP1) an oncofetal mRNA-binding protein-in different stem cell types such as 
bone marrow (BM)-MSC and umbilical cord blood (UCB)-hematopoietic stem cells.
Here, we demonstrate that MSCs of adipose tissue, BM, and UC origin have a
differential pattern of IGF2BP1 and ten-eleven-translocate 1/2 (TET1/2)
expression that could correlate with their proliferation potential. Upon IGF2BP1 
interference, a significant reduction of cell proliferation is observed,
accompanied by reduced expression of c-MYC and GLI1 and increased p21. We also
present, for the first time, evidence that IGF2BP1 is epigenetically regulated by
TET1 and TET2 demethylases. Specifically, we show that TET1 directly binds to the
promoter of IGF2BP1 gene and affects the hydroxymethylation status of its
promoter. These results indicate that IGF2BP1 and TET1/2 contribute to the
stemness of MSCs, at least regarding their proliferative potential.

PMID: 24915579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Trends Mol Med. 2014 Aug;20(8):416-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2014.05.003. Epub
2014 Jun 4.

Yin-Yang strands of PCAF/Hedgehog axis in cancer control.

Infante P(1), Canettieri G(2), Gulino A(3), Di Marcotullio L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Life Nanoscience (CLNS), Italian Institute of Technology-Sapienza, 
00161 Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, "La Sapienza" University,
00161 Rome, Italy. (3)Center for Life Nanoscience (CLNS), Italian Institute of
Technology-Sapienza, 00161 Rome, Italy; Department of Molecular Medicine, "La
Sapienza" University, 00161 Rome, Italy; IRCCS Neuromed, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy.
Electronic address: alberto.gulino@uniroma1.it. (4)Department of Molecular
Medicine, "La Sapienza" University, 00161 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
lucia.dimarcotullio@uniroma1.it.

PCAF (p300/CBP associated factor) harbors acetyltransferase and a recently
identified ubiquitylation activity that regulates gene expression in response to 
genotoxic stress or mitogenic signals. We highlight the dual role of PCAF in the 
control of Hedgehog signaling, a master regulator of tissue development,
stemness, and tumorigenesis. By promoting histone acetylation at Hedgehog/GLI1
target gene promoters or direct ubiquitylation and proteolysis of GLI1, the
PCAF/GLI1 axis stands as a promising therapeutic target for Hedgehog-dependent
tumors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24906555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jun 3;13:137. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-137.

Estrogen promotes stemness and invasiveness of ER-positive breast cancer cells
through Gli1 activation.

Sun Y, Wang Y, Fan C, Gao P, Wang X(1), Wei G, Wei J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Cancer Center, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University,
107 Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan 250012, China. wangxw12@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Although long-term estrogen (E2) exposure is associated with
increased breast cancer (BC) risk, and E2 appears to sustain growth of BC cells
that express functional estrogen receptors (ERs), its role in promoting BC stem
cells (CSCs) remains unclear. Considering that Gli1, part of the Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) developmental pathway, has been shown to mediate CSCs, we investigated
whether E2 and Gli1 could promote CSCs and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in ER+ BC cell lines.
METHODS: We knocked down Gli1 in several BC cells using a doxycycline-controlled 
vector, and compared Gli1-knockdown cells and Gli1+ cells in behavior and
expression of ER, Gli1, ALDH1 (BC-CSC marker), Shh, Ptch1 (Shh receptor) and
SOX2, Nanog and Bmi-1 (CSC-associated transcriptions factors), using PCR; tissue 
microarrays, western blot; chromatin immunoprecipitation q-PCR, confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy; fluorescence-activated cell sorting; annexin-flow 
cytometry (for apoptosis); mammosphere culture; and colony formation,
immunohistochemistry, Matrigel and wound-scratch assays.
RESULTS: Both mRNA and protein expressions of ER correlated with those of Gli1
and ALDH1. E2 induced Gli1 expression only in ER+ BC cells. E2 promoted CSC
renewal, invasiveness and EMT in ER+/Gli1+ cells but not in Gli1-knockdown cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that estrogen acts via Gli1 to promote CSC
development and EMT in ER+ BC cells. These findings also imply that Gli1 mediates
cancer stem cells, and thus could be a target of a novel treatment for ER+ breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4057898
PMID: 24889938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Anim Sci J. 2014 Sep;85(9):840-7. doi: 10.1111/asj.12220. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

Cyclopamine did not affect mouse oocyte maturation in vitro but decreased early
embryonic development.

Liu Y(1), Wei Z, Huang Y, Bai C, Zan L, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
China.

Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been studied in various animal body life procedures and
is suggested to be important for the development of multiple organs. The genes
involved in the Hh signaling pathway were expressed in the ovary of mice, pigs
and cattle. However, the function of Hh signaling pathway on oocyte maturation
and early embryonic development is still controversial. We detected the effect of
sonic hedgehog (Shh) and cyclopamine on the in vitro maturation of mouse oocytes 
and embryo development. The results showed that the presence of Shh or
cyclopamine resulted in similar oocyte maturation to control groups. Shh did not 
improve early embryonic development. However, the supplement of cyclopamine
depressed early embryo development. The mRNA of shh, ptch1, smo and gli1 were
less detected in the denuded oocytes. The expression levels of ptch1 ascended
from the uncleaved zygote to blastocyst stage. Smo or gli1 were expressed on a
higher level at the two-cell or four-cell stage in early embryonic development
separately. Therefore, Shh did not affect mouse oocyte maturation and early
embryo development, but cyclopamine led to inhibited development of mouse early
embryo. The effects of Hh signaling on the oocyte maturation and early embryo
development might be species-specific.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 24889396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):324-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.014. Epub 2014 
Jun 2.

Differential regulation of Gli proteins by Sufu in the lung affects PDGF
signaling and myofibroblast development.

Lin C(1), Chen MH(2), Yao E(1), Song H(1), Gacayan R(1), Hui CC(3), Chuang PT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94158, United States. (2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94158, United States; USDA/ARS Children<U+05F3>s Nutrition
Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, United States. (3)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Cardiovascular Research Institute,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, United States. Electronic
address: pao-tien.chuang@ucsf.edu.

Mammalian Hedgehog (Hh) signaling relies on three Gli transcription factors to
mediate Hh responses. This process is controlled in part by a major negative
regulator, Sufu, through its effects on Gli protein level, distribution and
activity. In this report, we showed that Sufu regulates Gli1 protein levels by
antagonizing Numb/Itch. Otherwise, Numb/Itch would induce Gli1 protein
degradation. This is in contrast to inhibition of Spop-mediated degradation of
Gli2/3 by Sufu. Thus, controlling protein levels of all three Gli genes by Sufu
is a conserved mechanism to modulate Hh responses albeit via distinct pathways.
These findings in cell-based assays were further validated in vivo. In analyzing 
how Sufu controls Gli proteins in different tissues, we discovered that loss of
Sufu in the lung exerts different effects on Hh target genes. Hh targets
Ptch1/Hhip are upregulated in Sufu-deficient lungs, consistent with Hh pathway
activation. Surprisingly, protein levels of Hh target Gli1 are reduced. We also
found that myofibroblasts are absent from many prospective alveoli of
Sufu-deficient lungs. Myofibroblast development is dependent on PDGF signaling.
Interestingly, analysis of the Pdgfra promoter revealed a canonical Gli-binding
site where Gli1 resides. These studies support a model in which loss of Sufu
contributes to compromised Pdgfra activation and disrupts myofibroblast
development in the lung. Our work illustrates the unappreciated complexity of Hh 
responses where distinct Hh targets could respond differently depending on the
availability of Gli proteins that control their expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4106470
PMID: 24886827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Nature. 2014 Jul 3;511(7507):90-3. doi: 10.1038/nature13283. Epub 2014 May 28.

The sonic hedgehog factor GLI1 imparts drug resistance through inducible
glucuronidation.

Zahreddine HA(1), Culjkovic-Kraljacic B(1), Assouline S(2), Gendron P(1), Romeo
AA(3), Morris SJ(3), Cormack G(1), Jaquith JB(4), Cerchietti L(5), Cocolakis
E(2), Amri A(1), Bergeron J(6), Leber B(7), Becker MW(8), Pei S(9), Jordan CT(9),
Miller WH(2), Borden KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer and Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Downtown Station,
Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada. (2)Segal Cancer Centre, Lady Davis Institute,
Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, 3755 Côte-Ste-Catherine Road,
Montréal, Québec H3T 1E2, Canada. (3)Pharmascience Inc., 6111 Royalmount Avenue, 
Montreal, Quebec H4P 2T4, Canada. (4)1] Pharmascience Inc., 6111 Royalmount
Avenue, Montreal, Quebec H4P 2T4, Canada [2] JAQJAM Consulting, Montreal J7V 9B6,
Canada. (5)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 1305 York Avenue, New York, New York
10021, USA. (6)Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, 5415 Boulevard de l'Assomption,
Montréal, Québec H1T 2M4, Canada. (7)McMaster University/Hamilton Health
Sciences, 237 Barton Street East, Hamilton, Ontario L8L 2X2, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, 601 Elmwood Avenue,
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627, USA. (9)Division of
Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, 13123 East
16th Avenue, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Jul;14(7):452-3.

Drug resistance is a major hurdle in oncology. Responses of acute myeloid
leukaemia (AML) patients to cytarabine (Ara-C)-based therapies are often short
lived with a median overall survival of months. Therapies are under development
to improve outcomes and include targeting the eukaryotic translation initiation
factor (eIF4E) with its inhibitor ribavirin. In a Phase II clinical trial in poor
prognosis AML, ribavirin monotherapy yielded promising responses including
remissions; however, all patients relapsed. Here we identify a novel form of drug
resistance to ribavirin and Ara-C. We observe that the sonic hedgehog
transcription factor glioma-associated protein 1 (GLI1) and the UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A) family of enzymes are elevated in resistant
cells. UGT1As add glucuronic acid to many drugs, modifying their activity in
diverse tissues. GLI1 alone is sufficient to drive UGT1A-dependent
glucuronidation of ribavirin and Ara-C, and thus drug resistance. Resistance is
overcome by genetic or pharmacological inhibition of GLI1, revealing a potential 
strategy to overcome drug resistance in some patients.

PMCID: PMC4138053
PMID: 24870236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Neurooncol. 2014 Sep;119(2):243-51. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1481-7. Epub 2014
May 28.

Expression of Hedgehog ligand and signal transduction components in mutually
distinct isocitrate dehydrogenase mutant glioma cells supports a role for
paracrine signaling.

Abiria SA(1), Williams TV, Munden AL, Grover VK, Wallace A, Lundberg CJ, Valadez 
JG, Cooper MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, MRB III, Rm.
6160, 465 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates the growth of malignant gliomas by a
ligand-dependent mechanism. The cellular source of Sonic Hh ligand and mode of
signaling have not been clearly defined due to the lack of methods to
definitively identify neoplastic cells in glioma specimens. Using an antibody
specific for mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase protein expression to identify
glioma cells, we demonstrate that Sonic Hh ligand and the pathway components
Patched1 (PTCH1) and GLI1 are expressed in neoplastic cells. Further, Sonic Hh
ligand and its transcriptional targets, PTCH1 and GLI1, are expressed in mutually
distinct populations of neoplastic cells. These findings support a paracrine mode
of intratumoral Hh signaling in malignant gliomas.

PMCID: PMC4290668
PMID: 24867209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. PLoS One. 2014 May 27;9(5):e97926. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097926. eCollection
2014.

Mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neuronal differentiation does not involve
GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling and is under the direct influence of canonical WNT
signaling.

Mesman S(1), von Oerthel L(1), Smidt MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, CNS, FNWI University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and WNT proteins are key regulators in many developmental
processes, like embryonic patterning and brain development. In the brain, SHH is 
expressed in a gradient starting in the floor plate (FP) progressing ventrally in
the midbrain, where it is thought to be involved in the development and
specification of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mdDA) neurons. GLI2A-mediated
SHH-signaling induces the expression of Gli1, which is inhibited when cells start
expressing SHH themselves. To determine whether mdDA neurons receive
GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling during differentiation, we used a BAC-transgenic
mouse model expressing eGFP under the control of the Gli1 promoter. This
mouse-model allowed for mapping of GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling temporal and
spatial in the mouse midbrain. Since mdDA neurons are born from E10.5, peaking at
E11.0-E12.0, we examined Gli1-eGFP embryos at E11.5, E12.5, and E13.5, indicating
whether Gli1 was induced before or during mdDA development and differentiation.
Our data indicate that GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling is not involved in mdDA
neuronal differentiation. However, it appears to be involved in the
differentiation of neurons which make up a subset of the red nucleus (RN). In
order to detect whether mdDA neuronal differentiation may be under the control of
canonical WNT-signaling, we used a transgenic mouse-line expressing LacZ under
the influence of stable ß-catenin. Here, we show that TH+ neurons of the midbrain
receive canonical WNT-signaling during differentiation. Therefore, we suggest
that early SHH-signaling is indirectly involved in mdDA development through early
patterning of the midbrain area, whereas canonical WNT-signaling is directly
involved in the differentiation of the mdDA neuronal population.

PMCID: PMC4035267
PMID: 24865218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Aug;10(2):749-54. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2246. Epub 2014 May 16.

Evaluation of Jagged2 and Gli1 expression and their correlation with prognosis in
human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang J(1), Tu K(1), Yang W(1), Li C(1), Yao Y(1), Zheng X(1), Liu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

Jagged2 is closely associated with numerous congenital diseases and has an
important role in multiple malignancies. It has been identified that Jagged2 is a
sonic hedgehog-regulated factor. However, its expression and correlation with
Gli1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain unknown. A total of 58 samples of
surgically resected paired HCC and normal tumor-adjacent tissues were collected, 
and the Jagged2 and Gli1 expression was detected in the samples using
immunohistochemical staining. The correlation between Jagged2 and Gli1 protein
expression, and their correlation with the clinicopathological features of HCC
were analyzed. The protein expression of Jagged2 and Gli1 were significantly
upregulated in HCC tissues compared with the normal tumor-adjacent tissues
(P<0.001, respectively), and Jagged2 expression was positively correlated with
Gli1 protein in HCC tissues (r=0.643, P<0.001). Jagged2 and Gli1 protein were
expressed at significantly higher levels in patients with intrahepatic
metastasis, high histological grade and advanced tumor-node-metastasis stage
(TNM) stage (P<0.05, respectively). With the Cox proportional hazard regression
mode, the independent factors predictive of poor long-term HCC survival following
radical liver resection included high expression of Jagged2, advanced TNM stage
and high histological grade (P<0.05). In HCC, high expression of Jagged2 was
closely correlated with poor clinicopathological features, and it may therefore
be a potential prognosis predictor for patients with HCC.

PMID: 24858621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2014 Aug;9(8):969-84. doi: 10.1517/17460441.2014.920816.
Epub 2014 May 23.

Discovery and preclinical development of vismodegib.

Gould SE(1), Low JA, Marsters JC Jr, Robarge K, Rubin LL, de Sauvage FJ,
Sutherlin DP, Wong H, Yauch RL.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Oncology, Genentech, Inc. , 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA ,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Vismodegib is the first Hedgehog (Hh) pathway inhibitor approved in
the US for the treatment of adults with metastatic or locally advanced basal cell
carcinoma (BCC). It was approved by the US FDA on 30 January 2012, and by the
European Commission on 12 July 2013, for the treatment of adult patients with
symptomatic metastatic BCC, or locally advanced BCC inappropriate for surgery or 
radiotherapy. Vismodegib selectively inhibits the Hh signaling pathway, binding
to and inhibiting a critical signal-transducing component of the pathway,
Smoothened (SMO). Vismodegib was discovered by Genentech, Inc., under a
collaboration agreement with Curis, Inc.
AREAS COVERED: This article reviews the development of vismodegib from its
discovery, preclinical pharmacology and validation to the clinical
pharmacokinetics and validation in Phase I and II clinical investigations. We
also provide a survey of other Hh pathway inhibitors in clinical development.
EXPERT OPINION: The authors' experience in target-based drug discovery suggests
that vismodegib's path to the clinic deserves some reflection to identify key
steps that have contributed to its success. Targeting the Hh pathway with
vismodegib blocks the abberant signaling caused by mutational inactivation of the
negative regulator PTCH1 or mutational activation of SMO. Vismodegib gives
physicians a treatment option for patients with locally advanced or metastatic
BCC for whom surgery or radiation is not recommended.

PMID: 24857041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Urol Oncol. 2014 Jul;32(5):539-45. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2014.03.006. Epub 2014 
May 22.

Clinicopathological correlates of Gli1 expression in a population-based cohort of
patients with newly diagnosed bladder cancer.

Sverrisson EF(1), Zens MS(2), Fei DL(3), Andrews A(2), Schned A(4), Robbins D(5),
Kelsey KT(6), Li H(7), DiRenzo J(8), Karagas MR(2), Seigne JD(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery (Urology), Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, 
NH. (2)Department of Community and Family Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH. (3)Cancer Biology Section, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD. (4)Department of Pathology (Urology), Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon, NH. (5)Molecular Oncology Program, Department of Surgery,
University of Miami, Miami, FL. (6)Department of Community Health, Brown
University, Providence, RI. (7)Center for Prostate Disease Research, Uniformed
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD. (8)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH.
(9)Department of Surgery (Urology), Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, 
NH. Electronic address: john.d.seigne@hitchcock.org.

Comment in
    Urol Oncol. 2014 Jul;32(5):546-8.

INTRODUCTION: Dysregulation of the hedgehog signaling pathway has been linked to 
the development and progression of a variety of different human tumors including 
cancers of the skin, brain, colon, prostate, blood, and pancreas. We assessed the
clinicopathological factors that are potentially related to expression of Gli1,
the transcription factor that is thought to be the most reliable marker of
hedgehog pathway activation in bladder cancer.
METHODS: Bladder cancer cases were identified from the New Hampshire State Cancer
Registry as histologically confirmed primary bladder cancer diagnosed between
January 1, 2002, and July 31, 2004. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on
a tissue microarray to detect Gli1 and p53 expression in these bladder tumors. We
computed odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% CIs for Gli1 positivity for pathological
category using T category (from TNM), invasiveness, and grade with both the World
Health Organization 1973 and World Health Organization International Society of
Urological Pathology criteria. We calculated hazard ratios and their 95% CI for
Gli1 positivity and recurrence for both Ta-category and invasive bladder tumors
(T1+).
RESULTS: A total of 194 men and 67 women, whose tumors were assessable for Gli1
staining, were included in the study. No appreciable differences in Gli1 staining
were noted by sex, age, smoking status, or high-risk occupation. Ta-category
tumors were more likely to stain for Gli1 as compared with T1-category tumors
(adjusted OR = 0.38, CI: 0.17-0.87). Similarly, low-grade (grades 1-2) tumors
were more likely to stain for Gli1 as compared with high-grade tumors (grade 3)
(adjusted OR = 0.44, CI: 0.21-0.93). In a Cox proportional hazards regression
analysis, non-muscle-invasive bladder tumors expressing Gli1 were less likely to 
recur (adjusted hazard ratio = 0.48; CI: 0.28-0.82; P<0.05) than those in which
Gli1 was absent.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that Gli1 expression may be a marker of
low-stage, low-grade bladder tumors and an indicator of a reduced risk of
recurrence in this group.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4243987
PMID: 24856810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biochem J. 2014 Aug 1;461(3):469-76. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130709.

Overlapping binding sites for importin ß1 and suppressor of fused (SuFu) on
glioma-associated oncogene homologue 1 (Gli1) regulate its nuclear localization.

Szczepny A, Wagstaff KM(1), Dias M(1), Gajewska K(1), Wang C(1), Davies RG(1),
Kaur G(1), Ly-Huynh J, Loveland KL, Jans DA.

Author information: 
(1)§Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia.

A key factor in oncogenesis is the transport into the nucleus of oncogenic
signalling molecules, such as Gli1 (glioma-associated oncogene homologue 1), the 
central transcriptional activator in the Hedgehog signalling pathway. Little is
known, however, how factors such as Gli are transported into the nucleus and how 
this may be regulated by interaction with other cellular factors, such as the
negative regulator suppressor of fused (SuFu). In the present study we show for
the first time that nuclear entry of Gli1 is regulated by a unique mechanism
through mutually exclusive binding by its nuclear import factor Impß1 (importin
ß1) and SuFu. Using quantitative live mammalian cell imaging, we show that
nuclear accumulation of GFP-Gli1 fusion proteins, but not of a control protein,
is specifically inhibited by co-expression of SuFu. Using a direct binding assay,
we show that Impß1 exhibits a high nanomolar affinity to Gli1, with specific
knockdown of Impß1 expression being able to inhibit Gli1 nuclear accumulation,
thus implicating Impß1 as the nuclear transporter for Gli1 for the first time.
SuFu also binds to Gli1 with a high nanomolar affinity, intriguingly being able
to compete with Impß1 for binding to Gli1, through the fact that the sites for
SuFu and Impß1 binding overlap at the Gli1 N-terminus. The results indicate for
the first time that the relative intracellular concentrations of SuFu and Impß1
are likely to determine the localization of Gli1, with implications for its
action in cancer, as well as in developmental systems.

PMID: 24854174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 11;449(4):444-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.048. Epub 2014 May 20.

Characterization of the human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil)
mediated Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling transduction in proliferating mammalian
dopaminergic neurons.

Sun L(1), Carr AL(2), Li P(3), Lee J(3), McGregor M(3), Li L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
46556, USA; Department of Physiology, Nankai University School of Medicine,
Tianjin 300071, China. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre 
Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA; Center for Zebrafish Research, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. (3)Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. (4)Department of Biological 
Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA; Center for
Zebrafish Research, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA.
Electronic address: Li.78@nd.edu.

The human oncogene SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus (Stil) is highly conserved in all 
vertebrate species. In humans, the expression of Stil is involved in cancer cell 
survival, apoptosis and proliferation. In this research, we investigated the
roles of Stil expression in cell proliferation of mammalian dopaminergic (DA)
PC12 cells. Stil functions through the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal transduction
pathway. Co-immunoprecipitation tests revealed that STIL interacts with Shh
downstream components, which include SUFU and GLI1. By examining the expression
of Stil, Gli1, CyclinD2 (cell-cycle marker) and PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen), we found that up-regulation of Stil expression (transfection with
overexpression plasmids) increased Shh signaling transduction and PC12 cell
proliferation, whereas down-regulation of Stil expression (by shRNA) inhibited
Shh signaling transduction, and thereby decreased PC12 cell proliferation.
Transient transfection of PC12 cells with Stil knockdown or overexpression
plasmids did not affect PC12 cell neural differentiation, further indicating the 
specific roles of Stil in cell proliferation. The results from this research
suggest that Stil may serve as a bio-marker for neurological diseases involved in
DA neurons, such as Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24853807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014 Sep;33:93-104. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.003. Epub 
2014 May 19.

Context-dependent signal integration by the GLI code: the oncogenic load,
pathways, modifiers and implications for cancer therapy.

Aberger F(1), Ruiz I Altaba A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse
34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria. Electronic address: fritz.aberger@sbg.ac.at.
(2)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, 8242 CMU, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland. Electronic
address: ariel.ruizaltaba@unige.ch.

Canonical Hedgehog (HH) signaling leads to the regulation of the GLI code: the
sum of all positive and negative functions of all GLI proteins. In humans, the
three GLI factors encode context-dependent activities with GLI1 being mostly an
activator and GLI3 often a repressor. Modulation of GLI activity occurs at
multiple levels, including by co-factors and by direct modification of GLI
structure. Surprisingly, the GLI proteins, and thus the GLI code, is also
regulated by multiple inputs beyond HH signaling. In normal development and
homeostasis these include a multitude of signaling pathways that regulate
proto-oncogenes, which boost positive GLI function, as well as tumor suppressors,
which restrict positive GLI activity. In cancer, the acquisition of oncogenic
mutations and the loss of tumor suppressors - the oncogenic load - regulates the 
GLI code toward progressively more activating states. The fine and reversible
balance of GLI activating GLI(A) and GLI repressing GLI(R) states is lost in
cancer. Here, the acquisition of GLI(A) levels above a given threshold is
predicted to lead to advanced malignant stages. In this review we highlight the
concepts of the GLI code, the oncogenic load, the context-dependency of GLI
action, and different modes of signaling integration such as that of HH and EGF. 
Targeting the GLI code directly or indirectly promises therapeutic benefits
beyond the direct blockade of individual pathways.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4151135
PMID: 24852887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2014 Aug;24(4):130-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2014.04.002. Epub 
2014 Apr 16.

Investigation of IGF2, Hedgehog and fusion gene expression profiles in pediatric 
sarcomas.

de Souza RR(1), Oliveira ID(2), del Giúdice Paniago M(3), Yaoita FH(4), Caran
EM(5), Macedo CR(6), Petrilli AS(7), Abib Sde C(8), de Seixas Alves MT(9), de
Toledo SR(10).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: rramos.souza@hotmail.com. (2)Pediatric Oncology Institute
(GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil; Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Federal University
of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
indhiradias@graacc.org.br. (3)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department
of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: mariopaniago@graacc.org.br. (4)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC),
Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil;
Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Federal University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: fernando.yaoita@gmail.com.
(5)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
elianacaran@graacc.org.br. (6)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department
of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: carladonatomacedo@uol.com.br. (7)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), 
Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: sergiopetrilli@graacc.org.br. (8)Pediatric Oncology Institute
(GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil; Division of Pediatric Surgery, Federal University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: simoneabib@uol.com.br. (9)Pediatric
Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of Pathology, Federal University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: mtseixas@patologia.epm.br.
(10)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: silviatoledo@graacc.org.br.

The childhood sarcomas are malignant tumors with high mortality rates. They are
divided into two genetic categories: a category without distinct pattern
karyotypic changes and the other category showing unique translocations that
originate gene rearrangements. This category includes rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS),
Ewing's sarcoma (ES) and synovial sarcoma (SS). Diverse studies have related
development genes, such as; IGF2, IHH, PTCH1 and GLI1 and
sarcomatogenesis.OBJECTIVE: To characterize the RMS, ES and SS rearrangements, we
quantify the expression of IGF2 IHH, PTCH1 and GLI1 genes and correlate molecular
data with clinical parameters of patients.
DESIGN: We analyzed 29 RMS, 10 SS and 60 ES tumor samples by RT-PCR (polymerase
chain reaction-reverse transcription) and qPCR (quantitative PCR).
RESULTS: Among the samples of ARMS, 50% had rearrangements of PAX3/7-FOXO1, 60%
of ES samples were EWS-FLI1 positive and 90% of SS samples were positive for
SS18-SSX1/2. In relation to the control reference samples (QPCR Human Reference
Total RNA-Stratagene, Human Skeletal Muscle Total RNA-Ambion, Universal RNA Human
Normal Tissues-Ambion), RMS samples showed a high IGF2 gene expression
(p<0.0001). Moreover, ES samples showed a low IGF2 gene expression (p<0.0001) and
high IHH (p<0.0001), PTCH1 (p=0.0173) and GLI1 (p=0.0113) gene expressions.
CONCLUSIONS: The molecular characterization of IGF and Hedgehog pathway in these 
pediatric sarcomas may collaborate to enable a better understanding of the
biological behavior of these neoplasms.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24846856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Elife. 2014 May 7;3:e02669. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02669.

Prospective identification of functionally distinct stem cells and
neurosphere-initiating cells in adult mouse forebrain.

Mich JK(1), Signer RA(1), Nakada D(2), Pineda A(1), Burgess RJ(1), Vue TY(3),
Johnson JE(3), Morrison SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Research Institute, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United
States. (2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, United States. (3)Department of Neuroscience, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Research Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States
sean.morrison@utsouthwestern.edu.

Neurosphere formation is commonly used as a surrogate for neural stem cell (NSC) 
function but the relationship between neurosphere-initiating cells (NICs) and
NSCs remains unclear. We prospectively identified, and isolated by flow
cytometry, adult mouse lateral ventricle subventricular zone (SVZ) NICs as
Glast(mid)EGFR(high)PlexinB2(high)CD24(-/low)O4/PSA-NCAM(-/low)Ter119/CD45(-)
(GEPCOT) cells. They were highly mitotic and short-lived in vivo based on
fate-mapping with Ascl1(CreERT2) and Dlx1(CreERT2). In contrast, pre-GEPCOT cells
were quiescent, expressed higher Glast, and lower EGFR and PlexinB2. Pre-GEPCOT
cells could not form neurospheres but expressed the stem cell markers
Slc1a3-CreER(T), GFAP-CreER(T2), Sox2(CreERT2), and Gli1(CreERT2) and were
long-lived in vivo. While GEPCOT NICs were ablated by temozolomide, pre-GEPCOT
cells survived and repopulated the SVZ. Conditional deletion of the Bmi-1
polycomb protein depleted pre-GEPCOT and GEPCOT cells, though pre-GEPCOT cells
were more dependent upon Bmi-1 for Cdkn2a (p16(Ink4a)) repression. Our data
distinguish quiescent NSCs from NICs and make it possible to study their
properties in vivo.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02669.001.

Copyright © 2014, Mich et al.

PMCID: PMC4038845
PMID: 24843006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Aug;34(2):507-12. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1783. Epub 2014 May 
16.

The large intracellular loop of ptch1 mediates the non-canonical Hedgehog pathway
through cyclin B1 in nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.

Yu FY(1), Hong YY(1), Qu JF(1), Chen F(2), Li TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Haidian District, Beijing 100081, P.R. China. (2)Central Laboratory,
Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Haidian District, Beijing
100081, P.R. China.

Mutations in the transmembrane receptor patched homolog 1 (Homo sapiens) (ptch1) 
are responsible for nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), an autosomal
dominant disorder that causes developmental abnormalities and predisposes the
affected individuals to cancer. Many of these mutations, including mutations in
the C-terminus of the large intracellular loop (ICL) of ptch1 (p.C727VfsX745 and 
p.S733IfsX736), result in the premature truncation of the protein. The
ptch1-C727VfsX745 and ptch1-S733IfsX736 mutations have been identified in
patients with NBCCS-associated keratocystic odontogenic tumors (KCOTs). In the
present study, we found that the molecular mechanisms regulated by the
non-canonical Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway through cyclin B1 are involved in
the pathogenesis of NBCCS-associated KCOTs. In contrast to wild-type ptch1,
ptch1-C727VfsX745 and ptch1-S733IfsX736 clearly exhibited reduced binding to
cyclin B1. Moreover, the cells expressing these two mutations demonstrated an
increase in cell cycle progression and these two mutation constructs failed to
inhibit cell proliferation. In addition, the mutants enhanced the activity of
glioma-associated oncogene family zinc finger 1 (GLI1), a downstream reporter of 
Hh signaling. Thus, our data suggest that the non-canonical Hh pathway mediated
through ptch1 and cyclin B1 is involved in the pathogenesis of NBCCS-associated
KCOTs. The C-terminus of ICL in ptch1 may also be a potential therapeutic target 
in the treatment of this disease.

PMID: 24840883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2014 Sep;45(3):363-71. doi: 10.1007/s12029-014-9617-8.

In the war against solid tumors arsenic trioxide needs partners.

Subbarayan PR(1), Ardalan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 1550 NW
10th Avenue, FOX 431A, Miami, FL, 33136, USA.

In the past decade, the therapeutic potential of arsenic trioxide (ATO) in the
treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) was recognized. This encouraged
other investigators to test the efficacy of ATO in the management of other
hematological and solid tumor malignancies. Notably, as a single agent, arsenic
trioxide did not benefit patients diagnosed with solid tumors. However, when it
was combined with other agents, treatment benefit emerged. In this article, we
have summarized the outcome of clinical trials that used arsenic trioxide as a
single agent as well as in combination settings in patients diagnosed with solid 
tumors. We have also reviewed possible additional mechanisms by which ATO may be 
useful as a chemosensitizer in combination therapy. We hope that our review will 
encourage clinical investigators to rationally combine ATO with additional
chemotherapeutic agents in treating patients diagnosed with solid tumors.

PMID: 24825822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2014 Jul 1;307(1):H66-72. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00166.2014. Epub 2014 May 9.

Gi proteins mediate activation of the canonical hedgehog pathway in the
myocardium.

Carbe CJ(1), Cheng L(1), Addya S(2), Gold JI(3), Gao E(3), Koch WJ(3), Riobo
NA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; (2)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Center 
for Translational Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Natalia.riobo@jefferson.edu.

During myocardial ischemia, upregulation of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway promotes
neovascularization and increases cardiomyocyte survival. The canonical Hh pathway
activates a transcriptional program through the Gli family of transcription
factors by derepression of the seven-transmembrane protein smoothened (Smo). The 
mechanisms linking Smo to Gli are complex and, in some cell types, involve
coupling of Smo to Gi proteins. In the present study, we investigated, for the
first time, the transcriptional response of cardiomyocytes to sonic hedgehog
(Shh) and the role of Gi protein utilization. Our results show that Shh strongly 
activates Gli1 expression by quantitative PCR in a Smo-dependent manner in
neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes. Microarray analysis of gene expression
changes elicited by Shh and sensitive to a Smo inhibitor identified a small
subset of 37 cardiomyocyte-specific genes regulated by Shh, including some in the
PKA and purinergic signaling pathways. In addition, neonatal rat ventricular
cardiomyocytes infected with an adenovirus encoding GiCT, a peptide that impairs 
receptor-Gi protein coupling, showed reduced activation of Hh targets. In vitro
data were confirmed in transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-inducible GiCT
expression. Transgenic GiCT mice showed specific reduction of Gli1 expression in 
the heart under basal conditions and failed to upregulate the Hh pathway upon
ischemia and reperfusion injury, unlike their littermate controls. This study
characterizes, for the first time, the transcriptional response of cardiomyocytes
to Shh and establishes a critical role for Smo coupling to Gi in Hh signaling in 
the normal and ischemic myocardium.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4080174
PMID: 24816261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Urol Oncol. 2014 Jul;32(5):546-8. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2014.01.021. Epub 2014
May 9.

The Hedgehog pathway: potential biomarker and therapeutic applications in
urologic malignancies.

Loughlin KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA. Electronic address: kloughlin@partners.org.

Comment on
    Urol Oncol. 2014 Jul;32(5):539-45.

The Hedgehog pathway has been implicated in the development of several
non-urologic malignancies. Recent work suggests that the activation of the
glioma-associated GLi family of zinc finger transcription factors may play a role
in some urologic malignancies. This review surveys the potential role of the
Hedgehog pathway as a new class of biomarker in some urologic cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24814405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS One. 2014 May 8;9(5):e96593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096593. eCollection 
2014.

Blocking signaling at the level of GLI regulates downstream gene expression and
inhibits proliferation of canine osteosarcoma cells.

Shahi MH(1), Holt R(1), Rebhun RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, University of California
Davis School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis, California, United States of America.

The Hedgehog-GLI signaling pathway is active in a variety of human malignancies
and is known to contribute to the growth and survival of human osteosarcoma
cells. In this study, we examined the expression and regulation of GLI
transcription factors in multiple canine osteosarcoma cell lines and analyzed the
effects of inhibiting GLI with GANT61, a GLI-specific inhibitor. Compared with
normal canine osteoblasts, real-time PCR showed that GLI1 and GLI2 were highly
expressed in two out of three cell lines and correlated with downstream target
gene expression of PTCH1and PAX6. Treatment of canine osteosarcoma cells with
GANT61 resulted in decreased expression of GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, and PAX6.
Furthermore, GANT61 inhibited proliferation and colony formation in all three
canine osteosarcoma cell lines. The finding that GLI signaling activity is
present and active in canine osteosarcoma cells suggests that spontaneously
arising osteosarcoma in dogs might serve as a good model for future preclinical
testing of GLI inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4014515
PMID: 24810746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jul;34(1):213-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1767. Epub 2014 May
2.

Sonic hedgehog secreted by neurons regulates angiopoietin expression in
neighboring fibroblasts.

Kim WJ(1), Lee SW(2), Kim KW(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory of Regenerative Sexual Medicine, Department of
Urology, Inha University School of Medicine, Incheon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Innovative Research Institute for Cell
Therapy, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Lately, the importance of the communication between different cell types and the 
understanding of the cell communication pathway has been emphasized, as it may
provide a novel therapeutic strategy for the regeneration of damaged tissue. In
the present study, we suggest that sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a mediator of cell
communication between neurons and fibroblasts. Recombinant Shh (rShh) affected
the expression of the angiogenic factors, angiopoietin (Ang)-1 and Ang-2, in
fibroblasts, but not in neurons or neural progenitor cells (NPCs). The expression
of the Shh downstream transcription factor, Gli1, was markedly increased in
neurons and NPCs, indicating that neurons and NPCs responded to rShh. However,
rShh did not affect Ang-1 and Ang-2 expression in neurons and NPCs. It should be 
noted that Shh was strongly expressed in neurons, but that Shh expression was
undetectable in fibroblasts. We performed a co-culture assay using neurons and
fibroblasts to investigate whether the expression of Ang-1 and Ang-2 is regulated
by cell communication, without rShh treatment. Ang-1 expression in fibroblasts
was markedly upregulated by co-culture with neurons, whereas Ang-2 expression was
decreased by co-culture with neurons. Moreover, when an Shh-neutralizing antibody
was added, this effect was diminished. Collectively, our data suggest that
Shh-expressing neurons regulate angiopoietin expression in neighboring
fibroblasts in a paracrine manner.

PMID: 24807580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biores Open Access. 2014 Apr 1;3(2):53-9. doi: 10.1089/biores.2014.0001.

Sonic hedgehog pathway contributes to gastric cancer cell growth and
proliferation.

Wan J(1), Zhou J(2), Zhao H(1), Wang M(1), Wei Z(1), Gao H(1), Wang Y(3), Cui
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University ,
Chongqing, China . (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Daping Hospital, Third Military
Medical University , PLA, Chongqing, China . (3)Department of Radiology, Fourth
Hospital of Hebei Medical University , Shijiazhuang, Hebei Province, China.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is commonly activated in
gastrointestinal cancer. However, our understanding of the Shh pathway in gastric
cancer remains limited. Here we examined the effects of cyclopamine, a specific
inhibitor of the Shh signaling pathway, on cell growth and proliferation in
gastric primary cancer cells GAM-016 and the MKN-45 cell line. The results showed
that the Shh signaling molecules SHH, PTCH, SMO, GLI1, and GLI2 were intact and
activated in both types of cells. Furthermore, we observed that cyclopamine
inhibited gastric cancer cell proliferation through cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. An in vivo study using NOD/SCID mouse xenografts demonstrated that
cyclopamine significantly prevented tumor growth and development. Our study
indicated that Shh signaling pathway could promote gastric cancer cell
proliferation and tumor development, and blocking this pathway may be a potential
strategy in gastric cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3995118
PMID: 24804165  [PubMed]


356. Sarcoma. 2014;2014:261804. doi: 10.1155/2014/261804. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

Aberrant hedgehog signaling and clinical outcome in osteosarcoma.

Lo WW(1), Pinnaduwage D(2), Gokgoz N(2), Wunder JS(3), Andrulis IL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1A8 ; 
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X5. (2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute,
Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X5.
(3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X5 ; University Musculoskeletal Oncology Unit,
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X5 ; Department of Surgery,
University of Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1L5.

Despite the importance of Hedgehog signaling in bone development, the
relationship between Hedgehog pathway expression and osteosarcoma clinical
characteristics and outcome has not been investigated. In this study of 43
high-grade human osteosarcoma samples, we detected high expression levels of the 
Hedgehog ligand gene, IHH, and target genes, PTCH1 and GLI1, in most samples.
Further analysis in tumors of patients with localized disease at diagnosis
identified coexpression of IHH and PTCH1 exclusively in large tumors. Higher
levels of IHH were observed more frequently in males and patients with higher
levels of GLI1 were more responsive to chemotherapy. Subgroup analysis by tumor
size and IHH expression indicated that the well-known association between
survival and tumor size was further refined when IHH levels were taken into
consideration.

PMCID: PMC3985328
PMID: 24799831  [PubMed]


357. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Aug;393(1-2):283-91. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2071-x. Epub 
2014 May 3.

Down-regulation of Gli-1 inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma cell migration and
invasion.

Chen JS(1), Li HS, Huang JQ, Zhang LJ, Chen XL, Wang Q, Lei J, Feng JT, Liu Q,
Huang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointesinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510120, People's Republic of China,
hychenjs@126.com.

Glioma-associated oncogene homolog-1 (Gli-1) is considered a marker of Hedgehog
pathway activation and is associated with the progression of several cancers. We 
have previously reported that Gli-1 was correlated with invasion and metastasis
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the exact roles and mechanisms of
Gli-1 in HCC invasion are unclear. In this study, we found that small interfering
RNA mediated down-regulation of Gli-1 expression significantly suppressed
adhesion, motility, migration, and invasion of both SMMC-7721 and SK-Hep1 cells. 
Furthermore, down-regulation of Gli-1 significantly reduced expressions and
activities of both matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9. In addition, we
found that down-regulation of Gli-1 resulted in up-regulation of E-cadherin and
concomitant down-regulation of Snail and Vimentin, consistent with inhibition of 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Taken together, our results suggest that
down-regulation of Gli-1 suppresses HCC cell migration and invasion likely
through inhibiting expressions and activations of MMP-2, 9 and blocking EMT.

PMID: 24792036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr 28;20(16):4712-7. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i16.4712.

Sonic hedgehog expression in a rat model of chronic pancreatitis.

Wang LW(1), Lin H(1), Lu Y(1), Xia W(1), Gao J(1), Li ZS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Luo-Wei Wang, Han Lin, Wei Xia, Jun Gao, Zhao-Shen Li, Department of
Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.

AIM: To analyze the activation of sonic hedgehog (SHh) signaling pathways in a
rat model of chronic pancreatitis.
METHODS: Forty Wistar rats were randomly divided into 2 groups: experimental
group and control group (20 rats in each group). Dibutyltin dichloride was
infused into the tail vein of the rats to induce chronic pancreatitis in the
experimental group. The same volume of ethanol and glycerol mixture was infused
in the control group. The expression of Ptch, Smo and Gli were analyzed using
immunohistochemistry, and real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, significant histological changes in
terms of the areas of abnormal architecture, glandular atrophy, fibrosis, pseudo 
tubular complexes, and edema were observed at week 4 in the experimental group.
The expression of Ptch1, Smo and Gli1 in the pancreatic tissue increased
significantly in the experimental group. Using RT-PCR, mRNA levels of Ptch, Smo
and Gli in the experimental group increased significantly compared with the
control group.
CONCLUSION: The SHh signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in rats with
chronic pancreatitis. The SHh signaling pathway plays an important role in the
development of chronic pancreatitis. These results may be helpful in studies
focusing on the relationship between chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4000507
PMID: 24782623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Oncol Lett. 2014 May;7(5):1381-1384. Epub 2014 Mar 11.

Characterization of sonic hedgehog inhibition in gastric carcinoma cells.

Bai R(1), Zhao H(1), Zhang X(2), DU S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Chaoyang,
Beijing 100029, P.R. China. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Aberrant activation of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway plays an
important role in gastric cancer. The exact mechanisms defining how the Shh
pathway promotes tumorigenesis or regulates its downstream targets remains
elusive. In the present study, the effects of inhibiting the Shh signaling
pathway in gastric cancer AGS cells was examined. It was identified that the Shh 
antagonist, cyclopamine, inhibited cancer proliferation, migration and invasion
in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Additionally, it was revealed that several 
key targets that are activated by the Shh signaling pathway, Gli1 and CXCR4, were
downregulated at an RNA and protein level by cyclopamine. The results from the
present study may be of benefit in facilitating the development of novel
therapeutic strategies to treat gastric cancer in human patients.

PMCID: PMC3997708
PMID: 24765141  [PubMed]


360. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 24;33:34. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-33-34.

Hedgehog/Gli promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung squamous cell
carcinomas.

Yue D, Li H, Che J, Zhang Y, Tseng HH, Jin JQ, Luh TM, Giroux-Leprieur E, Mo M,
Zheng Q, Shi H, Zhang H, Hao X(1), Wang C, Jablons DM, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Cancer, Lung Cancer Center, Tianjin Medical University
Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin 300060, China. yuedongsheng_cg@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) account for approximately 30% of
non-small cell lung cancer. Investigation of the mechanism of invasion and
metastasis of lung SCC will be of great help for the development of meaningful
targeted therapeutics. This study is intended to understand whether the
activation of Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is involved in lung SCC, and whether
activated Hh signaling regulates metastasis through epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in lung SCC.
METHODS: Two cohorts of patients with lung SCC were studied. Protein expression
was examined by immunohistochemistry, Western blot, or immunofluorescence.
Protein expression levels in tissue specimens were scored and correlations were
analyzed. Vismodegib and a Gli inhibitor were used to inhibit Shh/Gli activity,
and recombinant Shh proteins were used to stimulate the Hh pathway in lung SCC
cell lines. Cell migration assay was performed in vitro.
RESULTS: Shh/Gli pathway components were aberrantly expressed in lung SCC tissue 
samples. Gli1 expression was reversely associated with the expression of EMT
markers E-Cadherin and ß-Catenin in lung SCC specimens. Inhibition of the Shh/Gli
pathway suppressed migration and up-regulated E-Cadherin expression in lung SCC
cells. Stimulation of the pathway increased migration and down-regulated
E-Cadherin expression in lung SCC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested that the Shh/Gli pathway may be critical for
lung SCC recurrence, metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy. Inhibition of the
Shh/Gli pathway activity/function is a potential therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of lung SCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4029998
PMID: 24758269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Oct;25(10):2187-200. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013080893. Epub
2014 Apr 17.

Sonic hedgehog is a novel tubule-derived growth factor for interstitial
fibroblasts after kidney injury.

Zhou D(1), Li Y(1), Zhou L(2), Tan RJ(3), Xiao L(2), Liang M(2), Hou FF(2), Liu
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, and. (2)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure
Research, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University and Guangdong Provincial 
Institute of Nephrology, Guangzhou, China. (3)Medicine, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and. (4)Departments of Pathology,
and State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University and Guangdong Provincial Institute of Nephrology, Guangzhou,
China liuy@upmc.edu.

Tubular epithelium constitutes the majority of the renal parenchyma and is the
primary target of various kidney injuries. However, how the injured tubules drive
interstitial fibroblast activation and proliferation remains poorly understood.
Here, we investigated the role of sonic hedgehog (Shh), a secreted extracellular 
signaling protein, in fibroblast proliferation. Shh was induced in renal tubular 
epithelia in animal models of CKD induced by ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI),
adriamycin, or renal mass ablation, and in renal tubules of kidney biopsy
specimens from CKD patients with different etiologies. Using Gli1-CreER(T2)
reporter mice, we identified interstitial fibroblasts as the principal targets of
renal Shh signaling in vivo. In vitro, incubation with Shh promoted normal rat
kidney fibroblast proliferation, which was assessed by cell counting, MTT assay, 
and BrdU incorporation assay, and stimulated the induction of numerous
proliferation-related genes. However, Shh had no effect on the proliferation of
renal tubular epithelial cells. In vivo, overexpression of Shh promoted
fibroblast expansion and aggravated kidney fibrotic lesions after IRI.
Correspondingly, blockade of Shh signaling by cyclopamine, a small molecule
inhibitor of Smoothened, inhibited fibroblast proliferation, reduced
myofibroblast accumulation, and attenuated renal fibrosis. These studies identify
Shh as a novel, specific, and potent tubule-derived growth factor that promotes
interstitial fibroblast proliferation and activation. Our data also suggest that 
blockade of Shh signaling is a plausible strategy for therapeutic intervention of
renal fibrosis.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4178435
PMID: 24744439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 17;9(4):e94924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094924. eCollection
2014.

Analysis of molecular cytogenetic alteration in rhabdomyosarcoma by array
comparative genomic hybridization.

Liu C(1), Li D(2), Jiang J(3), Hu J(3), Zhang W(4), Chen Y(3), Cui X(3), Qi Y(3),
Zou H(3), Zhang W(3), Li F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, P. R. China; Department of Oncology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, Shihezi
University School of Medicine, Shihezi, Xinjiang, P. R. China; LU'AN People's
Hospital. LU'AN Affiliated Hospital of ANHUI Medical University, LU'AN, Anhui, P.
R. China. (3)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine,
Shihezi, Xinjiang, P. R. China. (4)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated 
Hospital, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang, P. R. China.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common pediatric soft tissue sarcoma with poor
prognosis. The genetic etiology of RMS remains largely unclear underlying its
development and progression. To reveal novel genes more precisely and new
therapeutic targets associated with RMS, we used high-resolution array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) to explore tumor-associated copy number 
variations (CNVs) and genes in RMS. We confirmed several important genes by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR). We then performed
bioinformatics-based functional enrichment analysis for genes located in the
genomic regions with CNVs. In addition, we identified miRNAs located in the
corresponding amplification and deletion regions and performed miRNA functional
enrichment analysis. aCGH analyses revealed that all RMS showed specific gains
and losses. The amplification regions were 12q13.12, 12q13.3, and 12q13.3-q14.1. 
The deletion regions were 1p21.1, 2q14.1, 5q13.2, 9p12, and 9q12. The recurrent
regions with gains were 12q13.3, 12q13.3-q14.1, 12q14.1, and 17q25.1. The
recurrent regions with losses were 9p12-p11.2, 10q11.21-q11.22, 14q32.33,
16p11.2, and 22q11.1. The mean mRNA level of GLI1 in RMS was 6.61-fold higher
than that in controls (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0477) by QRT-PCR. Meanwhile, the mean mRNA level of 
GEFT in RMS samples was 3.92-fold higher than that in controls (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0354).
Bioinformatic analysis showed that genes were enriched in functions such as
immunoglobulin domain, induction of apoptosis, and defensin. Proto-oncogene
functions were involved in alveolar RMS. miRNAs that located in the amplified
regions in RMS tend to be enriched in oncogenic activity (miR-24 and miR-27a). In
conclusion, this study identified a number of CNVs in RMS and functional analyses
showed enrichment for genes and miRNAs located in these CNVs regions. These
findings may potentially help the identification of novel biomarkers and/or drug 
targets implicated in diagnosis of and targeted therapy for RMS.

PMCID: PMC3990535
PMID: 24743780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:401903. doi: 10.1155/2014/401903. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

Sonic hedgehog signaling drives proliferation of synoviocytes in rheumatoid
arthritis: a possible novel therapeutic target.

Wang M(1), Zhu S(2), Peng W(2), Li Q(2), Li Z(2), Luo M(2), Feng X(2), Lin Z(3), 
Huang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou,
Zhejiang 325035, China ; Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510630, China ; Department of
Rheumatology of Zhongshan Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Zhongshan,
Guangdong 528400, China. (2)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510630, China. (3)School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035,
China.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling controls many aspects of human development,
regulates cell growth and differentiation in adult tissues, and is activated in a
number of malignancies. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by chronic
synovitis and pannus formation associated with activation of fibroblast-like
synoviocytes (FLS). We investigated whether Shh signaling plays a role in the
proliferation of FLS in RA. Expression of Shh signaling related components (Shh, 
Ptch1, Smo, and Gli1) in RA synovial tissues was examined by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) and in FLS by IHC, immunofluorescence (IF), quantitative RT-PCR, and
western blotting. Expression of Shh, Smo, and Gli1 in RA synovial tissue was
higher than that in control tissue (P < 0.05). Cyclopamine (a specific inhibitor 
of Shh signaling) decreased mRNA expression of Shh, Ptch1, Smo, and Gli1 in
cultured RA FLS, Shh, and Smo protein expression, and significantly decreased FLS
proliferation. Flow cytometry analysis suggested that cyclopamine treatment
resulted in cell cycle arrest of FLS in G1 phase. Our data show that Shh
signaling is activated in synovium of RA patients in vivo and in cultured FLS
form RA patients in vitro, suggesting a role in the proliferation of FLS in RA.
It may therefore be a novel therapeutic target in RA.

PMCID: PMC3987882
PMID: 24741597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 16;9(4):e95016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095016. eCollection
2014.

Sonic Hedgehog activation is implicated in diosgenin-induced megakaryocytic
differentiation of human erythroleukemia cells.

Ghezali L(1), Liagre B(1), Limami Y(1), Beneytout JL(1), Leger DY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Limoges, FR 3503 GEIST, EA 1069 "Laboratoire de Chimie des
Substances Naturelles", GDR CNRS 3049, Faculté de Pharmacie, Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Limoges, France.

Differentiation therapy is a means to treat cancer and is induced by different
agents with low toxicity and more specificity than traditional ones. Diosgenin, a
plant steroid, is able to induce megakaryocytic differentiation or apoptosis in
human HEL erythroleukemia cells in a dose-dependent manner. However, the exact
mechanism by which diosgenin induces megakaryocytic differentiation has not been 
elucidated. In this study, we studied the involvement of Sonic Hedgehog in
megakaryocytic differentiation induced by diosgenin in HEL cells. First, we
showed that different elements of the Hedgehog pathway are expressed in our model
by qRT-PCR. Then, we focused our interest on key elements in the Sonic Hedgehog
pathway: Smoothened receptor, GLI transcription factor and the ligand Sonic
Hedgehog. We showed that Smoothened and Sonic Hedgehog were overexpressed in
disogenin-treated cells and that GLI transcription factors were activated. Then, 
we showed that SMO inhibition using siSMO or the GLI antagonist GANT-61, blocked 
megakaryocytic differentiation induced by diosgenin in HEL cells. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that Sonic Hedgehog pathway inhibition led to inhibition of ERK1/2
activation, a major physiological pathway involved in megakaryocytic
differentiation. In conclusion, our study reports, for the first time, a crucial 
role for the Sonic Hedgehog pathway in diosgenin-induced megakaryocytic
differentiation in HEL cells.

PMCID: PMC3989280
PMID: 24740159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 30;289(22):15495-506. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.545194. Epub
2014 Apr 16.

The transcription factor GLI1 interacts with SMAD proteins to modulate
transforming growth factor ß-induced gene expression in a p300/CREB-binding
protein-associated factor (PCAF)-dependent manner.

Nye MD(1), Almada LL(1), Fernandez-Barrena MG(1), Marks DL(1), Elsawa SF(2),
Vrabel A(1), Tolosa EJ(1), Ellenrieder V(3), Fernandez-Zapico ME(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905. (2)the Department of Biological
Sciences, Northern Illinois University, De Kalb, Illinois 60115. (3)the Signaling
and Transcription Laboratory, Department of Gastroenterology, Philipps-University
of Marburg, 35037 Marburg, Germany, and. (4)From the Schulze Center for Novel
Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55905, the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905 fernandezzapico.martin@mayo.edu.

The biological role of the transcription factor GLI1 in the regulation of tumor
growth is well established; however, the molecular events modulating this
phenomenon remain elusive. Here, we demonstrate a novel mechanism underlying the 
role of GLI1 as an effector of TGFß signaling in the regulation of gene
expression in cancer cells. TGFß stimulates GLI1 activity in cancer cells and
requires its transcriptional activity to induce BCL2 expression. Analysis of the 
mechanism regulating this interplay identified a new transcriptional complex
including GLI1 and the TGFß-regulated transcription factor, SMAD4. We demonstrate
that SMAD4 physically interacts with GLI1 for concerted regulation of gene
expression and cellular survival. Activation of the TGFß pathway induces
GLI1-SMAD4 complex binding to the BCL2 promoter whereas disruption of the complex
through SMAD4 RNAi depletion impairs GLI1-mediated transcription of BCL2 and
cellular survival. Further characterization demonstrated that SMAD2 and the
histone acetyltransferase, PCAF, participate in this regulatory mechanism. Both
proteins bind to the BCL2 promoter and are required for TGFß- and GLI1-stimulated
gene expression. Moreover, SMAD2/4 RNAi experiments showed that these factors are
required for the recruitment of GLI1 to the BCL2 promoter. Finally, we determined
whether this novel GLI1 transcriptional pathway could regulate other TGFß
targets. We found that two additional TGFß-stimulated genes, INTERLEUKIN-7 and
CYCLIN D1, are dependent upon the intact GLI1-SMAD-PCAF complex for
transcriptional activation. Collectively, these results define a novel epigenetic
mechanism that uses the transcription factor GLI1 and its associated complex as a
central effector to regulate gene expression in cancer cells.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4140905
PMID: 24739390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 6;289(23):16516-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.539031. Epub 2014
Apr 15.

Inactivation of the transcription factor GLI1 accelerates pancreatic cancer
progression.

Mills LD(1), Zhang L(2), Marler R(3), Svingen P(4), Fernandez-Barrena MG(1), Dave
M(4), Bamlet W(5), McWilliams RR(6), Petersen GM(7), Faubion W(4),
Fernandez-Zapico ME(8).

Author information: 
(1)From the Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics. (2)Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology. (3)the Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, Arizona 85259. (4)Laboratory of Epigenetics
and Chromatin Dynamics. (5)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics.
(6)Department of Oncology, and. (7)Division of Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905 and. (8)From the Schulze Center for Novel
Therapeutics, fernandezzapico.martin@mayo.edu.

The role of GLI1 in pancreatic tumor initiation promoting the progression of
preneoplastic lesions into tumors is well established. However, its function at
later stages of pancreatic carcinogenesis remains poorly understood. To address
this issue, we crossed the gli1 knock-out (GKO) animal with cre-dependent
pancreatic activation of oncogenic kras concomitant with loss of the tumor
suppressor tp53 (KPC). Interestingly, in this model, GLI1 played a
tumor-protective function, where survival of GKO/KPC mice was reduced compared
with KPC littermates. Both cohorts developed pancreatic cancer without
significant histopathological differences in survival studies. However, analysis 
of mice using ultrasound-based imaging at earlier time points showed increased
tumor burden in GKO/KPC mice. These animals have larger tumors, decreased body
weight, increased lactate dehydrogenase production, and severe leukopenia. In
vivo and in vitro expression studies identified FAS and FAS ligand (FASL) as
potential mediators of this phenomenon. The FAS/FASL axis, an apoptotic inducer, 
plays a role in the progression of pancreatic cancer, where its expression is
usually lost or significantly reduced in advanced stages of the disease.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays identified FAS and FASL as
direct targets of GLI1, whereas GKO/KPC mice showed lower levels of this ligand
compared with KPC animals. Finally, decreased levels of apoptosis were detected
in tumor tissue in the absence of GLI1 by TUNEL staining. Together, these
findings define a novel pathway regulated by GLI1 controlling pancreatic tumor
progression and provide a new theoretical framework to help with the design and
analysis of trials targeting GLI1-related pathways.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4047418
PMID: 24737325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Oncol. 2014 Jul;8(5):912-26. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.03.009. Epub 2014 Mar
22.

Identification of novel non-coding RNA-based negative feedback regulating the
expression of the oncogenic transcription factor GLI1.

Villegas VE(1), Rahman MF(2), Fernandez-Barrena MG(3), Diao Y(2), Liapi E(2),
Sonkoly E(4), Ståhle M(4), Pivarcsi A(4), Annaratone L(5), Sapino A(5), Ramírez
Clavijo S(6), Bürglin TR(2), Shimokawa T(2), Ramachandran S(2), Kapranov P(7),
Fernandez-Zapico ME(3), Zaphiropoulos PG(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden; Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics & Doctoral Program in
Biomedical Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia. (2)Department of 
Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden. (3)Schulze
Center for Novel Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (4)Unit of
Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Solna, Sweden. (5)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin,
Italy. (6)Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics & Doctoral Program in
Biomedical Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia. (7)St. Laurent
Institute, One Kendall Square, Cambridge, MA, USA. (8)Department of Biosciences
and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden. Electronic address:
peter.zaphiropoulos@ki.se.

Non-coding RNAs are a complex class of nucleic acids, with growing evidence
supporting regulatory roles in gene expression. Here we identify a non-coding RNA
located head-to-head with the gene encoding the Glioma-associated oncogene 1
(GLI1), a transcriptional effector of multiple cancer-associated signaling
pathways. The expression of this three-exon GLI1 antisense (GLI1AS) RNA in cancer
cells was concordant with GLI1 levels. siRNAs knockdown of GLI1AS up-regulated
GLI1 and increased cellular proliferation and tumor growth in a xenograft model
system. Conversely, GLI1AS overexpression decreased the levels of GLI1, its
target genes PTCH1 and PTCH2, and cellular proliferation. Additionally, we
demonstrate that GLI1 knockdown reduced GLI1AS, while GLI1 overexpression
increased GLI1AS, supporting the role of GLI1AS as a target gene of the GLI1
transcription factor. Activation of TGFß and Hedgehog signaling, two known
regulators of GLI1 expression, conferred a concordant up-regulation of GLI1 and
GLI1AS in cancer cells. Finally, analysis of the mechanism underlying the
interplay between GLI1 and GLI1AS indicates that the non-coding RNA elicits a
local alteration of chromatin structure by increasing the silencing mark H3K27me3
and decreasing the recruitment of RNA polymerase II to this locus. Taken
together, the data demonstrate the existence of a novel non-coding RNA-based
negative feedback loop controlling GLI1 levels, thus expanding the repertoire of 
mechanisms regulating the expression of this oncogenic transcription factor.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4082767
PMID: 24726458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Apr 30;62(17):3759-67. doi: 10.1021/jf500231t. Epub 2014 
Apr 22.

Daidzein suppresses tumor necrosis factor-a induced migration and invasion by
inhibiting hedgehog/Gli1 signaling in human breast cancer cells.

Bao C(1), Namgung H, Lee J, Park HC, Ko J, Moon H, Ko HW, Lee HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University , 4726
Seodongdaero, Anseong 456-756, South Korea.

In breast cancer, the cytokine tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) induces cell
invasion, although the molecular basis of it has not been clearly elucidated. In 
this study, we investigated the role of daidzein in regulating TNF-a induced cell
invasion and the underlying molecular mechanisms. Daidzein inhibited TNF-a
induced cellular migration and invasion in estrogen receptor (ER) negative
MCF10DCIS.com human breast cancer cells. TNF-a activated Hedgehog (Hh) signaling 
by enhancing Gli1 nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity, which
resulted in increased invasiveness; these effects were blocked by daidzein and
the Hh signaling inhibitors, cyclopamine and vismodegib. Moreover, these
compounds suppressed TNF-a induced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 mRNA
expression and activity. Taken together, mammary tumor cell invasiveness was
stimulated by TNF-a induced activation of Hh signaling; these effects were
abrogated by daidzein, which suppressed Gli1 activation, thereby inhibiting
migration and invasion.

PMID: 24724627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jul;99(7):E1209-16. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4098. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

Sonic hedgehog signaling is active in human adrenal cortex development and
deregulated in adrenocortical tumors.

Gomes DC(1), Leal LF, Mermejo LM, Scrideli CA, Martinelli CE Jr, Fragoso MC,
Latronico AC, Tone LG, Tucci S, Yunes JA, Cardinalli IA, Mastellaro MJ,
Brandalise SR, Ramalho F, Moreira AC, Ramalho LN, de Castro M, Antonini SR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine (D.C.G., L.F.L., L.M.M., C.A.S., C.E.M., L.G.T., S.T.,
F.R., A.C.M., L.N.R., M.C., S.R.R.A.), Ribeirao Preto Medical School-University
of Sao Paulo, 14090-900 Ribeirao Preto, Brazil; School of Medicine (M.C.B.V.F.,
A.C.L.), University of Sao Paulo, 01246-903 Sao Paulo, Brazil; and Boldrini
Children's Center (J.A.Y., S.R.B., I.A.C., M.J.M.), 13083-210 Campinas, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway plays a key role in rodent adrenal
cortex development and is involved in tumorigenesis in several human tissues, but
data in human adrenal glands are limited.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of the study were to analyze the involvement of the
SHH pathway in human adrenal development and tumorigenesis and the effects of SHH
inhibition on an adrenocortical tumor (ACT) cell line.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Expression of SHH pathway components was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in 51 normal adrenals (33 fetal) and 34 ACTs (23 pediatric) 
and by quantitative PCR in 81 ACTs (61 pediatric) and 19 controls (10 pediatric).
The effects of SHH pathway inhibition on gene expression and cell viability in
the NCI-H295A adrenocortical tumor cell line after cyclopamine treatment were
analyzed.
RESULTS: SHH pathway proteins were present in fetal and postnatal normal adrenals
and showed distinct patterns of spatiotemporal expression throughout development.
Adult adrenocortical carcinomas presented with higher expression of PTCH1, SMO,
GLI3, and SUFU compared with normal adult adrenal cortices. Conversely, pediatric
ACTs showed lower mRNA expression of SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, and GLI3 compared
with normal pediatric adrenal cortices. In vitro treatment with cyclopamine
resulted in decreased GLI3, SFRP1, and CTNNB1 mRNA expression and ß-catenin
staining as well as decreased cell viability.
CONCLUSIONS: The SHH pathway is active in human fetal and postnatal adrenals,
up-regulated in adult adrenocortical carcinomas, and down-regulated in pediatric 
ACTs. SHH pathway antagonism impaired cell viability. The SHH pathway is
deregulated in ACTs and might provide a new target therapy to be explored.

PMID: 24712566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Oct;20(4):917-22. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9774-x. Epub
2014 Apr 9.

Activation of hedgehog signaling pathway in human non-small cell lung cancers.

Hong Z(1), Bi A, Chen D, Gao L, Yin Z, Luo L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Science, 
Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing, 210093, Poeple's Republic of China.

The activation of the hedgehog pathway, which is an important signaling mechanism
crucial in embryogenesis, has strong links to carcinogenesis. Aberrant regulation
of this pathway can result in the development of tumors. The present study was
designed to investigate Hh related protein expression in non-small cell lung
cancers. Fifty five non-small cell lung cancers samples were used in the study.
By reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), the expression of
Shh, Ptch-1, and Gli-1 in tumor and adjacent normal tissues was examined and
associated to clinical pathologic features. The expression levels of Shh, Ptch-1,
Gli-1 in non-small cell lung cancer tissues were 63.64, 69.09, 43.64 %,
respectively, higher than that in the adjacent normal tissues. Survival analysis 
showed that both Ptch-1 and Gli-1 expression were associated with poor survival
(both P<U+2009><0.05, log-rank test). Shh and Ptch-1 expression were correlated with
lymph node metastasis. These results suggest that dysregulation of Hh signaling
pathway plays an important role in the development of human NSCLCs. The
expression of Ptch-1 and Gli-1 is possibly involved in NSCLCs progression, which 
may be a useful prognostic indicator of NSCLCs.

PMID: 24710823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(6):828-32.

MiR-324-5p inhibits proliferation of glioma by target regulation of GLI1.

Xu HS(1), Zong HL, Shang M, Ming X, Zhao JP, Ma C, Cao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Central Hospital of Xuzhou, Xuzhou Clinical
School of Xuzhou Medical College, Affiliated Hospital of Southeast University,
Xuzhou, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. xhs51@126.com.

OBJECTIVES: To study the effects of the miR-324-5p on the glioma cells
proliferation via the targeted regulation of the glioma-associated oncogene 1.
METHODS: The luciferase reporter gene was used to test whether the
glioma-associated oncogene 1 was the target of the miR-324-5p microRNA. The
glioma-associated oncogene 1 expression was detected by Western blot. The
proliferation and cell cycle were evaluated by MTT assay and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The glioma-associated oncogene 1 is a target of the miR-324-5p. An
over-expressed miR-324-5p could reduce the cell survival rate and increase the
G1/G0 phase rate in the glioma cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: The miR-324-5p can inhibit proliferation of the glioma cells via the
targeted regulation of the glioma-associated oncogene 1.

PMID: 24706306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Childs Nerv Syst. 2014 Jul;30(7):1165-72. doi: 10.1007/s00381-014-2403-x. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

SHH, WNT, and NOTCH pathways in medulloblastoma: when cancer stem cells maintain 
self-renewal and differentiation properties.

Cordeiro BM(1), Oliveira ID, Alves MT, Saba-Silva N, Capellano AM, Cavalheiro S, 
Dastoli P, Toledo SR.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Institute/GRAACC, Department of Pediatrics, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil, brunamascaro@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Infant medulloblastoma (MB) is a malignant neuroepithelial embryonal
tumor of the cerebellum, believed to derive from precursor granule cells with
stem or progenitor cells appearance, and caused by a change in expression profile
of genes related to the development. This work aims to study the expression
profile of these genes in MB tumors, correlating with clinicopathological
characteristics.
METHODS: We quantified, by qPCR in 40 MB tumor samples, the expression of genes
in HH (PTCH1, PTCH2, and GLI1), WNT (APC, CTNNB1, WIF1, and DKK2), and NOTCH
pathways (NOTCH2 and HES1), which have a crucial role in development, and genes
as MYCC, MYCN, and TERT, correlating this findings to patient's
clinicopathological characteristics.
RESULTS: Considering the universal RNA as our control sample, and considering the
median of gene expression in the control samples as our cutoff, we observed that 
HES1 gene showed decreased expression compared to control (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0059), but
patients with HES1 overexpression were directly related to a shorter survival
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0165). Individuals with higher GLI1 gene expression had significant
shorter survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0469), and high expression was prevalent in patients up
to 5 years old (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0479). Patients showing high PTCH2 expression were related 
to worse survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0426), and it was correlated with GLI1 high expression
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0094). We also observed a concomitant overexpression of WIF1 and DKK2
genes in a subgroup of MB samples (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0118).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest the presence of activated developmental
signaling pathways in MB, which are important for cell proliferation and
maintenance, and that may be targeted for novel therapeutic options.

PMID: 24695855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(4):633-41.

The GANT61, a GLI inhibitor, induces caspase-independent apoptosis of SK-N-LO
cells.

Matsumoto T(1), Tabata K, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Nihon University.

GANT61 is a small-molecule inhibitor of glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1)- and 
GLI2-mediated transcription at the nuclear level that exerts its effect by
preventing DNA binding. It has been demonstrated to induce cell death against
Ewing's sarcoma family tumor (ESFT) cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. The
most sensitive cell line was SK-N-LO, which expresses the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene.
SK-N-LO cells treated with GANT61 showed cellular and nuclear morphological
changes, including cell shrinkage, chromatin condensation and nuclear
fragmentation, in a concentration-dependent manner, as visualized by Hoechst
33342 staining. Furthermore, annexin V-propidium iodide (PI) double-staining
revealed a significant increase in the number of late apoptotic cells. GANT61
induced a significant decrease in the proportion of cells in the S phase.
Significant decrease of the protein levels of GLI2, survivin, cyclin A and
claspin, and significant increase of p21 expression was also observed in the
cells treated with GANT61. Moreover, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage
was observed, but no cleavage of caspase-3 or -7, or any change in the
expressions of Bcl-2 or p53 were observed. These findings suggest that GANT61
induces cell death of SK-N-LO cells in a caspase-independent manner, by
inhibiting DNA replication in the S phase.

PMID: 24694609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Int J Med Sci. 2014 Mar 21;11(5):488-93. doi: 10.7150/ijms.6764. eCollection
2014.

Identifying hedgehog signaling specific microRNAs in glioblastomas.

Gu W(1), Shou J(1), Gu S(1), Sun B(1), Che X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200040, China.

Aberrant activation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an important role in
the development and proliferation of glioblastoma (GBM) cells. However, its
mechanism remains unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNA molecules 
which are involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of genes, and enrolled 
in signaling transduction network in tumors. This study was designed to
investigate the role of miRNAs targeting the Hh signaling pathway in GBMs.
According to the expression level of Gli1 mRNA measured by real time PCR, GBM
samples were assigned to Gli1 high or low expression group. MiRNA microarray was 
applied to screen the dysregulated miRNA. As a result, 17 miRNAs were
differentially expressed between Gli1 high expression and low expression groups
(p < 0.005). Thirteen miRNAs including miR-125b-1 were downregulated, while only 
4 miRNAs including miR-144 were upregulated in Gli1 high expression group. In
summary, our study presents a subset of miRNAs which target the Hh signaling
pathway in GBMs, and throws some light on the aberrant activation mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3970102
PMID: 24688313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Oncogenesis. 2014 Mar 31;3:e96. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2014.10.

Activation of Sonic hedgehog signaling in neural progenitor cells promotes glioma
development in the zebrafish optic pathway.

Ju B(1), Chen W(2), Spitsbergen JM(3), Lu J(4), Vogel P(5), Peters JL(6), Wang
YD(7), Orr BA(5), Wu J(1), Henson HE(1), Jia S(1), Parupalli C(1), Taylor MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA. (3)Fish Disease
Research Group, Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, National Center for Safety Evaluation of
Drugs, National Institute for the Control of Pharmaceutical and Biological
Products, Beijing, China. (5)Veterinary Pathology Core, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. (6)Cell and Tissue Imaging, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. (7)Computational Biology, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

Dysregulation of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling has been implicated in glioma
pathogenesis. Yet, the role of this pathway in gliomagenesis remains
controversial because of the lack of relevant animal models. Using the
cytokeratin 5 promoter, we ectopically expressed a constitutively active
zebrafish Smoothened (Smoa1) in neural progenitor cells and analyzed tumorigenic 
capacity of activated Shh signaling in both transient and stable transgenic fish.
Transient transgenic fish overexpressing Smoa1 developed retinal and brain
tumors, suggesting smoa1 is oncogenic in the zebrafish central nervous system
(CNS). We further established stable transgenic lines that simultaneously
developed optic pathway glioma (OPG) and various retinal tumors. In one of these 
lines, up to 80% of F1 and F2 fish developed tumors within 1 year of age.
Microarray analysis of tumor samples showed upregulated expression of genes
involved in the cell cycle, cancer signaling and Shh downstream targets ptc1,
gli1 and gli2a. Tumors also exhibited specific gene signatures characteristic of 
radial glia and progenitor cells as transcriptions of radial glia genes cyp19a1b,
s100ß, blbp, gfap and the stem/progenitor genes nestin and sox2 were
significantly upregulated. Overexpression of GFAP, S100ß, BLBP and Sox2 was
confirmed by immunofluorescence. We also detected overexpression of Mdm2
throughout the optic pathway in fish with OPG, therefore implicating the
Mdm2-Tp53 pathway in glioma pathogenesis. In conclusion, we demonstrate that
activated Shh signaling initiates tumorigenesis in the zebrafish CNS and provide 
the first OPG model not associated with neurofibromatosis 1.

PMCID: PMC4038393
PMID: 24686726  [PubMed]


376. Oncogene. 2014 Sep 18;33(38):4697-708. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.71. Epub 2014 Mar
31.

SOX2 regulates self-renewal and tumorigenicity of human melanoma-initiating
cells.

Santini R(1), Pietrobono S(1), Pandolfi S(1), Montagnani V(1), D'Amico M(2),
Penachioni JY(1), Vinci MC(1), Borgognoni L(3), Stecca B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori (CRL-ITT), Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental and Clinical
Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (3)Plastic Surgery Unit, S.M. 
Annunziata Hospital-Regional Melanoma Referral Center, Istituto Toscano Tumori,
Florence, Italy.

Melanoma is one of the most aggressive types of human cancer, characterized by
enhanced heterogeneity and resistance to conventional therapy at advanced stages.
We and others have previously shown that HEDGEHOG-GLI (HH-GLI) signaling is
required for melanoma growth and for survival and expansion of
melanoma-initiating cells (MICs). Recent reports indicate that HH-GLI signaling
regulates a set of genes typically expressed in embryonic stem cells, including
SOX2 (sex-determining region Y (SRY)-Box2). Here we address the function of SOX2 
in human melanomas and MICs and its interaction with HH-GLI signaling. We find
that SOX2 is highly expressed in melanoma stem cells. Knockdown of SOX2 sharply
decreases self-renewal in melanoma spheres and in putative melanoma stem cells
with high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH(high)). Conversely, ectopic
expression of SOX2 in melanoma cells enhances their self-renewal in vitro. SOX2
silencing also inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in melanoma cells. In
addition, depletion of SOX2 progressively abrogates tumor growth and leads to a
significant decrease in tumor-initiating capability of ALDH(high) MICs upon
xenotransplantation, suggesting that SOX2 is required for tumor initiation and
for continuous tumor growth. We show that SOX2 is regulated by HH signaling and
that the transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2, the downstream effectors of HH-GLI 
signaling, bind to the proximal promoter region of SOX2 in primary melanoma
cells. In functional studies, we find that SOX2 function is required for
HH-induced melanoma cell growth and MIC self-renewal in vitro. Thus SOX2 is a
critical factor for self-renewal and tumorigenicity of MICs and an important
mediator of HH-GLI signaling in melanoma. These findings could provide the basis 
for novel therapeutic strategies based on the inhibition of SOX2 for the
treatment of a subset of human melanomas.

PMCID: PMC4180644
PMID: 24681955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Hematol Oncol. 2014 Mar 30;7:28. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-7-28.

Arsenic trioxide induces differentiation of CD133+ hepatocellular carcinoma cells
and prolongs posthepatectomy survival by targeting GLI1 expression in a mouse
model.

Zhang KZ, Zhang QB, Zhang QB, Sun HC, Ao JY, Chai ZT, Zhu XD, Lu L, Zhang YY, Bu 
Y, Kong LQ, Tang ZY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute and Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Key
Laboratory for Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, The Chinese Ministry of
Education, 136 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Shanghai 200032, P R China. zytang88@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) play a key role in the posthepatectomy
recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). CD133+ HCC cells exhibit liver
CSC-like properties, and CSC differentiation-inducing therapy may lead these
cells to lose their self-renewal ability and may induce terminal differentiation,
which may in turn allow their malignant potential to be controlled. Because
arsenic trioxide (As2O3) increases remission rates and prolongs survival among
patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia by inducing differentiation and
apoptosis of leukemic cells, we hypothesized that As2O3 might also inhibit HCC
recurrence and prolong survival time after hepatectomy by inducing
differentiation of HCC CSCs.
METHODS: We evaluated the As2O3 induced differentiation of human HCC CSCs and its
mechanism in vitro, and we investigated the effects of treatment with As2O3 on
recurrence rates and median survival in a mouse xenograft model.
RESULTS: We found that As2O3 induced HCC CSC differentiation by down-regulating
the expression of CD133 and some stemness genes, thus inhibiting the cells'
self-renewal ability and tumorigenic capacity without inhibiting their
proliferation in vitro. In vivo experiments indicated that As2O3 decreased
recurrence rates after radical resection and prolonged survival in a mouse model.
As2O3, which shows no apparent toxicity, may induce HCC CSC differentiation by
down-regulating the expression of GLI1.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that As2O3 induced HCC CSC differentiation, inhibited
recurrence, and prolonged survival after hepatectomy by targeting GLI1expression.
Our results suggest that the clinical safety and utility of As2O3 should be
further evaluated.

PMCID: PMC4022144
PMID: 24678763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Oncol. 2014 May;8(3):766-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.02.006. Epub 2014 Mar
12.

p70S6 kinase mediates breast cancer cell survival in response to surgical wound
fluid stimulation.

Segatto I(1), Berton S(1), Sonego M(1), Massarut S(2), Fabris L(1), Armenia J(1),
Mileto M(2), Colombatti A(3), Vecchione A(4), Baldassarre G(1), Belletti B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology 2, CRO, National Cancer Institute, Aviano
33081, Italy. (2)Breast Surgery Unit, CRO, National Cancer Institute, Aviano
33081, Italy. (3)Division of Experimental Oncology 2, CRO, National Cancer
Institute, Aviano 33081, Italy; Department of Scienze Biologiche e Mediche, MATI 
Center of Excellence, University of Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy. (4)Division of
Pathology, University of Rome "La Sapienza", Sant' Andrea Hospital, Rome 00189,
Italy. (5)Division of Experimental Oncology 2, CRO, National Cancer Institute,
Aviano 33081, Italy. Electronic address: bbelletti@cro.it.

In early breast cancer, local relapses represent a determinant and not simply an 
indicator of risk for distant relapse and death. Notably, 90% of local
recurrences occur at or close to the same quadrant of the primary cancer.
Relevance of PI3K/mTOR/p70S6K signaling in breast tumorigenesis is very well
documented. However, the pathway/s involved in the process of breast cancer local
relapse are not well understood. The ribosomal protein p70S6K has been implicated
in breast cancer cell response to post-surgical inflammation, supporting the
hypothesis that it may be crucial also for breast cancer recurrence. Here, we
show that p70S6K activity is required for the survival of breast cancer cells
challenged in "hostile" microenvironments. We found that impairment of p70S6K
activity in breast cancer cells strongly decreased their tumor take rate in nude 
mice. In line with this observation, if cells were challenged to grow in
anchorage independence or in clonogenic assay, growth of colonies was strongly
dependent on an intact p70S6K signaling. This in vitro finding was particularly
evident when breast cancer cells were grown in the presence of wound fluids
harvested following surgery from breast cancer patients, suggesting that the
stimuli present in the post-surgical setting at least partially relied on
activity of p70S6K to stimulate breast cancer relapse. From a mechanistic point
of view, our results indicated that p70S6K signaling was able to activate Gli1
and up-regulate the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2, thereby activating a survival
response in breast cancer cells challenged in hostile settings. Our work
highlights a previously poorly recognized function of p70S6K in preserving breast
cancer cell survival, which could eventually be responsible for local relapse and
opens the way to the design of new and more specific therapies aiming to restrain
the deleterious effects of wound response.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24661902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Comp Pathol. 2014 Feb-Apr;150(2-3):198-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2013.08.006.
Epub 2013 Oct 26.

Multiple polymerase chain reaction markers for the differentiation of canine
cutaneous peripheral nerve sheath tumours versus canine fibrosarcomas.

Meyer A(1), Klopfleisch R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 15, 14163 Berlin, Germany. (2)Institute of Veterinary 
Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin, Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 15, 14163 Berlin,
Germany. Electronic address: robert.klopfleisch@fu-berlin.de.

Currently canine fibrosarcomas and peripheral nerve sheath tumours (PNSTs) are
differentiated by their histopathological phenotype. Preliminary global
transcriptomic analysis has identified genes with significant differential
expression in both tumour types that may act as potential tumour markers. The aim
of the present study was to establish reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) assays for the differentiation of formalin-fixed and paraffin
wax-embedded tumours of both types. Fifty histologically well-defined examples of
canine fibrosarcomas and PNSTs were characterized immunohistochemically for the
expression of S100, laminin and PGP 9.5. RT-PCR assays for the potential
fibrosarcoma markers FHL2-Ex4 and FHL2-Ex9 and the PNST markers GLI1 and CLEC3B
were established and tested for their specificity and sensitivity to
differentiate fibrosarcomas and PNSTs by their mRNA expression.
Immunohistochemical analysis challenged the value of S100, laminin and PGP 9.5
for the diagnosis of PNSTs, since both PNSTs and fibrosarcomas showed similar
expression of these proteins. In contrast, a combination of the markers GLI1 and 
CLEC3B differentiated PNSTs from fibrosarcomas with a sensitivity of 89% and a
specificity of 87%. The proposed fibrosarcoma markers FHL2-Ex4 and FHL2-Ex9
failed to separate PNSTs and fibrosarcomas (sensitivity 50%, specificity 88%).
The failure of these markers to unequivocally separate fibrosarcomas and PNSTs
raises questions as to whether histologically uniform PNSTs are less uniform at
the molecular level than expected or if both tumour types, despite their
different morphology, are more closely related in terms of their histogenesis
than previously thought.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24650889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 May;13(5):1259-69. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0731. Epub
2014 Mar 14.

Hedgehog pathway inhibition in chondrosarcoma using the smoothened inhibitor
IPI-926 directly inhibits sarcoma cell growth.

Campbell VT(1), Nadesan P, Ali SA, Wang CY, Whetstone H, Poon R, Wei Q, Keilty J,
Proctor J, Wang LW, Apte SS, McGovern K, Alman BA, Wunder JS.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge,
Massachusetts; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio; Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children;
University Musculoskeletal Oncology Unit and Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount 
Sinai Hospital; and Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Department of Surgery,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario Canada.

Hedgehog (Hh) pathway inhibition in cancer has been evaluated in both the
ligand-independent and ligand-dependent settings, where Hh signaling occurs
either directly within the cancer cells or within the nonmalignant cells of the
tumor microenvironment. Chondrosarcoma is a malignant tumor of cartilage in which
there is ligand-dependent activation of Hh signaling. IPI-926 is a potent, orally
delivered small molecule that inhibits Hh pathway signaling by binding to
Smoothened (SMO). Here, the impact of Hh pathway inhibition on primary
chondrosarcoma xenografts was assessed. Mice bearing primary human chondrosarcoma
xenografts were treated with IPI-926. The expression levels of known Hh pathway
genes, in both the tumor and stroma, and endpoint tumor volumes were measured.
Gene expression profiling of tumors from IPI-926-treated mice was conducted to
identify potential novel Hh target genes. Hh target genes were studied to
determine their contribution to the chondrosarcoma neoplastic phenotype. IPI-926 
administration results in downmodulation of the Hh pathway in primary
chondrosarcoma xenografts, as demonstrated by evaluation of the Hh target genes
GLI1 and PTCH1, as well as inhibition of tumor growth. Chondrosarcomas exhibited 
autocrine and paracrine Hh signaling, and both were affected by IPI-926.
Decreased tumor growth is accompanied by histopathologic changes, including
calcification and loss of tumor cells. Gene profiling studies identified genes
differentially expressed in chondrosarcomas following IPI-926 treatment, one of
which, ADAMTSL1, regulates chondrosarcoma cell proliferation. These studies
provide further insight into the role of the Hh pathway in chondrosarcoma and
provide a scientific rationale for targeting the Hh pathway in chondrosarcoma.

PMID: 24634412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jun;35(6):5857-68. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1776-5. Epub 2014
Mar 16.

Glypican-3 as an emerging molecular target for hepatocellular carcinoma gene
therapy.

Yao M(1), Wang L, Dong Z, Qian Q, Shi Y, Yu D, Wang S, Zheng W, Yao D.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Clinical Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, 20 West Temple Road, 226001, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, China.

Glypican-3 (GPC-3), a membrane-associated heparan sulfate proteoglycan, plays a
crucial role in cell proliferation and metastasis, particularly in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) progression, and perhaps is a valuable target for its gene
therapy. However, its mechanism remains to be explored. In the present study, the
biological behaviors of HCC cells were investigated by interfering GPC-3 gene
transcription. After the cells were transfected with specific GPC-3 short hairpin
RNA (shRNA), the inhibition of GPC-3 expression was 75.6 % in MHCC-97H or 73.8 % 
in Huh7 cells at mRNA level; the rates of proliferation and apoptosis were 53.6
and 60.5 % in MHCC-97H or 54.9 and 54.4 % in Huh7 cells, with the cell cycles
arrested in the G1 phase; the incidences of cell migration, metastasis, and
invasion inhibition were 80.1, 56.4, and 69.1 % in MHCC-97H or 80.9, 59.6, and
58.3 % in Huh7 cells, respectively. The cell biological behaviors were altered by
silencing GPC-3 with down-regulation of ß-catenin, insulin-like growth factor-II 
and vascular endothelial growth factor, and Gli1 up-regulation. The cell
proliferation was significantly inhibited (up to 95.11 %) by shRNA plus
anti-cancer drugs, suggesting that GPC-3 gene should be a potential target for
promoting hepatoma cell apoptosis and inhibiting metastasis through the
Wnt/ß-catenin and Hh singling pathways.

PMID: 24633918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 12;9(3):e91559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091559. eCollection
2014.

Interleukin-1ß attenuates myofibroblast formation and extracellular matrix
production in dermal and lung fibroblasts exposed to transforming growth
factor-ß1.

Mia MM(1), Boersema M(1), Bank RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Biology, Department of Pathology and Medical Biology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.

One of the most potent pro-fibrotic cytokines is transforming growth factor
(TGFß). TGFß is involved in the activation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts,
resulting in the hallmark of fibrosis: the pathological accumulation of collagen.
Interleukin-1ß (IL1ß) can influence the severity of fibrosis, however much less
is known about the direct effects on fibroblasts. Using lung and dermal
fibroblasts, we have investigated the effects of IL1ß, TGFß1, and IL1ß in
combination with TGFß1 on myofibroblast formation, collagen synthesis and
collagen modification (including prolyl hydroxylase, lysyl hydroxylase and lysyl 
oxidase), and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). We found that IL1ß alone has no
obvious pro-fibrotic effect on fibroblasts. However, IL1ß is able to inhibit the 
TGFß1-induced myofibroblast formation as well as collagen synthesis.
Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), the Hedgehog transcription factor
that is involved in the transformation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts is
upregulated by TGFß1. The addition of IL1ß reduced the expression of GLI1 and
thereby also indirectly inhibits myofibroblast formation. Other potentially
anti-fibrotic effects of IL1ß that were observed are the increased levels of
MMP1, -2, -9 and -14 produced by fibroblasts exposed to TGFß1/IL1ß in comparison 
with fibroblasts exposed to TGFß1 alone. In addition, IL1ß decreased the
TGFß1-induced upregulation of lysyl oxidase, an enzyme involved in collagen
cross-linking. Furthermore, we found that lung and dermal fibroblasts do not
always behave identically towards IL1ß. Suppression of COL1A1 by IL1ß in the
presence of TGFß1 is more pronounced in lung fibroblasts compared to dermal
fibroblasts, whereas a higher upregulation of MMP1 is seen in dermal fibroblasts.
The role of IL1ß in fibrosis should be reconsidered, and the differences in
phenotypical properties of fibroblasts derived from different organs should be
taken into account in future anti-fibrotic treatment regimes.

PMCID: PMC3951452
PMID: 24622053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Mar;22(3):213-21. doi:
10.1097/PDM.0000000000000030.

A study of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma copy number alterations by single nucleotide
polymorphism analysis.

Lynn M(1), Shah N, Conroy J, Ennis S, Morris T, Betts D, O'Sullivan M.

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland.

Rhabdomyosarcoma, the most common pediatric soft tissue malignancy arises in 2
major histologic forms: embryonal and alveolar. Classically, the alveolar subtype
is characterized by a chromosomal translocation t(2;13)(q35;q14) or
t(1;13)(p36;q14) fusing the PAX3 or PAX7 gene, respectively, to the FOXO1 gene,
although fusion-negative cases of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) occur; these
share considerably more with the genomic profiles and biological behavior of
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma than with fusion-positive ARMS. The current
understanding of any additional genetic aberrations in fusion-positive ARMS is
limited. In this study, we evaluated tumor-specific copy number alterations in a 
cohort of fusion-positive ARMSs using high-resolution technology. The results
presented here include previously described changes as well as completely novel
findings of copy number alterations in BCR and DICER. The study furthermore
highlights associations between fusion type and genotype, as well as outcomes and
genotype. Rearrangement of PAX7 is strongly associated with copy number
alteration of Glypican 5 (GPC5) and moderately with amplification of IGF1R. There
is a moderate association between death from/relapse of disease and, on the one
hand, amplification of 12q13.3 (DDIT3; Gli1), and on the other hand, copy number 
alteration of Wnt6 or LRP1B. Gains of both LRP1B and Gli1 in turn are strongly
associated with MycN amplification.

PMID: 24614150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Mar;30(3):258-61, 265.

[Acyldepsipeptide 1 induces apoptosis in renal cancer cells by down-regulation of
Gli and Bcl-2 via SHH pathway].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu S(1), DU C(2), Ma Z(2), Gao Y(2), Shi Q(2), Wang X(1), Zhang H(3), He D(1),
Guo P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital, Medical College, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Key Laboratory of Environment and Genes Related to Diseases,
Ministry of Education, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.
(2)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital, Medical College, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. (3)College
of Pharmacy, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of acyldepsipeptide 1 (ADEP1) on renal
cancer cell apoptosis and on the expressions of SHH signaling pathway related
protein Gli-1 and Bcl-2.
METHODS: The renal cancer cells (ACHN and 769-P) were treated with 50 µmol/L
ADEP1 for 48 hours. The changes of cell morphology and the nucleus shape in cell 
apoptosis were observed under a light microscope, and cell viability was measured
by MTT assay. The mRNA levels of SHH and Gli-1 were detected by real-time
quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR), and the protein levels of Gli-1 and Bcl-2 were
determined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: ADEP1 induced renal cancer cell apoptosis through reducing the
transcription of SHH and Gli-1, and decreasing Gli-1 and Bcl-2 protein
expressions.
CONCLUSION: ADEP1 could induce renal cancer cell apoptosis by the inhibition on
SHH signaling pathway related proteins.

PMID: 24606742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Pathol. 2014 Sep;234(1):11-22. doi: 10.1002/path.4349. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Endothelial cells promote stem-like phenotype of glioma cells through activating 
the Hedgehog pathway.

Yan GN(1), Yang L, Lv YF, Shi Y, Shen LL, Yao XH, Guo QN, Zhang P, Cui YH, Zhang 
X, Bian XW, Guo DY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Centre, Southwest Hospital, Third 
Military Medical University and Key Laboratory of Tumour Immunopathology,
Ministry of Education of China, Chongqing, 400038, People's Republic of China.

Microenvironmental regulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) strongly influences the
onset and spread of cancer. The way in which glioma cells interact with their
microenvironment and acquire the phenotypes of CSCs remains elusive. We
investigated how communication between vascular endothelial cells and glioma
cells promoted the properties of glioma stem cells (GSCs). We observed that
CD133(+) GSCs were located closely to Shh(+) endothelial cells in specimens of
human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). In both in vitro and in vivo studies, we
found that endothelial cells promoted the appearance of CSC-like glioma cells, as
demonstrated by increases in tumourigenicity and expression of stemness genes
such as Sox2, Olig2, Bmi1 and CD133 in glioma cells that were co-cultured with
endothelial cells. Knockdown of Smo in glioma cells led to a significant
reduction of their CSC-like phenotype formation in vitro and in vivo. Endothelial
cells with Shh knockdown failed to promote Hedgehog (HH) pathway activation and
CSC-like phenotype formation in co-cultured glioma cells. By examination of
glioma tissue specimens from 65 patients, we found that the survival of glioma
patients was closely correlated with the expression of both Shh by endothelial
cells and Gli1 by perivascular glioma cells. Taken together, our study
demonstrates that endothelial cells in the tumour microenvironment provide Shh to
activate the HH signalling pathway in glioma cells, thereby promoting GSC
properties and glioma propagation.

© 2014 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC4260128
PMID: 24604164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 15;74(8):2351-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1523. Epub
2014 Mar 5.

Identification of FoxR2 as an oncogene in medulloblastoma.

Koso H(1), Tsuhako A, Lyons E, Ward JM, Rust AG, Adams DJ, Jenkins NA, Copeland
NG, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Division of 
Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore; Experimental Cancer
Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
and Cancer Research Program, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, 
Texas.

Medulloblastoma is the most common pediatric brain tumor, and in ~25% of cases,
it is driven by aberrant activation of the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathway in
granule neuron precursor (GNP) cells. In this study, we identified novel
medulloblastoma driver genes through a transposon mutagenesis screen in the
developing brain of wild-type and Trp53 mutant mice. Twenty-six candidates were
identified along with established driver genes such as Gli1 and Crebbp. The
transcription factor FoxR2, the most frequent gene identified in the screen, is
overexpressed in a small subset of human medulloblastoma of the SHH subtype.
Tgif2 and Alx4, 2 new putative oncogenes identified in the screen, are strongly
expressed in the SHH subtype of human medulloblastoma. Mutations in these two
genes were mutually exclusive with mutations in Gli1 and tended to cooccur,
consistent with involvement in the SHH pathway. Notably, Foxr2, Tgif2, and Alx4
activated Gli-binding sites in cooperation with Gli1, strengthening evidence that
they function in SHH signaling. In support of an oncogenic function, Foxr2
overexpression transformed NIH3T3 cells and promoted proliferation of GNPs, the
latter of which was also observed for Tgif2 and Alx4. These findings offer
forward genetic and functional evidence associating Foxr2, Tgif2, and Alx4 with
SHH subtype medulloblastoma.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24599127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Andrology. 2014 Mar;2(2):267-74. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00187.x.

Dynamic Hedgehog signalling pathway activity in germline stem cells.

Sahin Z(1), Szczepny A, McLaughlin EA, Meistrich ML, Zhou W, Ustunel I, Loveland 
KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Near East
University, Nicosia, Mersin-10, Turkey; Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Although the contribution of Hedgehog (Hh) signalling to stem cell development
and oncogenesis is well recognised, its importance for spermatogonial stem cells 
(SSCs) has not been established. Here we interrogate adult rat SSCs using an
established model in which only undifferentiated spermatogonial cells remain in
the testis at 15 weeks following irradiation, and spermatogonial differentiation 
is induced within 4 weeks by gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist
(GnRH-ant) administration. Synthesis of Hh pathway components in untreated adult 
rat testes was compared with that in irradiated testes prior to and after
GnRH-ant exposure using in situ hybridization. In adult testes with complete
spermatogenesis, the Desert Hedgehog ligand transcript, Dhh, was detected in
Sertoli cells, some spermatogonia and in spermatocytes by in situ hybridization. 
Spermatogenic cells were identified as sites of Hh signalling through detection
of transcripts encoding the Hh receptor, Ptc2 transcripts and proteins for the
key downstream target of Hh signalling, Gli1 and the Hh transcriptional
activator, Gli2. Remarkably, the undifferentiated spermatogonia present in
irradiated adult rat testes contained Dhh in addition to Ptc2, Gli1 and Gli2,
revealing the potential for an autocrine Hh signalling loop to sustain
undifferentiated spermatogonial cells. These transcripts became undetectable by
in situ hybridization following GnRH-ant induction of spermatogonial
differentiation, however, detection of Gli1 protein in spermatogonia in all
groups indicates that Hh signalling is sustained. This is the first evidence of
active Hh signalling in mammalian male germline stem cells, as has been
documented for some cancer stem cells.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMCID: PMC4119796
PMID: 24574096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Pathol. 2014 Jun;233(2):196-208. doi: 10.1002/path.4342. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

Suppression of Hedgehog signalling promotes pro-tumourigenic integrin expression 
and function.

Moutasim KA(1), Mellows T, Mellone M, Lopez MA, Tod J, Kiely PC, Sapienza K,
Greco A, Neill GW, Violette S, Weinreb PH, Marshall JF, Ottensmeier CH, Sayan AE,
Jenei V, Thomas GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences Unit, University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine,
Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK.

Aberrant Hedgehog (Hh) signalling has been reported in a number of malignancies, 
particularly basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin. Clinical trials of Hh
inhibitors are underway in many cancers, and these have produced significant
clinical benefit in BCC patients, although regrowth of new, or clinically
aggressive, variants, as well as development of secondary malignancies, has been 
reported. avß6 integrin is expressed in many cancers, where it has been shown to 
correlate with an aggressive tumour phenotype and poor prognosis. We have
previously reported avß6 up-regulation in aggressive, morphoeic BCC variants,
where it modulates the stromal response and induces invasion. To examine a
possible link between Hh and avß6 function, we generated BCC models,
overexpressing Gli1 in immortalized keratinocytes (NTert1, HaCaT). Unexpectedly, 
we found that suppressing Gli1 significantly increased avß6 expression. This
promoted tumour cell motility and also stromal myofibroblast differentiation
through integrin-dependent TGF-ß1 activation. Gli1 inhibited avß6 expression by
suppressing TGF-ß1-induced Smad2/3 activation, blocking a positive feedback loop 
maintaining high avß6 levels. A similar mechanism was observed in AsPC1
pancreatic cancer cells expressing endogenous Gli1, suggesting a common mechanism
across tumour types. In vitro findings were supported using human clinical
samples, where we showed an inverse correlation between avß6 and Gli1 expression 
in different BCC subtypes and pancreatic cancers. In summary, we show that
expression of Gli1 and avß6 inversely correlates in tumours in vivo, and Hh
targeting up-regulates TGF-ß1/Smad2/3-dependent avß6 expression, promoting
pro-tumourigenic cell functions in vitro. These results have potential clinical
significance, given the reported recurrence of BCC variants and secondary
malignancies in patients treated by Hh targeting.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24573955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2014 Feb 24. [Epub ahead of print]

A Study of Alveolar Rhabdomyosarcoma Copy Number Alterations by Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism Analysis.

Lynn M(1), Shah N, Conroy J, Ennis S, Morris T, Betts D, O'Sullivan M.

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland.

Rhabdomyosarcoma, the most common pediatric soft tissue malignancy arises in 2
major histologic forms: embryonal and alveolar. Classically, the alveolar subtype
is characterized by a chromosomal translocation t(2;13)(q35;q14) or
t(1;13)(p36;q14) fusing the PAX3 or PAX7 gene, respectively, to the FOXO1 gene,
although fusion-negative cases of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) occur; these
share considerably more with the genomic profiles and biological behavior of
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma than with fusion-positive ARMS. The current
understanding of any additional genetic aberrations in fusion-positive ARMS is
limited. In this study, we evaluated tumor-specific copy number alterations in a 
cohort of fusion-positive ARMSs using high-resolution technology. The results
presented here include previously described changes as well as completely novel
findings of copy number alterations in BCR and DICER. The study furthermore
highlights associations between fusion type and genotype, as well as outcomes and
genotype. Rearrangement of PAX7 is strongly associated with copy number
alteration of Glypican 5 (GPC5) and moderately with amplification of IGF1R. There
is a moderate association between death from/relapse of disease and, on the one
hand, amplification of 12q13.3 (DDIT3; Gli1), and on the other hand, copy number 
alteration of Wnt6 or LRP1B. Gains of both LRP1B and Gli1 in turn are strongly
associated with MycN amplification.

PMID: 24569785  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


390. Brain Res. 2014 Apr 29;1560:18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.02.019. Epub 2014
Feb 22.

Umbilical cord blood cells regulate the differentiation of endogenous neural stem
cells in hypoxic ischemic neonatal rats via the hedgehog signaling pathway.

Wang X(1), Zhao Y(2), Wang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Imaging, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong, 
China. Electronic address: wxlpine@163.com. (2)Department of Ophthalmology,
Weifang Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Clinical Institute, Weifang
Medical University, Weifang, Shandong, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery,
Brigham and Women<U+05F3>s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic
address: xwang@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

Transplantation of umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells (UCBMC) promotes the
proliferation of endogenous neural stem cells (NSCs), but it has been unclear
whether the proliferating NSCs can differentiate into mature neural cells.
Therefore, we explored the effects of UCBMC transplantation on the
differentiation of endogenous NSCs and their underlying mechanisms. Seven-day-old
Sprague-Dawley rats underwent left carotid ligation followed by hypoxic stress.
UCBMC were transplanted 24h after hypoxia ischemia (HI). BrdU/ß-tubulin/HNA/DAPI,
BrdU/GFAP/HNA/DAPI, Ngn1/DAPI, and BMP4/DAPI were measured by immunofluorescence 
staining; Shh, Gli1, Ngn1, and BMP4 proteins were measured by western-blot
analysis 28 days after transplantation. More newborn neurons and fewer astrocytes
were observed in the HI+UCBMC group, its neuronal percentage was higher, and
glial percentage was lower compared with the N+UCBMC (P<0.05) and HI+PBS groups
(P<0.01), while fewer newborn neurons and more newborn astrocytes were found in
the HI+cyclopamine (an antagonist of the hedgehog protein)+UCBMC group compared
with the HI+UCBMC group (P<0.01). The expression of Shh, Gli1, and Ngn1 proteins 
was higher and BMP4 protein was lower in the HI+UCBMC compared with the HI+PBS
group (P<0.01) and the HI+cyclopamine+UCBMC group (P<0.01). Linear regression
analysis showed that the differentiation of NSCs correlated with expression of
Ngn1 and BMP4 proteins (P<0.01). In conclusion, UCBMC promote neuronal
differentiation and reduce glial differentiation in hypoxic ischemic neonatal
rats via the hedgehog signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24565927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 May;15(5):544-59. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28157. Epub 2014 Mar
11.

Effects of inhibition of hedgehog signaling on cell growth and migration of uveal
melanoma cells.

Duan F(1), Lin M(1), Li C(1), Ding X(1), Qian G(1), Zhang H(1), Ge S(1), Fan
X(1), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology; Ninth People's Hospital; Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine; Shanghai, PR China.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been demonstrated to play a critical role
in controlling embryonic development, tissue patterning, wound healing and a
variety of cell functions. Aberrant activation of Hh signaling is implicated in
the pathogenesis of many human cancers, and in angiogenesis. However, the role of
this pathway in uveal melanoma (UM) carcinogenesis remains unknown. In this
study, we investigated the effects of Hh inhibition using the specific Smoothened
(Smo) antagonist cyclopamine to block Hh signaling in cultured human UM cell
lines expressing Hh signaling components. Cyclopamine treatment effectively
increased apoptosis and inhibited cell proliferation, migration, and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by downregulating the Hh final arbiter
glioblastoma 1 (Gli1), which regulates the transcription of target genes in the
nucleus. Changes in gene and protein expression levels were detected by real-time
PCR and by western blotting and immunocytochemistry, respectively. Cell cycle and
apoptosis regulation induced by cyclopamine were demonstrated by flow cytometry. 
In addition, the migration capability of UM cells was reduced, as demonstrated by
transwell migration and scratch assays. The effects of Hh inhibition on the
levels of angiogenesis factors secreted by UM cells were examined by
tube-formation assay.CONCLUSION: Blocking the Hh pathway by cyclopamine decreased
cell viability, migration, EMT, and angiogenesis, increased apoptosis, and
induced G 1 phase cell cycle arrest in UM cells. Collectively, these results
provide the first evidence of the significance of Gli1 activation downstream of
Smo as a therapeutic target and the potential value of cyclopamine for the
treatment of human UM.

PMCID: PMC4026077
PMID: 24553082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jan 15;7(2):690-8. eCollection 2014.

Chromosomal and genetic imbalances in Chinese patients with rhabdomyosarcoma
detected by high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization.

Liu C(1), Li D(2), Hu J(3), Jiang J(3), Zhang W(4), Chen Y(3), Cui X(3), Qi Y(3),
Zou H(3), Zhang W(3), Li F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University 169 Donghu Road,
Wuhan, Hubei 430071, China ; Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School
of Medicine and The Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases,
Chinese Ministry of Education Shihezi, Xinjiang 832002, China. (2)Department of
Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine and The Key Laboratories for
Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Chinese Ministry of Education Shihezi,
Xinjiang 832002, China ; Lu'An People's Hospital and Lu'An Affiliated Hospital of
Anhui Medical University Lu'An, Anhui 237000, China. (3)Department of Pathology, 
Shihezi University School of Medicine and The Key Laboratories for Xinjiang
Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Chinese Ministry of Education Shihezi, Xinjiang
832002, China. (4)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital,
Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi, Xinjiang 830054, China.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in children.
Although associations between ARMS tumorigenesis and PAX3, PAX7, and FKHR are
well recognized, the complete genetic etiology underlying RMS pathogenesis and
progression remains unclear. Chromosomal copy number variations (CNVs) and the
involved genes may play important roles in the pathogenesis and progression of
human malignancies. Using high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH), we examined 20 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) RMS tumors to
explore the involvement of the relevant chromosomal regions with resident genes
in RMS tumorigenesis. In RMS, frequent gains were identified on chromosome
regions 12q13.3-q14.1, 12q24.31, 17q25.1, 1q21.1, and 7q11.23, whereas frequent
losses were observed on chromosome regions 5q13.2, 14q32.33, and 15q11.2.
Amplifications were observed on chromosome regions 9p13.3, 12q13.3-q14.1, 12q15, 
and 16p13.11, whereas deletions were detected on chromosome regions 1p36.33,
1p13.1, 2q11.1, 5q13.2, 8p23.1, 9p24.3, and 16p11.2. Frequent gains were detected
in GLI1, GEFT, OS9, and CDK4 (12q13.3-q14.1), being 60% in embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) and 66.67% in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS),
respectively. However, frequent losses were detected in IGHG1, IGHM, IGHG3, and
IGHG4 (14q32.33), being 70% in ERMS and 55.56% in and ARMS, respectively.
Frequent gains were detected in TYROBP, HCST, LRFN3, and ALKBH6 (19q13.12) in
ERMS but not in ARMS. The frequency of TYROBP, HCST, LRFN3, and ALKBH6 gains is
significantly different in ERMS versus ARMS (P=0.011). The results suggest that
novel TYROBP, HCST, LRFN3, and ALKBH6 genes may play important roles in ERMS. The
technique used is a feasible approach for array comparative genomic hybridization
analysis in archival tumor samples.

PMCID: PMC3925915
PMID: 24551291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 12;9(2):e88550. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088550. eCollection
2014.

Sonic hedgehog improves redifferentiation of dedifferentiated chondrocytes for
articular cartilage repair.

Lin L(1), Shen Q(2), Xue T(1), Duan X(1), Fu X(1), Yu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sports Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing,
People's Republic of China. (2)Institute of Urology, Peking University First
Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is involved in the induction of early cartilaginous
differentiation of mesenchymal cells in the limb. We investigated whether Shh
could promote redifferentiation of dedifferentiated chondrocytes and have a
favorable effect on the regeneration of cartilage. Articular chondrocytes of rats
were separated and cultured. The redifferentiation of dedifferentiated
chondrocytes transfected with Shh was evaluated using monolayer and pellet
culture system. The signaling molecules (Ptc 1, Gli 1 and Sox9) of the hedgehog
pathway were investigated. A rat model of articular cartilage defect was used to 
evaluate cartilage repair after transplantation with dedifferentiated
chondrocytes. After Shh gene transfer, the hedgehog pathway was upregulated in
dedifferentiated chondrocytes. Real time-PCR and western blot analysis verified
the stronger expression of Ptc1, Gli1 and Sox9 in Shh transfected cells. Shh
upregulates the Shh signaling pathway and multiple cytokines (bone morphogenetic 
protein 2 and insulin-like growth factor 1) in dedifferentiated chondrocytes.
After transplantation in the joint, histologic analysis of the regenerative
tissues revealed that significantly better cartilage repair in rats transplanted 
with Shh transfected cells. These data suggest that Shh could induce
redifferentiation of dedifferentiated chondrocytes through up-regulating Shh
signaling pathway, and have considerable therapeutic potential in cartilage
repair.

PMCID: PMC3922882
PMID: 24533105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 12;9(2):e88386. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088386. eCollection
2014.

Down-regulation of Gli transcription factor leads to the inhibition of migration 
and invasion of ovarian cancer cells via integrin ß4-mediated FAK signaling.

Chen Q(1), Xu R(1), Zeng C(1), Lu Q(2), Huang D(3), Shi C(3), Zhang W(4), Deng
L(4), Yan R(3), Rao H(5), Gao G(6), Luo S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (2)Department of Biostatistics &
Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi,
China. (3)Center for Experimental Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (4)Institute of Translational
Medicine, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (5)Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio,
Texas, United States of America. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
General Hospital of Beijing Aeronautics, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling by Gli transcription factors is characteristic of a variety of
aggressive human carcinomas including ovarian cancer. Therefore, chemotherapeutic
agents that inhibit activation of Gli transcription factors have emerged as
promising novel therapeutic drugs for ovarian cancer.
RESULTS: In this study, we show that activation of Hh signaling promoted cellular
migration and invasion, whereas blockade of Hh signaling with GANT61 suppressed
cellular migration and invasion in ovarian cancer cells. After treatment with
GANT61, cDNA microarray analyses revealed changes in many genes such as Integrin 
ß4 subunit (ITGB4), focal adhesion kinase (FAK), etc. Furthermore, ITGB4
expression was up-regulated by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) ligand and down-regulated by 
Hh signaling inhibitor. The Shh-mediated ovarian cell migration and invasion was 
blocked by neutralizing antibodies to ITGB4. In addition, phosphorylations of FAK
were increased by Shh and decreased by Hh signaling inhibitor. Inhibition of Gli1
expression using siRNA mimicked the effects of GANT61 treatment, supporting the
specificity of GANT61. Further investigations showed that activation of FAK was
required for Shh-mediated cell migration and invasion. Finally, we found that
down-regulation of Gli reduced the expression of ITGB4 and the phosphorylated
FAK, resulting in the inhibition of tumor growth in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The Hh signaling pathway induces cell migration and invasion through
ITGB4-mediated activation of FAK in ovarian cancer. Our findings suggest that the
diminishment of crosstalk between phosphorylated FAK and ITGB4 due to the
down-regulation of Gli family transcription factors might play a pivotal role for
inhibiting ovarian cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3922814
PMID: 24533083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Jul 15;325(2):96-103. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.02.003. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

Tooth, hair and claw: comparing epithelial stem cell niches of ectodermal
appendages.

Naveau A(1), Seidel K(2), Klein OD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Craniofacial and Mesenchymal Biology and Department of Orofacial
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA;
Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cite, UMR S872, Paris, France; Centre 
de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR S872, Paris,
France; INSERM U872, Paris, France. (2)Program in Craniofacial and Mesenchymal
Biology and Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Program in Craniofacial and Mesenchymal
Biology and Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Pediatrics and Institute for
Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: ophir.klein@ucsf.edu.

The vertebrate ectoderm gives rise to organs that produce mineralized or
keratinized substances, including teeth, hair, and claws. Most of these
ectodermal derivatives grow continuously throughout the animal<U+05F3>s life and have
active pools of adult stem cells that generate all the necessary cell types.
These organs provide powerful systems for understanding the mechanisms that
enable stem cells to regenerate or renew ectodermally derived tissues, and
remarkable progress in our understanding of these systems has been made in recent
years using mouse models. We briefly compare what is known about stem cells and
their niches in incisors, hair follicles, and claws, and we examine expression of
Gli1 as a potential example of a shared stem cell marker. We summarize some of
the features, structures, and functions of the stem cell niches in these
ectodermal derivatives; definition of the basic elements of the stem cell niches 
in these organs will provide guiding principles for identification and
characterization of the niche in similar systems.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4072742
PMID: 24530577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 1;20(7):1900-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1710.
Epub 2014 Feb 12.

A phase I, multicenter, open-label, first-in-human, dose-escalation study of the 
oral smoothened inhibitor Sonidegib (LDE225) in patients with advanced solid
tumors.

Rodon J(1), Tawbi HA, Thomas AL, Stoller RG, Turtschi CP, Baselga J,
Sarantopoulos J, Mahalingam D, Shou Y, Moles MA, Yang L, Granvil C, Hurh E, Rose 
KL, Amakye DD, Dummer R, Mita AC.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Vall d'Hebron Institut d'Oncologia and Universitat
Autonoma of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute and University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania; University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom; University
Hospital of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland; Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York; Institute for Drug Development, Cancer Therapy and Research
Center, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas; Novartis
Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts; and Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey.

PURPOSE: This phase I trial was undertaken to determine the maximum tolerated
dose (MTD), dose-limiting toxicities (DLT), safety, tolerability,
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and preliminary antitumor activity of the
novel smoothened inhibitor sonidegib (LDE225), a potent inhibitor of hedgehog
signaling, in patients with advanced solid tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Oral sonidegib was administered to 103 patients with
advanced solid tumors, including medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma (BCC), 
at doses ranging from 100 to 3,000 mg daily and 250 to 750 mg twice daily,
continuously, with a single-dose pharmacokinetics run-in period. Dose escalations
were guided by a Bayesian logistic regression model. Safety, tolerability,
efficacy, pharmacokinetics, and biomarkers in skin and tumor biopsies were
assessed.
RESULTS: The MTDs of sonidegib were 800 mg daily and 250 mg twice daily. The main
DLT of reversible grade 3/4 elevated serum creatine kinase (18% of patients) was 
observed at doses = the MTD in an exposure-dependent manner. Common grade 1/2
adverse events included muscle spasm, myalgia, gastrointestinal toxicities,
increased liver enzymes, fatigue, dysgeusia, and alopecia. Sonidegib exposure
increased dose proportionally up to 400 mg daily, and displayed nonlinear
pharmacokinetics at higher doses. Sonidegib exhibited exposure-dependent
reduction in GLI1 mRNA expression. Tumor responses observed in patients with
medulloblastoma and BCC were associated with evidence of hedgehog pathway
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Sonidegib has an acceptable safety profile in patients with advanced
solid tumors and exhibits antitumor activity in advanced BCC and relapsed
medulloblastoma, both of which are strongly associated with activated hedgehog
pathway, as determined by gene expression.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24523439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Apr;73(4):711-9. doi: 10.1007/s00280-014-2397-9.
Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Perifosine inhibits S6K1-Gli1 signaling and enhances gemcitabine-induced
anti-pancreatic cancer efficiency.

Xin Y(1), Shen XD, Cheng L, Hong DF, Chen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's
Hospital, Hangzhou, 310014, Zhejiang, China.

PURPOSE: The pancreatic cancer has extremely low overall 5-year survival, and
gemcitabine is the only approved single agent for pancreatic cancer treatment.
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the potential effect of
perifosine, a novel Akt inhibitor on gemcitabine-induced anti-pancreatic cancer
effect both in vivo and in vitro.
RESULTS: We showed that sub-cytotoxic low concentration of perifosine
dramatically enhanced gemcitabine-induced cytotoxicity in cultured pancreatic
cancer cells. Perifosine inhibited Akt-mammalian target of rapamycin and
Erk-mitogen-activated protein kinase activation in pancreatic cancer cells.
Meanwhile, perifosine suppressed the hedgehog signaling, as it inhibited
glioma-associated oncogenes (Gli) 1 activation and decreased its target protein
patched 1 (PTCH1) expression. Our data demonstrated that perifosine blocked
p70S6K1 (S6K1) activation, thus disrupting S6K1-Gli1 association and subsequent
Gli1 activation. The reduction of S6K1 or Gli1 expression by target siRNAs
inhibited PTCH1 expression and enhanced gemcitabine-induced cytotoxicity in
pancreatic cancer cells. Significantly, perifosine dramatically enhanced
gemcitabine-mediated antitumor effect in a PANC-1 xenograft severe combined
immunodeficiency mice model.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we conclude that perifosine sensitizes
gemcitabine-mediated anti-pancreatic cancer efficiency through regulating
multiple signaling pathways.

PMID: 24519751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Cancer Lett. 2014 May 28;347(1):129-38. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.02.003. Epub
2014 Feb 7.

a-Mangostin inhibits hypoxia-driven ROS-induced PSC activation and pancreatic
cancer cell invasion.

Lei J(1), Huo X(2), Duan W(1), Xu Q(1), Li R(1), Ma J(3), Li X(2), Han L(1), Li
W(1), Sun H(4), Wu E(5), Ma Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an 710061, Shaanxi
Province, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an 710061,
Shaanxi Province, China. (3)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an 710061,
Shaanxi Province, China. (4)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated
Hospital of Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road,
Xi'an 710061, Shaanxi Province, China. Electronic address: sunhaoxjyf@126.com.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, North Dakota State University, Fargo,
USA. (6)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an 710061, Shaanxi
Province, China. Electronic address: qyma56@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

Recent advances indicating a key role of microenvironment for tumor progression, 
we investigated the role of PSCs and hypoxia in pancreatic cancer aggressiveness,
and examined the potential protective effect of a-mangostin on hypoxia-driven
pancreatic cancer progression. Our data indicate that hypoxic PSCs exploit their 
oxidative stress due to hypoxia to secrete soluble factors favouring pancreatic
cancer invasion. a-Mangostin suppresses hypoxia-induced PSC activation and
pancreatic cancer cell invasion through the inhibition of HIF-1a stabilization
and GLI1 expression. Increased generation of hypoxic ROS is responsible for
HIF-1a stabilization and GLI1 upregulation. Therefore, a-mangostin may be
beneficial in preventing hypoxia-induced pancreatic cancer progression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4005872
PMID: 24513179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Feb 6;14(2):160-73. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.12.013.

Secretion of shh by a neurovascular bundle niche supports mesenchymal stem cell
homeostasis in the adult mouse incisor.

Zhao H(1), Feng J(1), Seidel K(2), Shi S(1), Klein O(2), Sharpe P(3), Chai Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, 2250 Alcazar Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA. (2)Department of Orofacial Sciences and Pediatrics, University of
California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(3)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, Dental
Institute, Kings College London, London TN3 9TF, UK. (4)Center for Craniofacial
Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of Southern California,
2250 Alcazar Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Electronic address:
ychai@usc.edu.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are typically defined by their in vitro
characteristics, and as a consequence the in vivo identity of MSCs and their
niches are poorly understood. To address this issue, we used lineage tracing in a
mouse incisor model and identified the neurovascular bundle (NVB) as an MSC
niche. We found that NVB sensory nerves secrete Shh protein, which activates Gli1
expression in periarterial cells that contribute to all mesenchymal derivatives. 
These periarterial cells do not express classical MSC markers used to define MSCs
in vitro. In contrast, NG2(+) pericytes represent an MSC subpopulation derived
from Gli1+ cells; they express classical MSC markers and contribute little to
homeostasis but are actively involved in injury repair. Likewise, incisor Gli1(+)
cells, but not NG2(+) cells, exhibit typical MSC characteristics in vitro.
Collectively, we demonstrate that MSCs originate from periarterial cells and are 
regulated by Shh secretion from an NVB.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951379
PMID: 24506883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Apr;15(4):463-72. doi: 10.4161/cbt.27821. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

All-trans-retinoic acid antagonizes the Hedgehog pathway by inducing patched.

Busch AM(1), Galimberti F(1), Nehls KE(2), Roengvoraphoj M(3), Sekula D(1), Li
B(4), Guo Y(1), Direnzo J(5), Fiering SN(6), Spinella MJ(5), Robbins DJ(4),
Memoli VA(7), Freemantle SJ(1), Dmitrovsky E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology; Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA. (2)Dartmouth College; Hanover, NH USA. (3)Department 
of Medicine; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Norris
Cotton Cancer Center; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA;
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center; Lebanon, NH USA. (4)Molecular Oncology
Program; Department of Surgery; Miller School of Medicine; University of Miami;
Miami, FL USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology; Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center; Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center; Lebanon, NH USA. (6)Norris Cotton Cancer Center; Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center;
Lebanon, NH USA; Department of Immunology and Microbiology; Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Department of Genetics; Geisel School of 
Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA. (7)Norris Cotton Cancer Center; Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center; Lebanon, NH USA; Department of Pathology; Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA. (8)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology; Geisel 
School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Department of Medicine; Geisel 
School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center;
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA; Dartmouth-Hitchcock
Medical Center; Lebanon, NH USA.

Male germ cell tumors (GCTs) are a model for a curable solid tumor. GCTs can
differentiate into mature teratomas. Embryonal carcinomas (ECs) represent the
stem cell compartment of GCTs and are the malignant counterpart to embryonic stem
(ES) cells. GCTs and EC cells are useful to investigate differentiation therapy
and chemotherapy response. This study explored mechanistic interactions between
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), which induces differentiation of EC and ES cells,
and the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway, a regulator of self-renewal and proliferation. RA 
was found to induce mRNA and protein expression of Patched 1 (Ptch1), the Hh
ligand receptor and negative regulator of this pathway. PTCH1 is also a target
gene of Hh signaling through Smoothened (Smo) activation. Yet, this observed
RA-mediated Ptch1 induction was independent of Smo. It occurred despite
co-treatment with RA and Smo inhibitors. Retinoid induction of Ptch1 also
occurred in other RA-responsive cancer cell lines and in normal ES cells.
Notably, this enhanced Ptch1 expression was preceded by induction of the homeobox
transcription factor Meis1, a direct RA target. Direct interaction between Meis1 
and Ptch1 was confirmed using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. To establish 
the translational relevance of this work, Ptch1 expression was shown to be
deregulated in human ECs relative to mature teratoma and the normal seminiferous 
tubule. Taken together, these findings reveal a previously unrecognized mechanism
through which RA can inhibit the Hh pathway via Ptch1 induction. Engaging this
pathway is a new way to repress the Hh pathway that can be translated into the
cancer clinic.

PMCID: PMC3979824
PMID: 24496080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar 10;32(8):745-51. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.49.9525. Epub 2014 
Feb 3.

Open-label, exploratory phase II trial of oral itraconazole for the treatment of 
basal cell carcinoma.

Kim DJ(1), Kim J, Spaunhurst K, Montoya J, Khodosh R, Chandra K, Fu T, Gilliam A,
Molgo M, Beachy PA, Tang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Daniel J. Kim, James Kim, Katrina Spaunhurst, Rita Khodosh, Kalyani Chandra,
Teresa Fu, Philip A. Beachy, and Jean Y. Tang, Stanford University, Stanford;
Anita Gilliam, Palo Alto Medical Foundation, Palo Alto, CA; James Kim, University
of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX; Javier Montoya and Monserrat Molgo,
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar 10;32(8):720-1.

PURPOSE: Itraconazole, a US Food and Drug Administration-approved antifungal
drug, inhibits the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway, a crucial driver of basal
cell carcinoma (BCC) tumorigenesis, and reduces BCC growth in mice. We assessed
the effect of itraconazole on the HH pathway and on tumor size in human BCC
tumors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with = one BCC tumor > 4 mm in diameter were
enrolled onto two cohorts to receive oral itraconazole 200 mg twice per day for 1
month (cohort A) or 100 mg twice per day for an average of 2.3 months (cohort B).
The primary end point was change in biomarkers: Ki67 tumor proliferation and HH
activity (GLI1 mRNA). Secondary end points included change in tumor size in a
subset of patients with multiple tumors.
RESULTS: A total of 29 patients were enrolled, of whom 19 were treated with
itraconazole. Itraconazole treatment was associated with two adverse events
(grade 2 fatigue and grade 4 congestive heart failure). Itraconazole reduced cell
proliferation by 45% (P = .04), HH pathway activity by 65% (P = .03), and reduced
tumor area by 24% (95% CI, 18.2% to 30.0%). Of eight patients with multiple
nonbiopsied tumors, four achieved partial response, and four had stable disease. 
Tumors from untreated control patients and from those previously treated with
vismodegib showed no significant changes in proliferation or tumor size.
CONCLUSION: Itraconazole has anti-BCC activity in humans. These results provide
the basis for larger trials of longer duration to measure the clinical efficacy
of itraconazole, especially relative to other HH pathway inhibitors.

PMID: 24493717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Endocrinology. 2014 Apr;155(4):1532-46. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1947. Epub 2014 Jan 
29.

Krüppel-like factor 9 deficiency in uterine endometrial cells promotes ectopic
lesion establishment associated with activated notch and hedgehog signaling in a 
mouse model of endometriosis.

Heard ME(1), Simmons CD, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205.

Endometriosis, a steroid hormone-dependent disease characterized by aberrant
activation of estrogen receptor signaling and progesterone resistance, remains
intractable because of the complexity of the pathways underlying its
manifestation. We previously showed that eutopic endometria of women with
endometriosis exhibit lower expression of Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9), a
progesterone receptor coregulator in the uterus, relative to that of women
without disease. Here we examined whether loss of endometrial KLF9 expression
causes ectopic lesion establishment using syngeneic wild-type (WT) mice as
recipients of endometrial fragments from WT and Klf9 null donors. We found
significantly higher incidence of ectopic lesions with Klf9 null than WT
endometria 8 weeks after tissue injection into the intraperitoneal cavity. The
increased incidence of lesion establishment with Klf9 null endometria was
associated with a higher expression ratio of estrogen receptor 2 isoform relative
to that of estrogen receptor 1 and attenuated progesterone receptor levels in
endometriotic stromal cells. PCR array analyses of Notch and Hedgehog signaling
components in ectopic lesions demonstrated up-regulated expression of select
genes (Jag 2, Shh, Gli1, and Stil 1) in Klf9 null lesions relative to that in WT 
lesions. Immunohistochemical analyses showed increased levels of Notch
intracellular domain and Sonic Hedgehog proteins in Klf9 null lesions relative to
that in WT lesions, confirming pathway activation. WT recipients with Klf9 null
lesions displayed lower systemic levels of TNFa and IL-6 and higher soluble TNF
receptor 1 than corresponding recipients with WT lesions. Our results suggest
that endometrial KLF9 deficiency promotes endometriotic lesion establishment by
the coincident deregulation of Notch-, Hedgehog-, and steroid receptor-regulated 
pathways.

PMCID: PMC3959595
PMID: 24476135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;20(6):1687-97. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1517.
Epub 2014 Jan 27.

A functional germline variant in GLI1 implicates hedgehog signaling in clinical
outcome of stage II and III colon carcinoma patients.

Szkandera J(1), Pichler M, Absenger G, Stotz M, Weissmueller M, Samonigg H,
Asslaber M, Lax S, Leitner G, Winder T, Renner W, Gerger A.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Clinical Oncology, Department of Medicine; 
Research Unit: Genetic Epidemiology and Pharmacogenetics, Division of Clinical
Oncology; Institute of Pathology; Clinical Institute of Medical and Laboratory
Diagnostics, Medical University of Graz; Department of Pathology, General
Hospital Graz West, Graz; Department of Pathology, General Hospital of Leoben,
Leoben, Austria; and Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Zuerich,
Zuerich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: Cumulating evidence indicates that germline variants in the Wnt, Notch, 
and Hedgehog pathways are involved in colon carcinoma progression and metastasis.
We investigated germline polymorphisms in a comprehensive panel of Wnt, Notch,
and Hedgehog pathway genes to predict time to recurrence (TTR) and overall
survival in patients with stage II and III colon carcinoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A total of 742 consecutively collected patients with stage
II and III colon carcinoma were included in this retrospective study. Genomic DNA
was analyzed for 18 germline polymorphisms in Wnt, Notch, and Hedgehog pathway
genes (SFRP, DKK 2 and 3, AXIN2, APC, MYC, TCF7L2, NOTCH2, and GLI1) by TaqMan
5'-exonuclease assays.
RESULTS: In univariate analysis, the homozygous mutant variant of GLI1 rs2228226 
G>C was significantly associated with decreased TTR in a recessive genetic model 
after adjustment for multiple testing [HR = 2.35; confidence interval (95% CI),
1.48-3.74; P < 0.001] and remained significant in multivariate analysis including
clinical stage, lymphovascular-, vascular-, and perineural-invasion (HR = 2.43;
CI 95%, 1.52-3.87; P < 0.001). In subanalyses, the association was limited to
patients with surgery alone (HR = 3.21; CI 95%, 1.59-6.49; P = 0.001), in
contrast with patients with adjuvant chemotherapy (HR = 0.82; CI 95%, 0.35-1.95; 
P = 0.657). When the subgroup of patients with "high-risk" GLI1 rs2228226 C/C
genotype was analyzed, no benefit of adjuvant 5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy
could be found.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study identifying GLI1 rs2228226 G>C as an
independent prognostic marker in patients with stage II and III colon carcinoma. 
Prospective studies are warranted to validate our findings.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24470513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Jun;134(6):1718-24. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.17. Epub 2014
Jan 27.

Role of CRD-BP in the growth of human basal cell carcinoma cells.

Noubissi FK(1), Kim T(2), Kawahara TN(3), Aughenbaugh WD(3), Berg E(3), Longley
BJ(3), Athar M(4), Spiegelman VS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. (2)1] Department of Dermatology,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin,
USA [2] Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center Graduate Program,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin,
USA. (3)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine 
and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA [2] Carbone Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA. (4)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA. (5)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of 
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA [2] Molecular and
Environmental Toxicology Center Graduate Program, University of Wisconsin School 
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA [3] Carbone Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Although the number of new cases of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) has increased
rapidly in the last few decades, the molecular basis of its pathogenesis is not
completely understood. Activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been
shown to be a key factor driving the development of BCC. The Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway was also shown to be activated in BCCs and to perhaps modulate 
the activity of the Hh pathway. We have previously identified a mechanism by
which Wnt signaling regulates the transcriptional outcome of the Hh signaling
pathway. We demonstrated that coding region determinant-binding protein (CRD-BP),
a direct target of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, binds to GLI1 mRNA, stabilizes
it, and consequently upregulates its levels (mRNA and protein) and activities. We
hypothesized that Wnt-induced and CRD-BP-dependent regulation of GLI1 expression 
and activities is important for the development of BCC. In this study, we show
that CRD-BP is overexpressed in BCC and that its expression positively correlates
with the activation of both Wnt and Hh signaling pathways. We also describe the
generation and characterization of a human BCC cell line. This cell line was
utilized to demonstrate the importance of CRD-BP-dependent regulation of GLI1
expression and activities in the development of BCC.

PMCID: PMC4041658
PMID: 24468749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e86269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086269. eCollection
2014.

Glycerol affects root development through regulation of multiple pathways in
Arabidopsis.

Hu J(1), Zhang Y(2), Wang J(1), Zhou Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, China ; College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China. (2)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic
Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

Glycerol metabolism has been well studied biochemically. However, the means by
which glycerol functions in plant development is not well understood. This study 
aimed to investigate the mechanism underlying the effects of glycerol on root
development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Exogenous glycerol inhibited primary root
growth and altered lateral root development in wild-type plants. These phenotypes
appeared concurrently with increased endogenous glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) and
H2O2 contents in seedlings, and decreased phosphate levels in roots. Upon
glycerol treatment, G3P level and root development did not change in glycerol
kinase mutant gli1, but G3P level increased in gpdhc1 and fad-gpdh mutants, which
resulted in more severely impaired root development. Overexpression of the
FAD-GPDH gene attenuated the alterations in G3P, phosphate and H2O2 levels,
leading to increased tolerance to exogenous glycerol, which suggested that
FAD-GPDH plays an important role in modulating this response. Free
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) content increased by 46%, and DR5pro::GUS staining
increased in the stele cells of the root meristem under glycerol treatment,
suggesting that glycerol likely alters normal auxin distribution. Decreases in
PIN1 and PIN7 expression, ß-glucuronidase (GUS) staining in plants expressing
PIN7pro::GUS and green fluorescent protein (GFP) fluorescence in plants
expressing PIN7pro::PIN7-GFP were observed, indicating that polar auxin transport
in the root was downregulated under glycerol treatment. Analyses with
auxin-related mutants showed that TIR1 and ARF7 were involved in regulating root 
growth under glycerol treatment. Glycerol-treated plants showed significant
reductions in root meristem size and cell number as revealed by CYCB1;1pro::GUS
staining. Furthermore, the expression of CDKA and CYCB1 decreased significantly
in treated plants compared with control plants, implying possible alterations in 
cell cycle progression. Our data demonstrated that glycerol treatment altered
endogenous levels of G3P, phosphate and ROS, affected auxin distribution and cell
division in the root meristem, and eventually resulted in modifications of root
development.

PMCID: PMC3899222
PMID: 24465999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Neurosci Res. 2014 May;92(5):587-96. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23343. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Primary cilia mediate sonic hedgehog signaling to regulate neuronal-like
differentiation of bone mesenchymal stem cells for resveratrol induction in
vitro.

Huang JG(1), Shen CB, Wu WB, Ren JW, Xu L, Liu S, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can differentiate into neuronal-like cell types
under specific conditions. The classical antioxidant inducers such as
ß-mercaptoethanol (BME), butylated hydroxyanisol (BHA), and dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO) are limited in clinical because of toxicity. Resveratrol, a safer, natural
antioxidant, can stimulate osteoblastic differentiation of MSCs. However, its
effect of inducing MSCs to differentiate into neuronal-like cells is less well
studied, and its differentiated mechanisms are not well understood. Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signaling, mediated by the primary cilia, is crucial for embryonic
development and tissue differentiation, but relatively little is known about the 
role of Shh signaling and primary cilia in neuronal-like differentiation of MSCs.
Here we show that primary cilia, harboring patched 1 (Ptc1), are present in
growth-arrested MSCs and that smoothened (Smo) and Gli1 are present in cytoplasm 
of MSCs, which are important components of the Shh signaling pathway. After
resveratrol induction, MSCs acquire neuronal-like cell morphologies and
phenotypes, Smo translocates to the primary cilia, Gli1 enters the nucleus, and
expressions of Smo and Gli1 proteins increase, which can be inhibited by
cyclopamine, a Smo antagonist. Meanwhile, Smo agonist (SAG) attains similar
effects compared with the resveratrol group. These data indicate that resveratrol
can induce MSCs to differentiate into neuronal-like cells and activate Shh
signaling pathway in the primary cilia. Moreover, the primary cilia and Shh
signaling are essential for resveratrol inducing neuronal-like differentiation of
MSCs. Our finding is important for understanding the neuronal-like
differentiation mechanism of MSCs for resveratrol and promoting its clinical
therapeutic utility.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24464877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Knee. 2014 Mar;21(2):529-33. doi: 10.1016/j.knee.2013.12.001. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Gender analysis of the anterior femoral condyle geometry of the knee.

Li P(1), Tsai TY(2), Li JS(2), Wang S(2), Zhang Y(3), Kwon YM(2), Rubash HE(2),
Li G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou Military Command,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510010, China. (2)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. (3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Guangzhou General
Hospital of Guangzhou Military Command, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510010, China.
(4)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic
address: gli1@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: No study has used 3-D anatomic knee models to investigate the gender 
differences in anterior femoral condyles. Therefore, this study aims to determine
the morphologic differences between genders in anterior femoral condyles of the
knees using 3-D anatomic knee models.
METHODS: Ninety-six male and sixty-five female 3D anatomic knee models were used 
to measure lateral and medial anterior condyle heights, anterior trochlear groove
heights, and anterior condyle width, which were normalized by the
anterior-posterior and medial-lateral dimensions of the knee, respectively. The
shape of anterior condyle groove was also analyzed.
RESULTS: The mean lateral anterior condyle height, medial anterior condyle height
and anterior condyle width of females were 6.6±1.8 mm, 2.0±2.3 mm, and 44.7±4.2
mm, respectively. These data were significantly smaller (p<0.05) than those of
males (7.7±1.8 mm, 2.9±2.0 mm and 50.0±3.4 mm). However, after normalizing by the
femur size, the aspect ratios had no gender differences. Both the ranges of
lateral and medial condyle of females were significantly smaller than those of
males, and the geometry curve of anterior condyle was different between genders.
CONCLUSION: Although the gender differences in anterior femoral condyle sizes no 
longer existed after normalization with the femur size, the shape and the peak
position of anterior condyle groove still have gender differences. The data may
have important implications on the current debate of gender-specific TKAs.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This study provides a better understanding of gender
differences in anterior femoral condyle geometry.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Apr;28(3):229-33. doi: 10.1111/dote.12173. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Alternations in genes expression of pathway signaling in esophageal tissue with
atresia: results of expression microarray profiling.

Smigiel R(1), Lebioda A, Blaszczynski M, Korecka K, Czauderna P, Korlacki W,
Jakubiak A, Bednarczyk D, Maciejewski H, Wizinska P, Sasiadek MM, Patkowski D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.

Esophageal atresia (EA) is a congenital defect of the esophagus involving the
interruption of the esophagus with or without connection to the trachea
(tracheoesophageal fistula [TEF]). EA/TEF may occur as an isolated anomaly, may
be part of a complex of congenital defects (syndromic), or may develop within the
context of a known syndrome or association. The molecular mechanisms underlying
the development of EA are poorly understood. It is supposed that a combination of
multigenic factors and epigenetic modification of genes play a role in its
etiology. The aim of our work was to assess the human gene expression microarray 
study in esophageal tissue samples. Total RNA was extracted from 26 lower pouches
of esophageal tissue collected during thoracoscopic EA repair in neonates with
the isolated (IEA) and the syndromic form (SEA). We identified 787 downregulated 
and 841 upregulated transcripts between SEA and controls, and about 817
downregulated and 765 upregulated probes between IEA and controls. Fifty percent 
of these genes showed differential expression specific for either IEA or SEA.
Functional pathway analysis revealed substantial enrichment for Wnt and Sonic
hedgehog, as well as cytokine and chemokine signaling pathways. Moreover, we
performed reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction study in a group of SHH
and Wnt pathways genes with differential expression in microarray profiling to
confirm the microarray expression results. We verified the altered expression in 
SFRP2 gene from the Wnt pathway as well as SHH, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 from the
Sonic hedgehog pathway. The results suggest an important role of these pathways
and genes for EA/TEF etiology.

© 2014 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 24460849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014 Mar;22(3):490-8. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2013.12.016. 
Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Primary cilia disassembly down-regulates mechanosensitive hedgehog signalling: a 
feedback mechanism controlling ADAMTS-5 expression in chondrocytes.

Thompson CL(1), Chapple JP(2), Knight MM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Material Sciences,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK; Centre for Endocrinology, William
Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. Electronic address:
clare.l.thompson@qmul.ac.uk. (2)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. Electronic address: j.p.chapple@qmul.ac.uk.
(3)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Material Sciences,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. Electronic address:
m.m.knight@qmul.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Hedgehog signalling is mediated by the primary cilium and promotes
cartilage degeneration in osteoarthritis. Primary cilia are influenced by
pathological stimuli and cilia length and prevalence are increased in
osteoarthritic cartilage. This study aims to investigate the relationship between
mechanical loading, hedgehog signalling and cilia disassembly in articular
chondrocytes.
METHODS: Primary bovine articular chondrocytes were subjected to cyclic tensile
strain (CTS; 0.33 Hz, 10% or 20% strain). Hedgehog pathway activation (Ptch1,
Gli1) and A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin Motifs 5
(ADAMTS-5) expression were assessed by real-time PCR. A chondrocyte cell line
generated from the Tg737(ORPK) mouse was used to investigate the role of the
cilium in this response. Cilia length and prevalence were quantified by
immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: Mechanical strain upregulates Indian hedgehog expression and activates
hedgehog signalling. Ptch1, Gli1 and ADAMTS-5 expression were increased following
10% CTS, but not 20% CTS. Pathway activation requires a functioning primary
cilium and is not observed in Tg737(ORPK) cells lacking cilia. Mechanical loading
significantly reduced cilium length such that cilia became progressively shorter 
with increasing strain magnitude. Inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a 
tubulin deacetylase, prevented cilia disassembly and restored mechanosensitive
hedgehog signalling and ADAMTS-5 expression at 20% CTS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time that mechanical loading
activates primary cilia-mediated hedgehog signalling and ADAMTS-5 expression in
adult articular chondrocytes, but that this response is lost at high strains due 
to HDAC6-mediated cilia disassembly. The study provides new mechanistic insight
into the role of primary cilia and mechanical loading in articular cartilage.

Copyright © 2014 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3988976
PMID: 24457103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 13;9(1):e84551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084551. eCollection
2014.

Caveolin-1 is up-regulated by GLI1 and contributes to GLI1-driven EMT in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gai X(1), Lu Z(1), Tu K(1), Liang Z(1), Zheng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Caveolin-1 (Cav-1) has been recently identified to be over-expressed in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and promote HCC cell motility and invasion ability
via inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, the mechanism of
aberrant overexpression of Cav-1 remains vague. Here, we observed that Cav-1
expression was positively associated with GLI1 expression in HCC tissues. Forced 
expression of GLI1 up-regulated Cav-1 in Huh7 cells, while knockdown of GLI1
decreased expression of Cav-1 in SNU449 cells. Additionally, silencing Cav-1
abolished GLI1-induced EMT of Huh7 cells. The correlation between GLI1 and Cav-1 
was confirmed in tumor specimens from HCC patients and Cav-1 was found to be
associated with poor prognosis after hepatic resection. The relationship between 
protein expression of GLI1 and Cav-1 was also established in HCC xenografts of
nude mice. These results suggest that GLI1 may be attributed to Cav-1
up-regulation which plays an important role in GLI1-driven EMT phenotype in HCC.

PMCID: PMC3890273
PMID: 24454730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2014 Jan 13;10:134-40. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.10.10. eCollection
2014.

Physalin H from Solanum nigrum as an Hh signaling inhibitor blocks
GLI1-DNA-complex formation.

Arai MA(1), Uchida K(1), Sadhu SK(2), Ahmed F(3), Ishibashi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. (2)Pharmacy Discipline, Life Science School,
Khulna University, Khulna-9208, Bangladesh. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of Dhaka, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in embryonic development, cell
maintenance and cell proliferation. Moreover, Hh signaling contributes to the
growth of cancer cells. Physalins are highly oxidized natural products with a
complex structure. Physalins (1-7) were isolated from Solanum nigrum (Solanaceae)
collected in Bangladesh by using our cell-based assay. The isolated physalins
included the previously reported Hh inhibitors 5 and 6. Compounds 1 and 4 showed 
strong inhibition of GLI1 transcriptional activity, and exhibited cytotoxicity
against cancer cell lines with an aberrant activation of Hh signaling. Compound 1
inhibited the production of the Hh-related proteins patched (PTCH) and BCL2.
Analysis of the structures of different physalins showed that the left part of
the physalins was important for Hh inhibitory activity. Interestingly, physalin H
(1) disrupted GLI1 binding to its DNA binding domain, while the weak inhibitor
physalin G (2) did not show inhibition of GLI1-DNA complex formation.

PMCID: PMC3896228
PMID: 24454566  [PubMed]


412. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Jul;51(1):11-25. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0154OC.

Targeting the hedgehog-glioma-associated oncogene homolog pathway inhibits
bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis in mice.

Moshai EF(1), Wémeau-Stervinou L, Cigna N, Brayer S, Sommé JM, Crestani B,
Mailleux AA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 1152,
Paris, France.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis has been associated with the reactivation of
developmental pathways, notably the Hedgehog-Glioma-associated oncogene homolog
(GLI) pathway. In this study, we determined whether the Hedgehog pathway was
activated in bleomycin-induced lung injury in mice, and whether targeting the
Hedgehog-Gli pathway could decrease bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. After
intratracheal injection of bleomycin on Day 0, C57Bl6 mice received GDC-0449 (an 
inhibitor of Smoothened, the transducer of the pathway), or
2,2'-[[Dihydro-2-(4-pyridinyl)-1,3(2H,4H)-pyrimidinediyl]bis(methylene)]bis[N,N
dimethylbenzenamine (GANT61; an inhibitor of GLI transcription factors in the
nucleus), from Day 7 to Day 13. At Day 14, whole-lung homogenates were obtained
for morphological analysis, assessment of cell apoptosis and proliferation,
collagen quantification, and evaluation of profibrotic (transforming growth
factor-ß, connective tissue growth factor, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1,
vascular endothelial growth factor-A) and proinflammatory mediators (IL-1ß)
expression. We showed that the Hedgehog pathway was activated in
bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis on Day 14 after injury, with an increased lung
expression of the ligand, Sonic Hedgehog, and with increased messenger RNA
expression and nuclear localization of GLI1 and GLI2. Inhibition of Smoothened
with GDC-0449 did not influence the development of bleomycin-induced lung
fibrosis. By contrast, the inhibition of GLI activity with GANT61 decreased lung 
fibrosis and lung collagen accumulation, and promoted an antifibrotic and
anti-inflammatory environment. Our results identify the hedgehog-Gli pathway as a
profibrotic pathway in experimental fibrosis. Inhibition of the Hedgehog-Gli
pathway at the level of GLI transcriptional activity could be a therapeutic
option in fibrotic lung diseases.

PMID: 24450438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jan 21;14:34. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-34.

MiR-133b is frequently decreased in gastric cancer and its overexpression reduces
the metastatic potential of gastric cancer cells.

Zhao Y, Huang J, Zhang L, Qu Y, Li J, Yu B, Yan M, Yu Y, Liu B(1), Zhu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Department of Surgery, Shanghai 
Institute of Digestive Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin Road, Shanghai 200025, People's Republic of
China. byliu@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence has shown that microRNAs are involved in gastric
cancer development and progression. Here we examine the role of miR-133b in
gastric cancer.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR analysis was performed in 140 patient gastric
cancer tissues and 8 gastric cancer cell lines. The effects of miR-133b in
gastric cancer cells metastasis were examined by scratch assay, transwell
migration and matrigel invasion. In vivo effects of miR-133b were examined in an 
intraperitoneal mouse tumor model. Targets of miR-133b were predicted by
bioinformatics tools and validated by luciferase reporter analyses, western blot,
and quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: MiR-133b was significantly downregulated in 70% (98/140) of gastric
cancer patients. Expression of miR-133b was negatively correlated with lymph node
metastasis of gastric cancer in patients. Similarly, the expression of miR-133b
was significantly lower in seven tested gastric cancer cell lines than in the
immortalized non-cancerous GES-1 gastric epithelial cells. Overexpression of
miR-133b markedly inhibited metastasis of gastric cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo. Moreover, the transcriptional factor Gli1 was identified as a direct target
for miR-133b. Level of Gli1 protein but not mRNA was decreased by miR-133b.
Activity of luciferase with Gli1 3'-untranslated region was markedly decreased by
miR-133b in gastric cancer cells. Gli1 target genes, OPN and Zeb2, were also
inhibited by miR133b.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-133b is frequently decreased in gastric cancer. Overexpression
of miR-133b inhibits cell metastasis in vitro and in vivo partly by directly
suppressing expression of Gli1 protein. These results suggested that miR-133b
plays an important role in gastric cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3925791
PMID: 24443799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Hum Pathol. 2014 Mar;45(3):513-21. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.10.017. Epub 2013 
Oct 30.

Aberrant activation of Sonic hedgehog signaling in chronic cholecystitis and
gallbladder carcinoma.

Xie F(1), Xu X(1), Xu A(2), Liu C(1), Liang F(1), Xue M(1), Bai L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of
Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. (2)Huizhou Medical Institute, Huizhou 516003, China. (3)Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of Gastroenterology,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China;
Department of Huiqiao Building, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China. Electronic address: bailan99@yeah.net.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling has been extensively studied and is implicated in 
various inflammatory diseases and malignant tumors. We summarized the
clinicopathological features and performed immunohistochemistry assays to examine
expression of Shh signaling proteins in 10 normal mucosa, 32 gallbladder
carcinoma (GBC), and 95 chronic cholecystitis (CC) specimens. The CC specimens
were classified into three groups according to degree of inflammation. Compared
with normal mucosa, CC, and GBC specimens exhibited increased expression of Shh. 
The immunoreactive score of Shh in the GBC group was higher than that in the mild
to moderate CC groups but lower than that in the severe CC group (P < .05).
Expression of Patched (Ptch) and Gli1 gradually increased from non-malignant
cholecystitis to malignant tumors. Compared with CC specimens, GBC specimens
showed higher cytoplasmic and membranous expression for Ptch (P < .05). Gli1
staining showed cytoplasmic expression of Gli1 in both CC (60% for mild, 77% for 
moderate, and 84% for severe) and GBC specimens (97%). Nuclear expression of Gli1
was detected in 16% of severe CC specimens with moderate to poor atypical
hyperplasia, and in 62.5% of GBC specimens. Shh expression strongly correlated
with expression of Ptch and Gli1. Furthermore, patients with strongly positive
Gli1 staining had significantly lower survival rates than those with weakly
positive staining. Our data indicate that the Shh signaling pathway is aberrantly
activated in CC and GBC, and altered Shh signaling may be involved in the course 
of development from CC to gallbladder carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24440094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cancer Sci. 2014 Mar;105(3):272-80. doi: 10.1111/cas.12354. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is a potential therapeutic target for gallbladder
cancer.

Matsushita S(1), Onishi H, Nakano K, Nagamatsu I, Imaizumi A, Hattori M, Oda Y,
Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a particularly deadly type of cancer with a 5-year
survival rate of only 10%. New effective therapeutic strategies are greatly
needed. Recently, we have shown that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is reactivated in
various types of cancer and is a potential therapeutic target. However, little is
known about the biological significance of Hh signaling in human GBC. In this
study, we determined whether Hh signaling could be a therapeutic target in GBC.
The Hh transcription factor Gli1 was detected in the nucleus of GBC cells but not
in the nucleus of normal gallbladder cells. The expression levels of Sonic Hh
(Shh) and Smoothened (Smo) in human GBC specimens (n = 37) were higher than those
in normal gallbladder tissue. The addition of exogenous Shh ligand augmented the 
anchor-dependent and anchor-independent proliferation and invasiveness of GBC
cells in vitro. In contrast, inhibiting the effector Smo decreased the
anchor-dependent and anchor-independent proliferation. Furthermore, the
suppression of Smo decreased GBC cell invasiveness through the inhibition of
MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression and inhibited the epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
In a xenograft model, tumor volume in Smo siRNA-transfected GBC cells was
significantly lower than in control tumors. These results suggest that Hh
signaling is elevated in GBC and may be involved in the acquisition of malignant 
phenotypes, and that Hh signaling may be a potential therapeutic target for GBC.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317941
PMID: 24438533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;51(10):916-21.

[Correlation between Gli1 expression and clinicopathological significance in
human pancreatic cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Sheng WW(1), Dong M, Zhou JP, Liu QF, Li X, Dong Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, the First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, China. (2)Email: cmudongming@sohu.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathological significance and relationship of
Gli1, MDM2 and p53 expression in human pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: The expression of Gli1, MDM2 and p53 proteins in 57 paired paraffin
embedded pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) specimens and adjacent
non-cancerous pancreatic tissues was detected by immunohistochemistry. The
relationship between their expression and clinicopathological characters was
analyzed. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to examine the expression
of Gli1 mRNA level in 14 paired fresh PDAC specimens and adjacent non-cancerous
pancreatic tissues. siRNA interference were used to further detect the close
relationship among them.
RESULTS: IHC showed the expression of Gli1 (50.9%), MDM2 (57.9%) and p53 (56.1%) 
was increased in 57 cases of pancreatic cancer compared to that in paired normal 
pancreatic tissues (33.3%, 26.3% and 17.5% respectively, t = 2.413, 2.848 and
2.960, all P < 0.05). Gli1 expression was positively associated with tumor TNM
stage (<U+03C7>(2) = 8.211, P = 0.004), invasion depth (<U+03C7>(2) = 4.247, P = 0.039) and
MDM2 expression (r = 0.299, <U+03C7>(2) = 5.105, P = 0.024), while expression of MDM2
and p53 was associated with tumor invasion depth (<U+03C7>(2) = 5.182, P = 0.023) and
TNM stage (<U+03C7>(2) = 5.696, P = 0.017), respectively. Univariate and multivariate
analysis revealed that Gli1 was an independent adverse prognostic indicator for
patients with PDAC (RR = 2.290, 95%CI: 1.051-4.992, P = 0.037), and patients with
Gli1 and MDM2 co-expression had a significantly poorer overall survival than
patients with their negative expression (P = 0.034). Gli1 mRNA expression was
much higher in 14 cases of PDAC than that in adjacent normal pancreatic tissues
(t = 2.926, P = 0.012). In p53 mutant AsPC-1 cells, Gli1 knockdown down regulated
MDM2, but had no effect on p53 expression, whereas Gli1 knockdown down regulated 
MDM2 and up regulated p53 protein levels in p53 wild-type Capan-2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Gli1, MDM2 and p53 are overexpressed in PDAC, and are benefit for
predicting patients' prognosis. Gli1can regulate MDM2 and wild-type p53
expression. Their co-expression might coordinately contribute to the development 
and progression of PDAC.

PMID: 24433772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;20(6):1566-75. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2195.
Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Hedgehog-GLI signaling inhibition suppresses tumor growth in squamous lung
cancer.

Huang L(1), Walter V, Hayes DN, Onaitis M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Surgery, Duke University, Durham and
Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar;11(3):121.

PURPOSE: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) currently lacks effective targeted
therapies. Previous studies reported overexpression of Hedgehog (HH)-GLI
signaling components in LSCC. However, they addressed neither the tumor
heterogeneity nor the requirement for HH-GLI signaling. Here, we investigated the
role of HH-GLI signaling in LSCC, and studied the therapeutic potential of HH-GLI
suppression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression datasets of two independent LSCC patient
cohorts were analyzed to study the activation of HH-GLI signaling. Four human
LSCC cell lines were examined for HH-GLI signaling components. Cell proliferation
and apoptosis were assayed in these cells after blocking the HH-GLI pathway by
lentiviral-shRNA knockdown or small-molecule inhibitors. Xenografts in
immunodeficient mice were used to determine the in vivo efficacy of GLI inhibitor
GANT61.
RESULTS: In both cohorts, activation of HH-GLI signaling was significantly
associated with the classical subtype of LSCC. In cell lines, genetic knockdown
of Smoothened (SMO) produced minor effects on cell survival, whereas GLI2
knockdown significantly reduced proliferation and induced extensive apoptosis.
Consistently, the SMO inhibitor GDC-0449 resulted in limited cytotoxicity in LSCC
cells, whereas the GLI inhibitor GANT61 was very effective. Importantly, GANT61
demonstrated specific in vivo antitumor activity in xenograft models of GLI(+)
cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Our studies demonstrate an important role for GLI2 in LSCC, and
suggest GLI inhibition as a novel and potent strategy to treat a subset of
patients with LSCC.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4136748
PMID: 24423612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Int J Cancer. 2014 Aug 15;135(4):989-95. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28719. Epub 2014 Jan
25.

Arsenic trioxide inhibits tumor cell growth in malignant rhabdoid tumors in vitro
and in vivo by targeting overexpressed Gli1.

Kerl K(1), Moreno N, Holsten T, Ahlfeld J, Mertins J, Hotfilder M, Kool M,
Bartelheim K, Schleicher S, Handgretinger R, Schüller U, Meisterernst M, Frühwald
MC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Tumor Biology, Westfalian Wilhelms University,
Muenster, Germany; Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University
Children's Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

Rhabdoid tumors are highly aggressive tumors occurring in infants and very young 
children. Despite multimodal and intensive therapy prognosis remains poor.
Molecular analyses have uncovered several deregulated pathways, among them the
CDK4/6-Rb-, the WNT- and the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathways. The SHH pathway is
activated in rhabdoid tumors by GLI1 overexpression. Here, we demonstrate that
arsenic trioxide (ATO) inhibits tumor cell growth of malignant rhabdoid tumors in
vitro and in a mouse xenograft model by suppressing Gli1. Our data uncover ATO as
a promising therapeutic approach to improve prognosis for rhabdoid tumor
patients.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24420698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Apr;1843(4):703-14. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.01.003.
Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Protein kinase inhibitor SU6668 attenuates positive regulation of Gli proteins in
cancer and multipotent progenitor cells.

Piirsoo A(1), Kasak L(2), Kauts ML(3), Loog M(4), Tints K(5), Uusen P(5), Neuman 
T(3), Piirsoo M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Protobios LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Cellin Technologies LLC,
Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. Electronic address: alla.maloverjan@ttu.ee.
(2)Protobios LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Department of Gene
Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, Tallinn 12618,
Estonia. (3)Protobios LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. (4)Institute of
Technology, University of Tartu, Nooruse 1, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (5)Cellin
Technologies LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. (6)Department of Gene
Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, Tallinn 12618,
Estonia.

Observations that Glioma-associated transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 (Gli1/2),
executers of the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway and targets of the
Transforming Growth Factor ß (TGF-ß) signaling axis, are involved in numerous
developmental and pathological processes unveil them as attractive pharmaceutical
targets. Unc-51-like serine/threonine kinase Ulk3 has been suggested to play
kinase activity dependent and independent roles in the control of Gli proteins in
the context of the Shh signaling pathway. This study aimed at investigating
whether the mechanism of generation of Gli1/2 transcriptional activators has
similarities regardless of the signaling cascade evoking their activation. We
also elucidate further the role of Ulk3 kinase in regulation of Gli1/2 proteins
and examine SU6668 as an inhibitor of Ulk3 catalytic activity and a compound
targeting Gli1/2 proteins in different cell-based experimental models. Here we
demonstrate that Ulk3 is required not only for maintenance of basal levels of
Gli1/2 proteins but also for TGF-ß or Shh dependent activation of endogenous
Gli1/2 proteins in human adipose tissue derived multipotent stromal cells (ASCs) 
and mouse immortalized progenitor cells, respectively. We show that cultured ASCs
possess the functional Shh signaling axis and differentiate towards osteoblasts
in response to Shh. Also, we demonstrate that similarly to Ulk3 RNAi, SU6668
prevents de novo expression of Gli1/2 proteins and antagonizes the Gli-dependent 
activation of the gene expression programs induced by either Shh or TGF-ß. Our
data suggest SU6668 as an efficient inhibitor of Ulk3 kinase allowing
manipulation of the Gli-dependent transcriptional outcome.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3946003
PMID: 24418624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1004072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004072. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

GATA6 is a crucial regulator of Shh in the limb bud.

Kozhemyakina E(1), Ionescu A(1), Lassar AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

In the limb bud, patterning along the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis is controlled
by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a signaling molecule secreted by the "Zone of Polarizing
Activity", an organizer tissue located in the posterior margin of the limb bud.
We have found that the transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6, which are key
regulators of cell identity, are expressed in an anterior to posterior gradient
in the early limb bud, raising the possibility that GATA transcription factors
may play an additional role in patterning this tissue. While both GATA4 and GATA6
are expressed in an A-P gradient in the forelimb buds, the hindlimb buds
principally express GATA6 in an A-P gradient. Thus, to specifically examine the
role of GATA6 in limb patterning we generated Prx1-Cre; GATA6(fl/fl) mice, which 
conditionally delete GATA6 from their developing limb buds. We found that these
animals display ectopic expression of both Shh and its transcriptional targets
specifically in the anterior mesenchyme of the hindlimb buds. Loss of GATA6 in
the developing limbs results in the formation of preaxial polydactyly in the
hindlimbs. Conversely, forced expression of GATA6 throughout the limb bud
represses expression of Shh and results in hypomorphic limbs. We have found that 
GATA6 can bind to chromatin (isolated from limb buds) encoding either Shh or Gli1
regulatory elements that drive expression of these genes in this tissue, and
demonstrated that GATA6 works synergistically with FOG co-factors to repress
expression of luciferase reporters driven by these sequences. Most significantly,
we have found that conditional loss of Shh in limb buds lacking GATA6 prevents
development of hindlimb polydactyly in these compound mutant embryos, indicating 
that GATA6 expression in the anterior region of the limb bud blocks hindlimb
polydactyly by repressing ectopic expression of Shh.

PMCID: PMC3886911
PMID: 24415953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cancer Sci. 2014 Mar;105(3):324-33. doi: 10.1111/cas.12348. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Reoxygenation from chronic hypoxia promotes metastatic processes in pancreatic
cancer through the Hedgehog signaling.

Morifuji Y(1), Onishi H, Iwasaki H, Imaizumi A, Nakano K, Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most deadly types of
malignancies because of its high ability to metastasize. PDAC is thought to be
under hypoxic condition. Therefore, to investigate the mechanism of metastatic
processes, chronic-hypoxia-resistant PDAC cells were newly generated under
hypoxic condition for 3-6 months and reoxygenation experiments were performed
using these chronic-hypoxia-resistant PDAC cells in in vivo-mimicking conditions.
Proliferation, invasiveness and tumorigenicity in PDAC cells were significantly
increased by reoxygenation. A Hedgehog (Hh) signaling component, Gli1, was
significantly increased by reoxygenation. Gli1 knockdown inhibited
reoxygenation-induced increases in proliferation and tumorigenicity and decreased
invasiveness through suppression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 2 and MMP9.
Moreover, inhibition of Sonic Hh and Smoothened abrogated reoxygenation induced
increases in proliferation and invasiveness. These results suggest that
metastatic processes in PDAC are induced through activation of the Hh signaling
pathway. Therefore, the Hh signaling pathway may be a therapeutic target for
refractory PDAC in metastatic processes induced by reoxygenation.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317936
PMID: 24397700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochimie. 2014 Jun;101:50-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.12.019. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Inhibition of hedgehog signaling by GANT58 induces apoptosis and shows
synergistic antitumor activity with AKT inhibitor in acute T cell leukemia cells.

Hou X(1), Chen X(2), Zhang P(3), Fan Y(2), Ma A(2), Pang T(2), Song Z(2), Jin
Y(2), Hao W(2), Liu F(2), Wang W(2), Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Shandong University, Jinan, PR China. Electronic address:
houxiaoming11111@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Provincial Hospital
Affiliated to Shandong University, Shandong University, Jinan, PR China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Qi Lu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, PR
China. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Shandong University, Jinan, PR China. Electronic address:
shandongwanghou@gmail.com.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathways have a crucial role in cell proliferation
and survival, and the de-regulation of these pathways can lead to tumorigenesis. 
Here we investigated the expression and function of these pathways in acute T
lymphocytic leukemia cells (T-ALL). Profiling of Hh pathway members revealed
common expression of key Hh signaling effectors in all T-ALL cells. We found that
T-ALL cells were insensitive to specific Smoothened (SMO) inhibition following
the use of low concentrations of the SMO antagonist cyclopamine. In contrast,
treatment with the novel GLI antagonist GANT58 reduced expression of the target
gene Patched 1 as well as GLI family zinc finger 1 (GLI1) and preferentially
decreased the viability of T-ALL cells. We also found perifosine, a novel AKT
inhibitor, down-regulated GLI1 protein by dephosphorylation of AKT and GSK3ß
dose-dependently and that pre-treatment with PD98059, a MEK/ERK pathway
inhibitor, enhanced this down-regulation by 20%-30%. Then we questioned whether
use of both GANT58 and AKT inhibitor together could confer a synergistic effect
to decrease T-ALL cell viability. By applying the Chou-Talalay method, low
concentration of GANT58 induced T-ALL cell death in a synergism fashion with
perifosine or GSK690693 when used simultaneously. These findings indicate that
the combined use of GANT58 and AKT inhibitor could help treat a broad range of
malignant tumors in conjunction with existing cancer treatments.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24394624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 24;443(4):1200-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.133. Epub 2014 Jan 4.

Wwox suppresses breast cancer cell growth through modulation of the hedgehog-GLI1
signaling pathway.

Xiong A(1), Wei L(2), Ying M(1), Wu H(1), Hua J(1), Wang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, PR China. (2)Department of Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, PR China; Department of Oncology, NO. 401 hospital 
of PLA, Qingdao, Shandong, PR China. (3)Department of Oncology, Changhai
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, PR China. Electronic
address: yajiewang@live.com.

Wwox is a tumor suppressor that is frequently deleted or altered in several
cancer types, including breast cancer. Previous studies have shown that ectopic
expression of Wwox inhibits proliferation of breast cancer cells. However, the
underlying mechanism remains unclear. To better understand the molecular
mechanisms of Wwox function, we investigated novel partners of this protein.
Utilizing the coimmunoprecipitation assay, we observed a physical association
between Wwox and the Gli1 zinc-finger transcription factor involved in the
hedgehog pathway. Our results further demonstrated that Wwox expression triggered
redistribution of nuclear Gli1 to the cytoplasm. Additionally, ectopic expression
of Wwox reduced Gli1 expression in vitro. Furthermore, Gli1 Blocks Wwox-induced
breast cancer cell growth inhibition. These findings suggest a functional
crosstalk between Wwox and hedgehog-GLI1 signaling pathway in tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24393846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jan 7;13:4. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-4.

GPCR-like signaling mediated by smoothened contributes to acquired
chemoresistance through activating Gli.

Zhan X, Wang J, Liu Y, Peng Y, Tan W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, 826
Zhangheng Road, Shanghai 201203, P,R, China. wftan@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Smoothened (Smo), which possesses a structural similarity with
classic G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR), is the most important molecular
target in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling system for developing anticancer drugs;
however, whether Smo may transmit GPCR-like signaling to activate the canonical
transcriptional factor Gli of Hh signaling system and consequently to be involved
in the Gli-dependent biological events remains controversial.
RESULTS: In this study, using the acquired chemoresistant cancer cell lines and
their respective parental cells, we found that Smo may activate Gli through Gai, 
Gß<U+03B3>-JNK signaling axis, thereby promoting the Gli-dependent acquired
chemoresistance. These observations were further complementarily strengthened by 
data obtained from chemosensitive cancer cells with artificially elevated Hh
pathway activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Hence, our data demonstrate that GPCR-like signaling mediated by Smo
contributes to the acquired chemoresistance through activating the canonical Hh
transcriptional factor Gli; therefore improving our knowledge of the nature of
the signal transduction of Smo and the molecular mechanisms responsible for the
acquired chemoresistance maintained by Hh pathway. Moreover, our data that JNK
after activated by Smo-Gß<U+03B3> signaling axis may stimulate the Gli activity and
consequently promotes acquired chemoresistance expose a promising and potential
target for developing anti-cancer drugs aimed at Hh pathway and for combating the
acquired resistance raised by using of anti-cancer drugs targeting Smo.

PMCID: PMC3895738
PMID: 24393163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Mar 3;225(2):318-24. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.12.022. Epub
2014 Jan 2.

Protein and mRNA expression of Shh, Smo and Gli1 and inhibition by cyclopamine in
hepatocytes of rats with chronic fluorosis.

Zhao L(1), Yu Y(2), Deng C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Guiyang Medical University, Gui Zhou 550004, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Guiyang Medical University, Gui Zhou 550004, China.
Electronic address: gyyxybl2010@163.com.

In order to investigate the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway and the effect
of cyclopamine in rat hepatocytes with chronic fluorosis, 48 Wistar rats were
randomly divided into 4 groups. The control group was provided with tap water in 
which the fluorine concentration was <1mg/L, while the remaining three groups
were provided with water containing sodium fluoride (NaF) at a concentration of
50mg/L. After 6 months, the blocking and blocking control groups were injected
intraperitoneally once every 2 days for 6 days with 10mg/kg cyclopamine or
dimethyl sulfoxide, respectively. The urinary and skeletal fluoride contents were
determined by the ion selective electrode method. Levels of aspartate
transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), total protein (TP) and albumin
(Alb) in the serum were determined by using autobiochemical machine. Histological
changes in liver tissue were evaluated with Hematoxylin & Eeosin (H&E) staining
using light microscopy. The protein and mRNA expression of Shh, Smo and Gli1 in
hepatocytes of experimental animals was determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC),
Western blotting (Wb) and Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). Fluoride content 
of the urine and bone was increased in the fluorosis and blocking groups compared
to those in the control group (P<0.05), while fluoride content in the blocking
group was decreased compared to the fluorosis and blocking control groups
(P<0.05). The expression of Shh, Smo and Gli1 at the mRNA and protein levels was 
significantly increased in hepatocytes from the fluorosis and blocking control
groups compared with the control group, and expression in the blocking group was 
lower than that of the fluorosis and blocking control groups. The difference
between any two groups was considered to be statistically significant (P<0.05).
Taken together, our study indicates that the expression of Shh, Smo and Gli1 at
the protein and mRNA level in hepatocytes of rats with chronic fluorosis can be
increased by fluoride and may be inhibited by cyclopamine and that the Shh
signaling pathway plays an important role in the liver pathogenesis caused by
fluorosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24388991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jan 2;5:e979. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.497.

Gli1 inhibition suppressed cell growth and cell cycle progression and induced
apoptosis as well as autophagy depending on ERK1/2 activity in human
chondrosarcoma cells.

Sun Y(1), Guo W(1), Ren T(1), Liang W(1), Zhou W(1), Lu Q(1), Jiao G(1), Yan
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Tumor Center, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing,
China.

The transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene 1 (Gli1) has been recognized 
as a very important nuclear executor at the distal end of the Hedgehog (Hh)
signal pathway, which has crucial roles in regulating many developmental
processes, such as pattern formation, differentiation, proliferation, and
apoptosis. Overexpression of patched 1 protein and Gli1 or constitutively active 
Indian Hedgehog (IHh)-parathyroid hormone-related protein signal pathway may lead
to musculoskeletal tumorigenesis. However, for chondrosarcoma few studies have
paid close attention to the IHh-Gli1 signal transduction cascade and more work
needs to be carried out to fully elucidate Gli1 protein functions. Here we show
that the IHh signal pathway was activated in chondrosarcoma, and knocking down
the expression of Gli1 attenuated the disturbed IHh signal pathway, which not
only suppressed cell proliferation and promoted G2/M cell cycle arrest but also
enhanced cell apoptosis by downregulating Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl expression.
Furthermore, Gli1 downregulation, not cyclopamine, induced autophagy by
regulating mTOR phosphorylation, and inhibition of autophagy prevented Gli1 small
interfering RNA-mediated cell death. We also demonstrated that extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activity may mediate these antiproliferative events
induced by Gli1 inhibition. These results indicate that Gli1 inhibition could
ultimately provide a promising new approach for chondrosarcoma treatment.

PMCID: PMC4040663
PMID: 24384722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2208-11.

A loss-of-function mutation in PTCH1 suggests a role for autocrine hedgehog
signaling in colorectal tumorigenesis.

Chung JH(1), Bunz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Molecular Radiation Sciences, The Kimmel 
Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is largely suppressed in the normal differentiated
tissues of the adult but activated in many cancers. The Hh pathway can either be 
activated by the expression of Hh ligands, or by mutations that cause
constitutive, ligand-independent signaling. Colorectal cancer cells frequently
express Hh ligands that are believed to exert paracrine effects on the stromal
component of the tumor. Evidence for a more direct role of Hh signaling on the
growth and evolution of colorectal cancer cell clones has been lacking. Here, we 
report a loss-of-function mutation of PTCH1, a tumor suppressor in the Hh
pathway, in a colorectal cancer that exhibits transcriptional upregulation of the
downstream Hh gene GLI1. This finding demonstrates that autocrine Hh signaling
can provide a selective advantage to evolving tumors that arise in the colorectal
epithelia, and suggests a definable group of colorectal cancer patients that
could derive enhanced benefit from Hh pathway inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3926820
PMID: 24368541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2013 Oct 31;9:2328-35. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.9.267. eCollection
2013.

Cyclopamine analogs bearing exocyclic methylenes are highly potent and
acid-stable inhibitors of hedgehog signaling.

Moschner J(1), Chentsova A(1), Eilert N(1), Rovardi I(1), Heretsch P(2), Giannis 
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universität Leipzig, Institut für Organische Chemie, Johannisallee 29, D-04103
Leipzig, Germany. (2)Rice University, Department of Chemistry, BioScience
Research Collaborative, 6500 Main St., Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The chemical synthesis and biological evaluation of new cyclopamine analogs
bearing exocyclic methylenes in different positions is described.
Bis-exo-cyclopamine 6 was identified as a potent inhibitor of the Gli1-dependent 
luciferase expression in Shh-LIGHTII cells. An extension of this study to
F-ring-modified structures shows the necessity of a rigidly positioned nitrogen
atom for bioactivity as well as the presence of the C21 methyl group for acid
stability and bioactivity.

PMCID: PMC3869244
PMID: 24367396  [PubMed]


429. Int J Oncol. 2014 Mar;44(3):655-61. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2222. Epub 2013 Dec 20.

GLI1 upregulates C-JUN through a specific 130-kDa isoform.

Amable L(1), Gavin E(2), Kudo K(2), Meng E(2), Rocconi RP(2), Shevde LA(3), Reed 
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Mitchell Cancer Institute,
University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36604, USA. (3)Department of Pathology,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35233, USA.

The Hedgehog pathway is molecularly linked to increased resistance to cisplatin
and increased repair of platinum-DNA damage, through C-JUN. GLI1, which has five 
known isoforms, is a positive transcriptional regulator in Hedgehog. Southwestern
blot assay, EMSA and ChIP assays indicate that only one of five isoforms of GLI1 
may be responsible for the Hedgehog link with C-JUN and thus, increased
platinum-DNA adduct repair. Cancer tissues express this 130-kDa isoform at levels
6-fold higher than non-malignant tissues; and this isoform exists in abundance in
six of seven ovarian cancer cell lines examined.

PMCID: PMC3928471
PMID: 24366538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Tumour Biol. 2014 Apr;35(4):3831-7. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1507-3. Epub 2013 Dec
21.

MicroRNA218 inhibits glioma migration and invasion via inhibiting
glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 expression at N terminus.

Peng B(1), Li D, Qin M, Luo D, Zhang X, Zhao H, Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Cancer hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510000, China, pengbiaogd@yeah.net.

Glioma is characterized by high invasion, migration and proliferation abilities. 
However, the molecular mechanism that triggers the development and recurrence of 
this tumor is also elusive. This study aims to investigate the biological
function and molecular mechanism of microRNA218 in glioma. Human glioma samples
were obtained and employed to investigate the correlation between microRNA218 and
glioma pathological grading. Glioma cell viability was detected by the
cell-counting kit-8 (CCK-8) cell counting assay. Transwell assay and
wound-healing assay were employed to examine the migration and invasion of the
glioma cells. The mRNA transcription and protein expression of glioma-associated 
oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot
analysis, respectively. Southwestern blot assay was utilized to explore the
possible interaction site of GLI1 and microRNA218. The results indicated that
microRNA218 is significantly down-regulated in glioma samples and negatively
correlated with the pathological grading. The cell viability was significantly
decreased, and migration and invasion were significantly inhibited in microRNA218
treated cells, compared with un-treated cells. GLI1 was discovered acting as a
functional downstream target of microRNA218, by which microRNA218 inhibited
glioma cell migration and invasion. Southwestern blot result showed that
microRNA218 targeted directly the N terminus of GLI1 molecular, and repressed the
GLI1 expression in U87MG cells. In conclusion, microRNA218 could reduce the
invasion and migration, and inhibit proliferation of glioma cells by suppressing 
the expression of GLI1 protein at the interacting with the N terminus.

PMID: 24357514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Orthop Res. 2014 Apr;32(4):581-6. doi: 10.1002/jor.22562. Epub 2013 Dec 17.

Activation of hedgehog signaling during fracture repair enhances
osteoblastic-dependent matrix formation.

Baht GS(1), Silkstone D, Nadesan P, Whetstone H, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Fracture repair is a well orchestrated process involving various cell types and
signaling molecules. The hedgehog signaling pathway is activated in chondrocytes 
during fracture repair and is known to regulate chondrogenesis however, its role 
in osteoblasts during injury is yet unknown. In this study we observed tibial
fracture repair in mice in which hedgehog signaling was modulated through genetic
alterations of the pathway activator, smoothened. Levels of the hedgehog target
genes Gli1 and Ptch1 in wildtype mice were upregulated in fracture calluses
throughout the repair process. Forced activation of the hedgehog pathway in
ubiquitous fashion resulted in increased matrix deposition in the fracture
callus. Interestingly, inhibition in chondrocytes did not alter the fracture
repair phenotype, while activation of hedgehog in osteoblasts was a requirement
for normal fracture repair. In vitro, transcript levels of Gli1 and Ptch1 were
elevated during osteoblastogenesis. Activation of hedgehog signaling positively
affected osteoblastic differentiation and mineralization as detected using
alkaline phosphatase and Von Kossa staining and Alp and Col1 expression. Here we 
show that the hedgehog signaling pathway plays a critical role in osteoblasts
during fracture repair: inhibition of the pathway in osteoblasts leads to
decreased matrix at the fracture site while activation increased matrix
deposition.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the
Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 24347536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2014 Feb;29(2):155-60. doi:
10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2013.11.018. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

In vivo loads in the lumbar L3-4 disc during a weight lifting extension.

Wang S(1), Park WM(2), Kim YH(2), Cha T(3), Wood K(3), Li G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Lab, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Suwon, Republic of
Korea. (3)Bioengineering Lab, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Bioengineering Lab, 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: gli1@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge of in vivo human lumbar loading is critical for
understanding the lumbar function and for improving surgical treatments of lumbar
pathology. Although numerous experimental measurements and computational
simulations have been reported, non-invasive determination of in vivo spinal disc
loads is still a challenge in biomedical engineering. The object of the study is 
to investigate the in vivo human lumbar disc loads using a subject-specific and
kinematic driven finite element approach.
METHODS: Three dimensional lumbar spine models of three living subjects were
created using MR images. Finite element model of the L3-4 disc was built for each
subject. The endplate kinematics of the L3-4 segment of each subject during a
dynamic weight lifting extension was determined using a dual fluoroscopic imaging
technique. The endplate kinematics was used as displacement boundary conditions
to calculate the in-vivo disc forces and moments during the weight lifting
activity.
FINDINGS: During the weight lifting extension, the L3-4 disc experienced maximum 
shear load of about 230 N or 0.34 bodyweight at the flexion position and maximum 
compressive load of 1500 N or 2.28 bodyweight at the upright position. The disc
experienced a primary flexion-extension moment during the motion which reached a 
maximum of 4.2 Nm at upright position with stretched arms holding the weight.
INTERPRETATION: This study provided quantitative data on in vivo disc loading
that could help understand intrinsic biomechanics of the spine and improve
surgical treatment of pathological discs using fusion or arthroplasty techniques.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3943591
PMID: 24345591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003955. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003955. Epub 2013 Dec
5.

Positive and negative regulation of Gli activity by Kif7 in the zebrafish embryo.

Maurya AK(1), Ben J, Zhao Z, Lee RT, Niah W, Ng AS, Iyu A, Yu W, Elworthy S, van 
Eeden FJ, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)ASTAR Institute of Molecular & Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore ; Department
of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

Loss of function mutations of Kif7, the vertebrate orthologue of the Drosophila
Hh pathway component Costal2, cause defects in the limbs and neural tubes of
mice, attributable to ectopic expression of Hh target genes. While this implies a
functional conservation of Cos2 and Kif7 between flies and vertebrates, the
association of Kif7 with the primary cilium, an organelle absent from most
Drosophila cells, suggests their mechanisms of action may have diverged. Here,
using mutant alleles induced by Zinc Finger Nuclease-mediated targeted
mutagenesis, we show that in zebrafish, Kif7 acts principally to suppress the
activity of the Gli1 transcription factor. Notably, we find that endogenous Kif7 
protein accumulates not only in the primary cilium, as previously observed in
mammalian cells, but also in cytoplasmic puncta that disperse in response to Hh
pathway activation. Moreover, we show that Drosophila Costal2 can substitute for 
Kif7, suggesting a conserved mode of action of the two proteins. We show that
Kif7 interacts with both Gli1 and Gli2a and suggest that it functions to
sequester Gli proteins in the cytoplasm, in a manner analogous to the regulation 
of Ci by Cos2 in Drosophila. We also show that zebrafish Kif7 potentiates Gli2a
activity by promoting its dissociation from the Suppressor of Fused (Sufu)
protein and present evidence that it mediates a Smo dependent modification of the
full length form of Gli2a. Surprisingly, the function of Kif7 in the zebrafish
embryo appears restricted principally to mesodermal derivatives, its inactivation
having little effect on neural tube patterning, even when Sufu protein levels are
depleted. Remarkably, zebrafish lacking all Kif7 function are viable, in contrast
to the peri-natal lethality of mouse kif7 mutants but similar to some
Acrocallosal or Joubert syndrome patients who are homozygous for loss of function
KIF7 alleles.

PMCID: PMC3854788
PMID: 24339784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Nature. 2013 Dec 12;504(7479):311-4. doi: 10.1038/nature12833.

Primary cilia are specialized calcium signalling organelles.

Delling M(1), DeCaen PG(1), Doerner JF(2), Febvay S(2), Clapham DE(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston
Children's Hospital, 320 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2].
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's
Hospital, 320 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (3)1] Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital,
320 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Department of
Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;15(2):78.

Primary cilia are solitary, non-motile extensions of the centriole found on
nearly all nucleated eukaryotic cells between cell divisions. Only ~200-300<U+2009>nm in
diameter and a few micrometres long, they are separated from the cytoplasm by the
ciliary neck and basal body. Often called sensory cilia, they are thought to
receive chemical and mechanical stimuli and initiate specific cellular signal
transduction pathways. When activated by a ligand, hedgehog pathway proteins,
such as GLI2 and smoothened (SMO), translocate from the cell into the cilium.
Mutations in primary ciliary proteins are associated with severe developmental
defects. The ionic conditions, permeability of the primary cilia membrane, and
effectiveness of the diffusion barriers between the cilia and cell body are
unknown. Here we show that cilia are a unique calcium compartment regulated by a 
heteromeric TRP channel, PKD1L1-PKD2L1, in mice and humans. In contrast to the
hypothesis that polycystin (PKD) channels initiate changes in ciliary calcium
that are conducted into the cytoplasm, we show that changes in ciliary calcium
concentration occur without substantially altering global cytoplasmic calcium.
PKD1L1-PKD2L1 acts as a ciliary calcium channel controlling ciliary calcium
concentration and thereby modifying SMO-activated GLI2 translocation and GLI1
expression.

PMCID: PMC4112737
PMID: 24336288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013;4(6):146.

Genistein decreases the breast cancer stem-like cell population through Hedgehog 
pathway.

Fan P, Fan S, Wang H, Mao J, Shi Y, Ibrahim MM, Ma W, Yu X, Hou Z, Wang B, Li L.

INTRODUCTION: The existence of breast cancer stem-like cells (BCSCs) has profound
implications for cancer prevention. Genistein, a predominant isoflavone found in 
soy products, has multiple robust anti-tumor effects in various cancers,
especially in the breast and prostate cancer. In this study, we aimed to evaluate
genistein inhibition of BCSCs and its potential mechanism by culturing MCF-7
breast cancer cells and implanting these cells into nude mice.
METHODS: Cell counting, colony formation and cell apoptosis analysis were used to
evaluate the effect of genistein on breast cancer cells growth, proliferation
and apoptosis. We then used mammosphere formation assay and CD44CD24 staining to 
evaluate the effect of genistein on BCSCs in vitro. A nude mice xenograft model
was employed to determine whether genistein could target BCSCs in vivo, as
assessed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and immunohistochemical
staining. The potential mechanism was investigated utilizing real-time PCR,
western blotting analysis and immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: Genistein inhibited the MCF-7 breast cancer cells growth and
proliferation and promoted apoptosis. Both in vitro and in vivo genistein
decreased breast cancer stem cells, and inhibited breast cancer stem-like cells
through down-regulation of the Hedgehog-Gli1 Signaling Pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated for the first time that genistein inhibits BCSCs by 
down-regulating Hedgehog-Gli1 signaling pathway. These findings provide support
and rationale for investigating the clinical application of genistein in treating
breast cancer, and specifically by targeting breast cancer stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4054948
PMID: 24331293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 3;8(12):e82201. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082201. eCollection
2013.

Rhein, a natural anthraquinone derivative, attenuates the activation of
pancreatic stellate cells and ameliorates pancreatic fibrosis in mice with
experimental chronic pancreatitis.

Tsang SW(1), Zhang H, Lin C, Xiao H, Wong M, Shang H, Yang ZJ, Lu A, Yung KK,
Bian Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong
Kong SAR, China.

Pancreatic fibrosis, a prominent histopathological feature of chronic
pancreatitis (CP) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, is essentially a dynamic 
process that leads to irreversible scarring of parenchymal tissues of the
pancreas. Though the exact mechanisms of its initiation and development are
poorly understood, recent studies suggested that the activation of pancreatic
stellate cells (PSCs) plays a critical role in eliciting such active course of
fibrogenesis. Anthraquinone compounds possess anti-inflammatory bioactivities
whereas its natural derivative rhein has been shown to effectively reduce tissue 
edema and free-radical production in rat models of inflammatory conditions. Apart
from its anti-inflammatory properties, rhein actually exerts strong anti-fibrotic
effects in our current in-vivo and in-vitro experiments. In the mouse model of
cerulein-induced CP, prolonged administration of rhein at 50 mg/kg/day
significantly decreased immunoreactivities of the principal fibrotic activators
alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) on 
pancreatic sections implicating the activation of PSCs, which is the central
tread to fibrogenesis, was attenuated. Consequently, the overwhelmed deposition
of extracellular matrix proteins fibronectin 1 (FN1) and type I collagen (COL
I-a1) in exocrine parenchyma was found accordingly reduced. In addition, the
expression levels of sonic hedgehog (SHH), which plays important roles in
molecular modulation of various fibrotic processes, and its immediate effector
GLI1 in pancreatic tissues were positively correlated to the degree of
cerulein-induced fibrosis. Such up-regulation of SHH signaling was restrained in 
rhein-treated CP mice. In cultured PSCs, we demonstrated that the expression
levels of TGF-ß-stimulated fibrogenic markers including a-SMA, FN1 and COL I-a1
as well as SHH were all notably suppressed by the application of rhein at 10 µM. 
The present study firstly reported that rhein attenuates PSC activation and
suppresses SHH/GLI1 signaling in pancreatic fibrosis. With strong anti-fibrotic
effects provided, rhein can be a potential remedy for fibrotic and/or PSC-related
pathologies in the pancreas.

PMCID: PMC3849497
PMID: 24312641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 29;8(11):e81756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081756.
eCollection 2013.

Glycerol-3-phosphate metabolism in wheat contributes to systemic acquired
resistance against Puccinia striiformis f. sp. tritici.

Yang Y(1), Zhao J, Liu P, Xing H, Li C, Wei G, Kang Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of
Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, People's Republic 
of China.

Glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) is a proposed regulator of plant defense signaling in 
basal resistance and systemic acquired resistance (SAR). The GLY1-encoded
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH) and GLI1-encoded glycerol kinase (GK) 
are two key enzymes involved in the G3P biosynthesis in plants. However, their
physiological importance in wheat defense against pathogens remains unclear. In
this study, quantification analysis revealed that G3P levels were significantly
induced in wheat leaves challenged by the avirulent Puccinia striiformis f. sp.
tritici (Pst) race CYR23. The transcriptional levels of TaGLY1 and TaGLI1 were
likewise significantly induced by avirulent Pst infection. Furthermore, knocking 
down TaGLY1 and TaGLI1 individually or simultaneously with barley stripe mosaic
virus-induced gene silencing (BSMV-VIGS) inhibited G3P accumulation and
compromised the resistance in the wheat cultivar Suwon 11, whereas the
accumulation of salicylic acid (SA) and the expression of the SA-induced marker
gene TaPR1 in plant leaves were altered significantly after gene silencing. These
results suggested that G3P contributes to wheat systemic acquired resistance
(SAR) against stripe rust, and provided evidence that the G3P function as a
signaling molecule is conserved in dicots and monocots. Meanwhile, the
simultaneous co-silencing of multiple genes by the VIGS system proved to be a
powerful tool for multi-gene functional analysis in plants.

PMCID: PMC3843702
PMID: 24312351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2013 Dec;69(Pt 12):2563-79. doi:
10.1107/S0907444913028473. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Structural basis of SUFU-GLI interaction in human Hedgehog signalling regulation.

Cherry AL(1), Finta C, Karlström M, Jin Q, Schwend T, Astorga-Wells J, Zubarev
RA, Del Campo M, Criswell AR, de Sanctis D, Jovine L, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition and Center for Biosciences, Karolinska
Institutet, Novum, Hälsovägen 7, SE-141 83 Huddinge, Sweden.

Hedgehog signalling plays a fundamental role in the control of metazoan
development, cell proliferation and differentiation, as highlighted by the fact
that its deregulation is associated with the development of many human tumours.
SUFU is an essential intracellular negative regulator of mammalian Hedgehog
signalling and acts by binding and modulating the activity of GLI transcription
factors. Despite its central importance, little is known about SUFU regulation
and the nature of SUFU-GLI interaction. Here, the crystal and small-angle X-ray
scattering structures of full-length human SUFU and its complex with the key
SYGHL motif conserved in all GLIs are reported. It is demonstrated that GLI
binding is associated with major conformational changes in SUFU, including an
intrinsically disordered loop that is also crucial for pathway activation. These 
findings reveal the structure of the SUFU-GLI interface and suggest a mechanism
for an essential regulatory step in Hedgehog signalling, offering possibilities
for the development of novel pathway modulators and therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3852661
PMID: 24311597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):707-12. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2881. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway induces autophagy in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cells.

Xu Y(1), An Y(2), Wang X(3), Zha W(1), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, The First People's Hospital of Yancheng, Yancheng, Jiangsu, P.R.
China. (2)Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First People's Hospital of Changzhou,
Changzhou, Jiangsu, P.R. China. (3)Liver Transplantation Center, First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P.R. China.

The HH signaling pathway is a 'core' signal transduction pathway in pancreatic
cancer that promotes the tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancers via enhancing cell
proliferation, increasing invasion and metastasis and protecting against
apoptosis. In the present study, we found that HH signaling regulates autophagy
in pancreatic cancer cells. Activation of HH signaling inhibits autophagy, while 
inhibition of the HH pathway induces autophagy. Although the role of autophagy in
cell survival and apoptosis may depend on tumor type and the microenvironment,
our data clearly demonstrated that GANT61-induced autophagy contributed to
reduced viability and increased apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells both in vivo
and in vitro, and these effects were reversed by the autophagy inhibitor, 3-MA.
We propose that HH signaling by regulating autophagy plays an important role in
determining the cellular response to HH-targeted therapy in pancreatic cancer and
further investigation of the interaction between autophagy and HH signaling is
particularly important.

PMID: 24297612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):673-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2893. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Genistein attenuates cancer stem cell characteristics in gastric cancer through
the downregulation of Gli1.

Yu D(1), Shin HS(2), Lee YS(1), Lee D(1), Kim S(1), Lee YC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Division of
Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Womans University School of
Medicine, Ewha Medical Research Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Genistein is an isoflavone from soy with multiple action targets in cellular
processes. Hedgehog signaling and its activator Gli1 are involved not only in
oncogenesis, but also in cancer stemness and overexpression of CD44, a typical
cancer stem cell surface marker. It has been shown that levels of Gli1 and CD44
expression are downregulated by genistein. Genistein may modulate distinctive
cellular characteristics in cancer stem cells by inhibiting Gli1-related
signaling pathways. In the present study, we sorted cells from MKN45, a human
gastric cancer cell line, according to CD44 expression. CD44(+) cells showed
properties of cancer stem-like cells and formed sphere colonies. In addition,
sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling genes were upregulated in CD44(+) cells when
compared with these levels in CD44(-) cells. When CD44(+) cancer stem-like cells 
were treated with genistein, Gli1 and CD44 mRNA and protein expression was
significantly reduced. Moreover, other stem cell markers were downregulated by
genistein. Gli1 siRNA was used to confirm the action of genistein in inhibiting
Gli1 expression. The high cell migration capacity of CD44(+) cells was blocked by
genistein. in conclusion, genistein inhibits Gli1 gene expression, resulting in
the attenuation of cancer stem-like properties in gastric cancer cells. In
addition, genistein suppresses the cell invasive capacity that is required for
tumor growth and metastasis. Our data showed that genistein can be an effective
agent for gastric cancer therapy by targeting cancer stem-like characteristics.

PMID: 24297371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Histopathology. 2014 Mar;64(4):523-35. doi: 10.1111/his.12273. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

The clinicopathological significance and relationship of Gli1, MDM2 and p53
expression in resectable pancreatic cancer.

Sheng W(1), Dong M, Zhou J, Li X, Liu Q, Dong Q, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Hospital,
China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

AIMS: To study the expression of Gli1, MDM2 and p53 for clinical significance in 
pancreatic cancer (PC), and their functional relationship in regulating the
biological behaviour of PC cells.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry showed that the expression of Gli1,
MDM2 and p53 was much higher in 57 cases of PC than in paired normal pancreatic
tissues, and was positively associated with tumour UICC stage and T stage
(P < 0.05). Patients with expression of Gli1 only or coexpression of Gli1 and
MDM2 had significantly worse overall survival than patients with negative
expression (P < 0.05). RNA interference showed that p53 knockdown increased the
protein level of Gli1 but decreased the level of MDM2, and enhanced cell invasion
and migration in wild-type p53 Capan-2 cells; whereas Gli1 or MDM2 knockdown did 
not change p53 expression, but decreased the protein level of MDM2 or Gli1,
respectively, and inhibited cell invasion and migration in mutant p53 PANC-1
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of Gli1, MDM2 and mutant p53 contributes to the
development and progression of PC, and plays an important role in predicting PC
patients' prognosis. Moreover, we report a positive association between Gli1 and 
MDM2 in PC cells, but their relationship with p53 is dependent on wild-type or
mutant p53 status.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24289472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 13;33(46):5370-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.480. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Distinct cellular origin and genetic requirement of Hedgehog-Gli in postnatal
rhabdomyosarcoma genesis.

Rajurkar M(1), Huang H(2), Cotton JL(1), Brooks JK(1), Sicklick J(3), McMahon
AP(4), Mao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA. (2)1] Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA [2] Department of Histology &
Embryology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, PR
China. (3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Moores Cancer Center, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology and 
Regenerative Medicine, Broad-CIRM Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell 
Research, WM Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Dysregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh)-Gli signaling pathway is implicated in a
variety of human cancers, including basal cell carcinoma (BCC), medulloblastoma
(MB) and embryonal rhabdhomyosarcoma (eRMS), three principle tumors associated
with human Gorlin syndrome. However, the cells of origin of these tumors,
including eRMS, remain poorly understood. In this study, we explore the cell
populations that give rise to Hh-related tumors by specifically activating
Smoothened (Smo) in both Hh-producing and -responsive cell lineages in postnatal 
mice. Interestingly, we find that unlike BCC and MB, eRMS originates from the
stem/progenitor populations that do not normally receive active Hh signaling.
Furthermore, we find that the myogenic lineage in postnatal mice is largely Hh
quiescent and that Pax7-expressing muscle satellite cells are not able to give
rise to eRMS upon Smo or Gli1/2 overactivation in vivo, suggesting that
Hh-induced skeletal muscle eRMS arises from Hh/Gli quiescent non-myogenic cells. 
In addition, using the Gli1 null allele and a Gli3 repressor allele, we reveal a 
specific genetic requirement for Gli proteins in Hh-induced eRMS formation and
provide molecular evidence for the involvement of Sox4/11 in eRMS cell survival
and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4309268
PMID: 24276242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biol Open. 2013 Sep 9;2(11):1203-13. doi: 10.1242/bio.20136262. eCollection 2013.

Targeted inactivation and identification of targets of the Gli2a transcription
factor in the zebrafish.

Wang X(1), Zhao Z, Muller J, Iyu A, Khng AJ, Guccione E, Ruan Y, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology , 61 Biopolis Drive , Singapore 138673
; Present address: High Throughput Molecular Drug Discovery Center, Tianjin
International Joint Academy of Biotechnology and Medicine, Tianjin, China.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is mediated by the Gli transcription factors and, in the 
zebrafish, plays an important role in patterning both the neural tube and
myotome. Using a null allele of the gli2a gene induced by targeted mutagenesis,
we show that Gli2a is completely dispensable in the fish but acts redundantly
with Gli1 to regulate expression of known Hh targets, such as ptch2, prdm1a and
eng2a, in the myotome and neural tube. To identify novel targets of Hh signaling,
we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) of whole embryo 
extracts. Samples were significantly enriched for 192 genomic regions, some of
which are associated with four known Hh target genes, ptch1, ptch2, gli1 and
olig2. Sequence analysis of these regions reveals a high level of conservation of
Gli-binding sites from fish to mammals in some, but not all, cases. Expression
analysis of other transcription units that are closely associated with peaks
identified several putative targets not previously implicated as Hh targets,
including myl10, hnmt, lrp4, efemp2, fras1, quo, and lamc1. Each of these genes
shows loss of, or reduced expression in, embryos homozygous for an antimorphic
allele of gli2a, you-too (yot), consistent with their being direct targets of
Gli2a.

PMCID: PMC3828767
PMID: 24244857  [PubMed]


444. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;144 Pt A:237-41. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.11.002. Epub 2013 Nov 12.

Reciprocal role of vitamin D receptor on ß-catenin regulated keratinocyte
proliferation and differentiation.

Hu L(1), Bikle DD(2), Oda Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco
and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA; School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco
and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. (3)Department 
of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco and Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. Electronic address:
yuko.oda@ucsf.edu.

The active metabolite of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3),
suppresses the proliferation while promoting the differentiation of keratinocytes
through the vitamin D receptor (VDR). ß-Catenin, on the other hand, promotes
proliferation and blocks epidermal differentiation, although it stimulates hair
follicle differentiation. In intestinal epithelia VDR binds ß-catenin and blocks 
its proliferative effects. In this study we investigated the role of
1,25(OH)2D3/VDR on ß-catenin regulated gene transcription during keratinocyte
proliferation and differentiation. 1,25(OH)2D3 suppressed promoter reporter
activity driven by synthetic and natural TCF/ß-catenin response elements.
Over-expression of VDR further suppressed these TCF/ß-catenin promoter
activities. 1,25(OH)2D3 also suppressed the mRNA expression of the ß-catenin
regulated gene Gli1 through VDR. These data were consistent with our previous
observations that VDR silencing resulted in keratinocyte hyperproliferation with 
increased expression of Gli1 in vitro, whereas VDR null skin showed
hyperproliferation in vivo. In contrast, 1,25(OH)2D3 induced expression of
another ß-catenin regulated gene, PADI1, important for both epidermal and hair
follicle differentiation. Deletion of VDR resulted in defects in hair
differentiation in vivo, with decreased expression of ß-catenin regulated hair
differentiation genes such as PADI1, hair keratin KRT31 and calcium binding
protein S100a3. These genes possess vitamin D response elements (VDRE) adjacent
to TCF/ß-catenin response elements and are regulated by both VDR and ß-catenin
signaling. Therefore, we propose that VDR and ß-catenin interact reciprocally to 
promote VDR stimulation of genes involved with differentiation that contain both 
VDR and ß-catenin response elements while inhibiting ß-catenin stimulation of
genes involved with proliferation. Thus the major finding of this study is that
while 1,25(OH)2D3/VDR inhibits the actions of ß-catenin to promote keratinocyte
proliferation, 1,25(OH)2D3/VDR promotes the ability of ß-catenin to stimulate
hair follicle differentiation. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled
'16th Vitamin D Workshop'.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4061268
PMID: 24239508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 4;8(11):e78127. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078127. eCollection
2013.

Preferential activation of the hedgehog pathway by epigenetic modulations in HPV 
negative HNSCC identified with meta-pathway analysis.

Fertig EJ(1), Markovic A, Danilova LV, Gaykalova DA, Cope L, Chung CH, Ochs MF,
Califano JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is largely divided into two groups 
based on their etiology, human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive and -negative.
Global DNA methylation changes are known to drive oncogene and tumor suppressor
expression in primary HNSCC of both types. However, significant heterogeneity in 
DNA methylation within the groups results in different transcriptional profiles
and clinical outcomes. We applied a meta-pathway analysis to link gene expression
changes to DNA methylation in distinguishing HNSCC subtypes. This approach
isolated specific epigenetic changes controlling expression in HPV- HNSCC that
distinguish it from HPV+ HNSCC. Analysis of genes identified Hedgehog pathway
activation specific to HPV- HNSCC. We confirmed that GLI1, the primary Hedgehog
target, showed higher expression in tumors compared to normal samples with HPV-
tumors having the highest GLI1 expression, suggesting that increased expression
of GLI1 is a potential driver in HPV- HNSCC. Our algorithm for integration of DNA
methylation and gene expression can infer biologically significant molecular
pathways that may be exploited as therapeutics targets. Our results suggest that 
therapeutics targeting the Hedgehog pathway may be of benefit in HPV- HNSCC.
Similar integrative analysis of high-throughput coupled DNA methylation and
expression datasets may yield novel insights into deregulated pathways in other
cancers.

PMCID: PMC3817178
PMID: 24223768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 17;110(51):20611-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315729110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Sonic hedgehog signals to multiple prostate stromal stem cells that replenish
distinct stromal subtypes during regeneration.

Peng YC(1), Levine CM, Zahid S, Wilson EL, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 17;110(51):20356-7.

The adult mouse prostate has a seemingly endless capacity for regeneration, and
sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling has been implicated in this stem cell-driven
process. However, it is not clear whether SHH acts on the epithelium or stromal
cells that secrete factors required for epithelial expansion. Because little is
known about stromal stem cells compared with their epithelial counterparts, we
used in vivo mouse genetics tools to characterize four prostate stromal subtypes 
and their stem cells. Using knockin reporter alleles, we uncovered that SHH
signals from prostate basal epithelial cells to adjacent stromal cells.
Furthermore, the SHH target gene Gli1 is preferentially expressed in
subepithelial fibroblast-like cells, one of four prostate stromal subtypes and
the subtype closest to the epithelial source of SHH. Using Genetic Inducible Fate
Mapping to mark adult Gli1- or Smooth muscle actin-expressing cells and follow
their fate during regeneration, we uncovered that Gli1-expressing cells exhibit
long-term self-renewal capacity during multiple rounds of androgen-mediated
regeneration after castration-induced involution, and depleted smooth muscle
cells are mainly replenished by preexisting smooth muscle cells. Based on our
Genetic Inducible Fate Mapping studies, we propose a model where SHH signals to
multiple stromal stem cells, which are largely unipotent in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3870668
PMID: 24218555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2608. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3608.

Structural insight into the mutual recognition and regulation between Suppressor 
of Fused and Gli/Ci.

Zhang Y(1), Fu L, Qi X, Zhang Z, Xia Y, Jia J, Jiang J, Zhao Y, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China [2].

Hedgehog (Hh) signalling regulates embryonic development and adult tissue
homoeostasis. Mutations of its pathway components including Suppressor of Fused
(Sufu) and Gli/Ci predispose to cancers and congenital anomalies. The Sufu-Gli
protein complex occupies a central position in the vertebrate Hh signalling
pathway, especially in mammals. Here structures of full-length human and
Drosophila Sufu, the human Sufu-Gli complex, along with normal mode analysis and 
FRET measurement results, reveal that Sufu alternates between 'open' and 'closed'
conformations. The 'closed' form of Sufu is stabilized by Gli binding and
inhibited by Hh treatment, whereas the 'open' state of Sufu is promoted by
Gli-dissociation and Hh signalling. Mutations of critical interface residues
disrupt the Sufu-Gli complex and prevent Sufu from repressing Gli-mediated
transcription, tethering Gli in the cytoplasm and protecting Gli from the 26S
proteasome-mediated degradation. Our study thus provides mechanistic insight into
the mutual recognition and regulation between Sufu and Gli/Ci.

PMID: 24217340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Nat Med. 2013 Nov;19(11):1410-22. doi: 10.1038/nm.3389. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Unraveling the therapeutic potential of the Hedgehog pathway in cancer.

Amakye D(1), Jagani Z, Dorsch M.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey, USA.

Major progress has been made in recent years in the development of Hedgehog (Hh) 
pathway inhibitors for the treatment of patients with cancer. Promising clinical 
trial results have been obtained in cancers that harbor activating mutations of
the Hh pathway, such as basal cell carcinoma and medulloblastoma. However, for
many cancers, in which Hh ligand overexpression is thought to drive tumor growth,
results have been disappointing. Here we review the preclinical data that
continue to shape our understanding of the Hh pathway in tumorigenesis and the
emerging clinical experience with smoothened inhibitors.

PMID: 24202394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(2):99-110. doi: 10.1159/000353116. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

Inductive ability of human developing and differentiated dental mesenchyme.

Zheng L(1), Warotayanont R, Stahl J, Kunimatsu R, Klein O, DenBesten PK, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco,
Calif., USA.

The development of cell-based therapeutic strategies to bioengineer tooth tissue 
is a promising approach for the treatment of lost or damaged tooth tissue. The
lack of a readily available cell source for human dental epithelial cells (ECs)
severely constrains the progress of tooth bioengineering. Previous studies in
model organisms have demonstrated that developing dental mesenchyme can instruct 
nondental epithelium to differentiate into enamel-forming epithelium. In this
study, we characterized the ability of fetal and adult human dental mesenchyme to
promote differentiation of human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived ECs (ES-ECs) 
into ameloblast-lineage cells. ES-ECs were co-cultured either with human fetal
dental mesenchymal cells (FDMCs) or with adult dental mesenchymal cells (ADMCs)
in either a three-dimensional culture system, or in the renal capsules of SCID
mice. When co-cultured with FDMCs in vitro, ES-ECs polarized and expressed
amelogenin. Tooth organ-like structures assembled with epithelium and encased
mesenchyme and developing enamel-like structures could be detected in the
complexes resulting from in vitro and ex vivo co-culture of ES-ECs and FDMCs. In 
contrast, co-cultured ES-ECs and ADMCs formed amorphous spherical structures and 
occasionally formed hair. Transcription factors were significantly upregulated in
FDMCs compared to ADMCs including MSX1, GLI1, LHX6, LHX8,LEF1 and TBX1. In
summary, FDMCs but not ADMCs had the capacity to induce differentiation of ES-ECs
into ameloblast lineage cells. Further characterization of the functional
differences between these two types of dental mesenchyme could enable
reprogramming of ADMCs to enhance their odontogenic inductive competence.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 24192998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 30;33(44):17490-505. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2042-13.2013.

Titration of GLI3 repressor activity by sonic hedgehog signaling is critical for 
maintaining multiple adult neural stem cell and astrocyte functions.

Petrova R(1), Garcia AD, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10065, BCMB Graduate Program, Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, New York
10065, and Department of Biology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), a key regulator of embryonic neurogenesis, signals directly
to neural stem cells (NSCs) in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and to astrocytes in
the adult mouse forebrain. The specific mechanism by which the GLI2 and GLI3
transcriptional activators (GLI2(A) and GLI3(A)) and repressors (GLI2(R) and
GLI3(R)) carry out SHH signaling has not been addressed. We found that the
majority of slow-cycling NSCs express Gli2 and Gli3, whereas Gli1 is restricted
ventrally and all three genes are downregulated when NSCs transition into
proliferating progenitors. Surprisingly, whereas conditional ablation of Smo in
postnatal glial fibrillary acidic protein-expressing cells results in
cell-autonomous loss of NSCs and a progressive reduction in SVZ proliferation,
without an increase in glial cell production, removal of Gli2 or Gli3 does not
alter adult SVZ neurogenesis. Significantly, removing Gli3 in Smo conditional
mutants largely rescues neurogenesis and, conversely, expression of a
constitutive GLI3(R) in the absence of normal Gli2 and Gli3 abrogates
neurogenesis. Thus unattenuated GLI3(R) is a primary inhibitor of adult SVZ NSC
function. Ablation of Gli2 and Gli3 revealed a minor role for GLI2(R) and little 
requirement for GLI(A) function in stimulating SVZ neurogenesis. Moreover, we
found that similar rules of GLI activity apply to SHH signaling in regulating
SVZ-derived olfactory bulb interneurons and maintaining cortical astrocyte
function. Namely, fewer superficial olfactory bulb interneurons are generated in 
the absence of Gli2 and Gli3, whereas astrocyte partial gliosis results from an
increase in GLI3(R). Thus precise titration of GLI(R) levels by SHH is critical
to multiple functions of adult NSCs and astrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3812512
PMID: 24174682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 Sep;42(5):543-9.

[Effect of Helicobacter pylori lipopolysaccharide on expression of Gli and Ptch-1
proteins in sonic hedgehog signaling pathway of gastric mucosa GES-1 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang J(1), Zhang GX, Chen FF, He BS, Ye F, Pan XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210006,China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of Helicobacter Pylori lipopolysaccharide
(Hp-LPS) on expression of Gli and Ptch-1 proteins in sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling pathway of gastric mucosa GES-1 cells.
METHODS: The LPS was extracted from Hp by hot phenol water method, and then the
concentration of LPS was detected by the kinetic turbidimetric assay. GES-1 cells
were stimulated by different concentrations of Hp-LPS (0, 1, 10, 20, 30 and 40
µg/ml). The inhibition rates of cell growth were measured by MTT assay after
treated with Hp-LPS for 24 h. The expression of Gli and Ptch-1 proteins were
determined by Western Blot.
RESULTS: MTT assay showed that the inhibition rates of GES-1 cell growth after
treatment by different concentrations of Hp-LPS (1, 10, 20, 30 and 40µg/ml) were 
25.8% ± 2.7%, 34.2% ± 3.1 %, 46.3% 3.4%, 60.8% ± 2.1% and 82.9% ± 2.8%
respectively (r=0.985, P<0.001). Western blot showed that the expressions of Gli 
and Ptch-1 proteins were decreased after Hp-LPS treatment (0, 1, 10, 20, 30 and
40 µg/ml): the relative expression values of Gli were 1.286 ± 0.180, 0.963 ±
0.067, 0.850 ± 0.085, 0.566 ± 0.058, 0.549 ± 0.056 and 0.377 ± 0.047,
respectively (r=-0.945, P<0.001); those of Ptch-1 were 1.688 ± 0.088, 1.466 ±
0.061, 1.170 ± 0.065, 1.042 ± 0.064, 0.648 ± 0.057 and 0.482 ± 0.074,
respectively (r=-0.985, P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Hp-LPS can decrease the related protein expression of Shh signaling
pathway, which indicates that Hp may interfere with the function of Shh signaling
pathway in gastric mucosa via the effect of its LPS.

PMID: 24167136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2013 Dec;19(12):926-36. doi: 10.1111/cns.12163. Epub 2013 Oct 
25.

Curcumin suppresses malignant glioma cells growth and induces apoptosis by
inhibition of SHH/GLI1 signaling pathway in vitro and vivo.

Du WZ(1), Feng Y, Wang XF, Piao XY, Cui YQ, Chen LC, Lei XH, Sun X, Liu X, Wang
HB, Li XF, Yang DB, Sun Y, Zhao ZF, Jiang T, Li YL, Jiang CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.

AIMS: To study the role of curcumin on glioma cells via the SHH/GLI1 pathway in
vitro and vivo.
METHODS: The effects of curcumin on proliferation, migration, apoptosis, SHH/GLI1
signaling, and GLI1 target genes expression were evaluated in multiple glioma
cell lines in vitro. A U87-implanted nude mice model was used to study the role
of curcumin on tumor volume and the suppression efficacy of GLI1.
RESULTS: Curcumin showed cytotoxic effects on glioma cell lines in vitro. Both
mRNA and protein levels of SHH/GLI1 signaling (Shh, Smo, GLI1) were downregulated
in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Several GLI1-dependent target genes
(CyclinD1, Bcl-2, Foxm1) were also downregulated. Curcumin treatment prevented
GLI1 translocating into the cell nucleus and reduced the concentration of its
reporter. Curcumin suppressed cell proliferation, colony formation, migration,
and induced apoptosis which was mediated partly through the mitochondrial pathway
after an increase in the ratio of Bax to Bcl2. Intraperitoneal injection of
curcumin in vivo reduced tumor volume, GLI1 expression, the number of positively 
stained cells, and prolonged the survival period compared with the control group.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that curcumin holds a great promise for SHH/GLI1
targeted therapy against gliomas.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24165291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 15;73(24):7313-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2008. Epub 
2013 Oct 28.

GLI1 interferes with the DNA mismatch repair system in pancreatic cancer through 
BHLHE41-mediated suppression of MLH1.

Inaguma S(1), Riku M, Hashimoto M, Murakami H, Saga S, Ikeda H, Kasai K.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School
of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

The mismatch repair (MMR) system is indispensable for the fidelity of DNA
replication, the impairment of which predisposes to the development and
progression of many types of cancers. To date, GLI1 transcription factor, a key
molecule of the Hedgehog signaling pathway, has been shown to regulate the
expression of several genes crucial for a variety of cancer cell properties in
many types of cancers, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), but
whether GLI1 could control the MMR system was not known. Here, we showed that
GLI1 and GLI2 indirectly suppressed the expression of MLH1 in PDAC cells. Through
GLI1 target gene screening, we found that GLI1 and GLI2 activated the expression 
of a basic helix-loop-helix type suppressor BHLHE41/DEC2/SHARP1 through a
GLI-binding site in the promoter. Consistent with a previous report that BHLHE41 
suppresses the MLH1 promoter activity, we found that the activation of GLI1 led
to the BHLHE41-dependent suppression of MLH1, and a double knockdown of GLI1 and 
GLI2 conversely increased the MLH1 protein in PDAC cells. Using TALEN-based
modification of the MLH1 gene, we further showed that GLI1 expression was indeed 
associated with an increased tolerance to a methylating agent, methylnitrosourea 
cooperatively with a lower copy number status of MLH1. Finally, GLI1 expression
was immunohistochemically related positively with BHLHE41 and inversely with MLH1
in PDAC cells and precancerous lesions of the pancreas. On the basis of these
results, we propose that GLI1 depresses the MMR activity and might contribute to 
the development and progression of PDAC.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24165159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2237-48.

Identification of anaplastic lymphoma kinase as a potential therapeutic target in
Basal Cell Carcinoma.

Ning H(1), Mitsui H, Wang CQ, Suárez-Fariñas M, Gonzalez J, Shah KR, Chen J,
Coats I, Felsen D, Carucci JA, Krueger JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, The Rockefeller University, New
York, NY.

The pathogenesis of BCC is associated with sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling.
Vismodegib, a smoothened inhibitor that targets this pathway, is now in clinical 
use for advanced BCC patients, but its efficacy is limited. Therefore, new
therapeutic options for this cancer are required. We studied gene expression
profiling of BCC tumour tissues coupled with laser capture microdissection to
identify tumour specific receptor tyrosine kinase expression that can be targeted
by small molecule inhibitors. We found a >250 fold increase (FDR<10-4) of the
oncogene, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) as well as its ligands, pleiotrophin
and midkine in BCC compared to microdissected normal epidermis. qRT-PCR confirmed
increased expression of ALK (p<0.05). Stronger expression of phosphorylated ALK
in BCC tumour nests than normal skin was observed by immunohistochemistry.
Crizotinib, an FDA-approved ALK inhibitor, reduced keratinocyte proliferation in 
culture, whereas a c-Met inhibitor did not. Crizotinib significantly reduced the 
expression of GLI1 and CCND2 (members of SHH-pathway) mRNA by approximately 60%
and 20%, respectively (p<0.01). Our data suggest that ALK may increase GLI1
expression in parallel with the conventional SHH-pathway and promote keratinocyte
proliferation. Hence, an ALK inhibitor alone or in combination with targeting
SHH-pathway molecules may be a potential treatment for BCC patients.

PMCID: PMC3926823
PMID: 24163262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cancer. 2014 Feb 15;120(4):537-47. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28439. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Involvement and targeted intervention of dysregulated Hedgehog signaling in
osteosarcoma.

Lo WW(1), Wunder JS, Dickson BC, Campbell V, McGovern K, Alman BA, Andrulis IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: During development, the Hedgehog pathway plays important roles
regulating the proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes, providing a
template for growing bone. In this study, the authors investigated the components
of dysregulated Hedgehog signaling as potential therapeutic targets for
osteosarcoma.
METHODS: Small-molecule agonists and antagonists that modulate the Hedgehog
pathway at different levels were used to investigate the mechanisms of
dysregulation and the efficacy of Hedgehog blockade in osteosarcoma cell lines.
The inhibitory effect of a small-molecule Smoothened (SMO) antagonist, IPI-926
(saridegib), also was examined in patient-derived xenograft models.
RESULTS: An inverse correlation was identified in osteosarcoma cell lines between
endogenous glioma-associated oncogene 2 (GLI2) levels and Hedgehog pathway
induction levels. Cells with high levels of GLI2 were sensitive to GLI
inhibition, but not SMO inhibition, suggesting that GLI2 overexpression may be a 
mechanism of ligand-independent activation. In contrast, cells that expressed
high levels of the Hedgehog ligand gene Indian hedgehog (IHH) and the target
genes patched 1 (PTCH1) and GLI1 were sensitive to modulation of both SMO and
GLI, suggesting ligand-dependent activation. In 2 xenograft models, active
autocrine and paracrine, ligand-dependent Hedgehog signaling was identified.
IPI-926 inhibited the Hedgehog signaling interactions between the tumor and the
stroma and demonstrated antitumor efficacy in 1 of 2 ligand-dependent models.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicate that both ligand-dependent and
ligand-independent Hedgehog dysregulation may be involved in osteosarcoma. It is 
the first report to demonstrate Hedgehog signaling crosstalk between the tumor
and the stroma in osteosarcoma. The inhibitory effect of IPI-926 warrants
additional research and raises the possibility of using Hedgehog pathway
inhibitors as targeted therapeutics to improve treatment for osteosarcoma.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24151134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 1;20(1):140-50. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1434.
Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Transient activation of hedgehog pathway rescued irradiation-induced
hyposalivation by preserving salivary stem/progenitor cells and parasympathetic
innervation.

Hai B(1), Qin L, Yang Z, Zhao Q, Shangguan L, Ti X, Zhao Y, Kim S, Rangaraj D,
Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Institute for Regenerative Medicine at Scott and White,
Molecular and Cellular Medicine Department, Texas A&M Health Science Center;
Department of Radiation Oncology, Scott and White Hospital, Temple, Texas;
Lutheran Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York; Beijing Stomatological Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing; Department of Orthodontics, School of
Stomatology; and Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
Shaanxi, China.

PURPOSE: To examine the effects and mechanisms of transient activation of the
Hedgehog pathway on rescuing radiotherapy-induced hyposalivation in survivors of 
head and neck cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Mouse salivary glands and cultured human salivary epithelial
cells were irradiated by a single 15-Gy dose. The Hedgehog pathway was
transiently activated in mouse salivary glands, by briefly overexpressing the
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) transgene or administrating smoothened agonist, and in human
salivary epithelial cells, by infecting with adenovirus encoding Gli1. The
activity of Hedgehog signaling was examined by the expression of the Ptch1-lacZ
reporter and endogenous Hedgehog target genes. The salivary flow rate was
measured following pilocarpine stimulation. Salivary stem/progenitor cells
(SSPC), parasympathetic innervation, and expression of related genes were
examined by flow cytometry, salisphere assay, immunohistochemistry, quantitative 
reverse transcription PCR, Western blotting, and ELISA.
RESULTS: Irradiation does not activate Hedgehog signaling in mouse salivary
glands. Transient Shh overexpression activated the Hedgehog pathway in ductal
epithelia and, after irradiation, rescued salivary function in male mice, which
is related with preservation of functional SSPCs and parasympathetic innervation.
The preservation of SSPCs was likely mediated by the rescue of signaling
activities of the Bmi1 and Chrm1-HB-EGF pathways. The preservation of
parasympathetic innervation was associated with the rescue of the expression of
neurotrophic factors such as Bdnf and Nrtn. The expression of genes related with 
maintenance of SSPCs and parasympathetic innervation in female salivary glands
and cultured human salivary epithelial cells was similarly affected by
irradiation and transient Hedgehog activation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that transient activation of the Hedgehog
pathway has the potential to restore salivary gland function after
irradiation-induced dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3951215
PMID: 24150232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Dev Cell. 2013 Oct 14;27(1):5-18. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.09.003.

WT1 maintains adrenal-gonadal primordium identity and marks a population of
AGP-like progenitors within the adrenal gland.

Bandiera R(1), Vidal VP, Motamedi FJ, Clarkson M, Sahut-Barnola I, von Gise A, Pu
WT, Hohenstein P, Martinez A, Schedl A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology Valrose, iBV, University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis, 06108 
Nice Cedex 2, France; INSERM UMR 1091, CNRS UMR 7277 Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice
Cedex 2, France.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4446-9.

Adrenal glands and gonads share a common primordium (AGP), but the molecular
events driving differentiation are poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that
the Wilms tumor suppressor WT1 is a key factor defining AGP identity by
inhibiting the steroidogenic differentiation process. Indeed, ectopic expression 
of WT1 precludes differentiation into adrenocortical steroidogenic cells by
locking them into a progenitor state. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
identify Tcf21 and Gli1 as direct targets of WT1. Moreover, cell lineage tracing 
analyses identify a long-living progenitor population within the adrenal gland,
characterized by the expression of WT1, GATA4, GLI1, and TCF21, that can generate
steroidogenic cells in vivo. Strikingly, gonadectomy dramatically activates these
WT1(+) cells and leads to their differentiation into gonadal steroidogenic
tissue. Thus, our data describe a mechanism of response to organ loss by
recreating hormone-producing cells at a heterotopic site.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4032791
PMID: 24135228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Dec;33(12):2858-66. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302494. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Hedgehog-dependent regulation of angiogenesis and myogenesis is impaired in aged 
mice.

Renault MA(1), Robbesyn F, Chapouly C, Yao Q, Vandierdonck S, Reynaud A, Belloc
I, Traiffort E, Ruat M, Desgranges C, Gadeau AP.

Author information: 
(1)From the University of Bordeaux, Adaptation cardiovasculaire à l'ischémie,
UMR1034, Pessac, France (M.-A.R., F.R., C.C., Q.Y., S.V., A.R., I.B., C.D.,
A.-P.G.); INSERM, Adaptation cardiovasculaire à l'ischémie, U1034, Pessac, France
(M.-A.R., F.R., C.C., Q.Y., S.V., A.R., I.B., C.D., A.-P.G.); CHU de Bordeaux,
Pharmacie de l'Hôpital Haut-Lévêque, Bordeaux, France (C.C., S.V.); and CNRS,
UPR-3294, Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Développement, Institut de
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard IFR2118, Gif-sur-Yvette, France (E.T., M.R.).

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to further document alteration of signal 
transduction pathways, more particularly of hedgehog (Hh) signaling, causing
impaired ischemic muscle repair in old mice.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We used 12-week-old (young mice) and 20- to 24-month-old
C57BL/6 mice (old mice) to investigate the activity of Hh signaling in the
setting of hindlimb ischemia-induced angiogenesis and skeletal muscle repair. In 
this model, delayed ischemic muscle repair observed in old mice was associated
with an impaired upregulation of Gli1. Sonic Hh expression was not different in
old mice compared with young mice, whereas desert Hh (Dhh) expression was
downregulated in the skeletal muscle of old mice both in healthy and ischemic
conditions. The rescue of Dhh expression by gene therapy in old mice promoted
ischemia-induced angiogenesis and increased nerve density; nevertheless, it
failed to promote myogenesis or to increase Gli1 mRNA expression. After further
investigation, we found that, in addition to Dhh, smoothened expression was
significantly downregulated in old mice. We used smoothened haploinsufficient
mice to demonstrate that smoothened knockdown by 50% is sufficient to impair
activation of Hh signaling and ischemia-induced muscle repair.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that Hh signaling is impaired in aged
mice because of Dhh and smoothened downregulation. Moreover, it shows that
hegdehog-dependent regulation of angiogenesis and myogenesis involves distinct
mechanisms.

PMID: 24135022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Development. 2013 Nov;140(22):4522-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.092775. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Fetal adrenal capsular cells serve as progenitor cells for steroidogenic and
stromal adrenocortical cell lineages in M. musculus.

Wood MA(1), Acharya A, Finco I, Swonger JM, Elston MJ, Tallquist MD, Hammer GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and
Diabetes, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The lineage relationships of fetal adrenal cells and adrenal capsular cells to
the differentiated adrenal cortex are not fully understood. Existing data support
a role for each cell type as a progenitor for cells of the adult cortex. This
report reveals that subsets of capsular cells are descendants of fetal
adrenocortical cells that once expressed Nr5a1. These fetal adrenocortical cell
descendants within the adrenal capsule express Gli1, a known marker of
progenitors of steroidogenic adrenal cells. The capsule is also populated by
cells that express Tcf21, a known inhibitor of Nr5a1 gene expression. We
demonstrate that Tcf21-expressing cells give rise to Nr5a1-expressing cells but
only before capsular formation. After the capsule has formed, capsular
Tcf21-expressing cells give rise only to non-steroidogenic stromal adrenocortical
cells, which also express collagen 1a1, desmin and platelet-derived growth factor
(alpha polypeptide) but not Nr5a1. These observations integrate prior
observations that define two separate origins of adult adrenocortical
steroidogenic cells (fetal adrenal cortex and/or the adrenal capsule). Thus,
these observations predict a unique temporal and/or spatial role of adult
cortical cells that arise directly from either fetal cortical cells or from fetal
cortex-derived capsular cells. Last, the data uncover the mechanism by which two 
populations of fetal cells (fetal cortex derived Gli1-expressing cells and
mesenchymal Tcf21-expressing mesenchymal cells) participate in the establishment 
of the homeostatic capsular progenitor cell niche of the adult cortex.

PMCID: PMC3817941
PMID: 24131628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Eur J Dermatol. 2013 Sep-Oct;23(5):734-6. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2013.2130.

ß-Catenin and cyclin D1 expression in Gli1-independent basal cell carcinomas.

Aguayo RS(1), Rafel M, Santacana M, Fernández RM, Sanmartín V, Casanova JM, Gari 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida,, Department of medicine, Universitat 
de Lleida, Av/Rovira Roure, n° 80, 25198, Lleida, Catalonia, Spain.

PMID: 24125828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Biochemistry. 2013 Nov 12;52(45):7857-69. doi: 10.1021/bi4006539. Epub 2013 Oct
31.

RNA-Seq analysis identifies a novel set of editing substrates for human ADAR2
present in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Eifler T(1), Pokharel S, Beal PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California , One Shields Avenue, Davis,
California 95616, United States.

ADAR2 is a member of a family of RNA editing enzymes found in metazoa that bind
double helical RNAs and deaminate select adenosines. We find that when human
ADAR2 is overexpressed in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae it
substantially reduces the rate of cell growth. This effect is dependent on the
deaminase activity of the enzyme, suggesting yeast transcripts are edited by
ADAR2. Characterization of this novel set of RNA substrates provided a unique
opportunity to gain insight into ADAR2's site selectivity. We used RNA-Seq. to
identify transcripts present in S. cerevisiae subject to ADAR2-catalyzed editing.
From this analysis, we identified 17 adenosines present in yeast RNAs that
satisfied our criteria for candidate editing sites. Substrates identified include
both coding and noncoding RNAs. Subsequent Sanger sequencing of RT-PCR products
from yeast total RNA confirmed efficient editing at a subset of the candidate
sites including BDF2 mRNA, RL28 intron RNA, HAC1 3'UTR RNA, 25S rRNA, U1 snRNA,
and U2 snRNA. Two adenosines within the U1 snRNA sequence not identified as
substrates during the original RNA-Seq. screen were shown to be deaminated by
ADAR2 during the follow-up analysis. In addition, examination of the RNA sequence
surrounding each edited adenosine in this novel group of ADAR2 sites revealed a
previously unrecognized sequence preference. Remarkably, rapid deamination at one
of these sites (BDF2 mRNA) does not require ADAR2's dsRNA-binding domains
(dsRBDs). Human glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) mRNA is a known ADAR2
substrate with similar flanking sequence and secondary structure to the yeast
BDF2 site discovered here. As observed with the BDF2 site, rapid deamination at
the GLI1 site does not require ADAR2's dsRBDs.

PMCID: PMC3856204
PMID: 24124932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Exp Hematol. 2014 Jan;42(1):46-58. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.09.010. Epub 2013
Oct 2.

The orphan nuclear receptor Ear-2 (Nr2f6) is a novel negative regulator of T cell
development.

Ichim CV(1), Dervovic DD(2), Zúñiga-Pflücker JC(2), Wells RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada;
Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada; Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA. (2)Biological Sciences,
Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada; Department of Immunology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (3)Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research 
Institute, Toronto, Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Program, Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada. Electronic
address: rwells@sri.utoronto.ca.

We describe a novel role for the orphan nuclear receptor Ear-2 in regulating T
cell development. Retrovirus-mediated overexpression of Ear-2 (EAR-2++) in a bone
marrow (BM) transplantation assay resulted in limited T cell development and a
greater than tenfold decrease in thymus size and cellularity relative to
controls. Ear-2-transduced murine BM hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in OP9-DL1
cultures showed a proliferation deficit during days 1-5 after induction of
differentiation, which corresponded to increased expression of the cell cycle
regulators p21 (cdkn1a) and p27 (cdkn1b), as well as increased expression of
Hes1, Notch3, Egr1, and Scl (Tal1) and decreased expression of Gli1, Gfi-1,
HoxA9, PU.1, Nrarp, and Tcf1. In addition, there was a block in differentiation
at the DN4 to double-positive (DP) transition accompanied by an increase in
apoptosis, similar to the deficit seen in the ROR<U+03B3>t null mouse. Gene expression
profiling revealed that, like the ROR<U+03B3>t-deficient mouse, EAR-2++ DP cells had
decreased expression of BclXL and increased expression of the proapoptosis gene
Bad. In addition, EAR-2++ DP cells had decreased expression of Bcl11b, PU.1, and 
HoxA9, and increased expression of Id2. Based on these findings, we conclude that
EAR-2++ cells were able to migrate to, but not fully repopulate, the thymus
because of a cell-intrinsic defect in the proliferation of DN1 cells followed by 
a block in differentiation from the DN4 to DP stage of T cell development. We
conclude that Ear-2 is a novel negative regulator of T-cell development and that 
downregulation of Ear-2 is indispensable for the proliferation of DN1 cells and
the survival of DN4-DP cells.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):516. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.08.038. 
Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Discussion.

[No authors listed]

Comment on
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):508-16.

PMID: 24094914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):508-16. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.08.035. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Targeting of the Hedgehog signal transduction pathway suppresses survival of
malignant pleural mesothelioma cells in vitro.

You M(1), Varona-Santos J(1), Singh S(2), Robbins DJ(2), Savaraj N(3), Nguyen
DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery Section, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of
Surgery, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Leonard M. Miller School of
Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Fla. (2)Molecular Oncology Program,
Department of Surgery, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Leonard M. Miller
School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Fla. (3)Division of Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Miami Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, University of 
Miami, Miami, Fla. (4)Thoracic Surgery Section, Division of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Department of Surgery, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Leonard M.
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Fla. Electronic address:
dnguyen4@med.miami.edu.

Comment in
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Jan;147(1):516.

OBJECTIVE: The present study sought to determine whether the Hedgehog (Hh)
pathway is active and regulates the cell growth of cultured malignant pleural
mesothelioma (MPM) cells and to evaluate the efficacy of pathway blockade using
smoothened (SMO) antagonists (SMO inhibitor GDC-0449 or the antifungal drug
itraconazole [ITRA]) or Gli inhibitors (GANT61 or the antileukemia drug arsenic
trioxide [ATO]) in suppressing MPM viability.
METHODS: Selective knockdown of SMO to inhibit Hh signaling was achieved by small
interfering RNA in 3 representative MPM cells. The growth inhibitory effect of
GDC-0449, ITRA, GANT61, and ATO was evaluated in 8 MPM lines, with cell viability
quantified using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
(MTT) assay. Cell death was determined by annexinV/propidium iodide staining and 
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: SMO small interfering RNA mediated a two- to more than fivefold
reduction of SMO and Gli1 gene expression as determined by real-time quantitative
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, indicating significant Hh
pathway blockade. This was associated with significantly reduced cell viability
(34% ± 7% to 61% ± 14% of nontarget small interfering RNA controls; P = .0024 to 
P = .043). Treating MPM cells with Hh inhibitors resulted in a 1.5- to 4-fold
reduction of Gli1 expression. These 4 Hh antagonists strongly suppressed MPM cell
viability. More importantly, ITRA, ATO, GANT61 induced significant apoptosis in
the representative MPM cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Hh signaling is active in MPM and regulates cell viability. ATO and 
ITRA were as effective as the prototypic SMO inhibitor GDC-0449 and the Gli
inhibitor GANT61 in suppressing Hh signaling in MPM cells. Pharmaceutical agents 
Food and Drug Administration-approved for other indications but recently found to
have anti-Hh activity, such as ATO or ITRA, could be repurposed to treat MPM.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 24094913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 25;8(9):e75253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075253. eCollection
2013.

Hedgehog signaling regulates telomerase reverse transcriptase in human cancer
cells.

Mazumdar T(1), Sandhu R, Qadan M, DeVecchio J, Magloire V, Agyeman A, Li B,
Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is critical for normal embryonic development,
tissue patterning and cell differentiation. Aberrant HH signaling is involved in 
multiple human cancers. HH signaling involves a multi-protein cascade activating 
the GLI proteins that transcriptionally regulate HH target genes. We have
previously reported that HH signaling is essential for human colon cancer cell
survival and inhibition of this signal induces DNA damage and extensive cell
death. Here we report that the HH/GLI axis regulates human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), which determines the replication potential of cancer
cells. Suppression of GLI1/GLI2 functions by a C-terminus truncated GLI3
repressor mutant (GLI3R), or by GANT61, a pharmacological inhibitor of GLI1/GLI2,
reduced hTERT protein expression in human colon cancer, prostate cancer and
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines. Expression of an N-terminus deleted
constitutively active mutant of GLI2 (GLI2<U+0394>N) increased hTERT mRNA and protein
expression and hTERT promoter driven luciferase activity in human colon cancer
cells while GANT61 inhibited hTERT mRNA expression and hTERT promoter driven
luciferase activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with GLI1 or GLI2 antibodies
precipitated fragments of the hTERT promoter in human colon cancer cells, which
was reduced upon exposure to GANT61. In contrast, expression of GLI1 or GLI2<U+0394>N in
non-malignant 293T cells failed to alter the levels of hTERT mRNA and protein, or
hTERT promoter driven luciferase activity. Further, expression of GLI2<U+0394>N
increased the telomerase enzyme activity, which was reduced by GANT61
administration in human colon cancer, prostate cancer, and GBM cells. These
results identify hTERT as a direct target of the HH signaling pathway, and reveal
a previously unknown role of the HH/GLI axis in regulating the replication
potential of cancer cells. These findings are of significance in understanding
the important regulatory mechanisms that determine the functions of HH/GLI
signaling in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3783395
PMID: 24086482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Tumour Biol. 2014 Feb;35(2):1357-63. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1185-1. Epub 2013
Oct 1.

Significance and prognostic value of Gli-1 and Snail/E-cadherin expression in
progressive gastric cancer.

Wang ZS(1), Shen Y, Li X, Zhou CZ, Wen YG, Jin YB, Li JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First
People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Abnormal activation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been found to be
involved in the occurrence, invasion, and metastasis of cancers.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) also plays an important role in the
invasion and metastasis of cancers. However, the significance of the Hh signaling
pathway and EMT in the invasion and metastasis of gastric cancer is still
unclear. This study aimed to investigate the significance and prognostic value of
the Hh signaling pathway and EMT in progressive gastric cancer.
Immunohistochemistry was performed to detect the expression of the Hh-induced
transcriptional factor Gli-1 and the EMT-related molecules Snail and E-cadherin
in 121 patients with progressive gastric cancer. Histological type, depth of
invasion, lymph node metastasis, and pTNM stage were also recorded. In
progressive gastric cancer, Gli-1 expression increased markedly, and was closely 
associated with increased Snail expression and decreased E-cadherin expression.
Diffuse type cancer, lymph node metastasis, and abnormal expression of E-cadherin
were independent factors influencing the prognosis of patients with progressive
gastric cancer. These findings suggest that abnormal activation of the Hh
signaling pathway is closely related to the presence of EMT and is an important
factor influencing the prognosis of patients with diffuse progressive gastric
cancer.

PMID: 24081672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 25;440(3):431-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.090. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Fem1b promotes ubiquitylation and suppresses transcriptional activity of Gli1.

Gilder AS(1), Chen YB, Jackson RJ 3rd, Jiang J, Maher JF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute and Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical
Center, Jackson, MS 39216, United States.

The mammalian Fem1b gene encodes a homolog of FEM-1, a protein in the
sex-determination pathway of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Fem1b and FEM-1
proteins each contain a VHL-box motif that mediates their interaction with
certain E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes. In C. elegans, FEM-1 negatively regulates 
the transcription factor TRA-1, and functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase substrate
recognition subunit to target TRA-1 for ubiquitylation. TRA-1 is homologous to
the mammalian Gli1 protein, a transcription factor that mediates Hedgehog
signaling as well as having Hedgehog-independent functions. Whether the
interaction between nematode FEM-1 and TRA-1 proteins is conserved, between
corresponding mammalian homologs, has not been reported. Herein, we show that
Fem1b interacts with Gli1 within cells, and directly binds Gli1. Fem1b also
promotes ubiquitylation of Gli1, suppresses transcriptional activation by Gli1,
and attenuates an oncogenic Gli1 autoregulatory loop in cancer cells, all
dependent on the VHL-box of Fem1b. These findings have implications for
understanding the cellular functions of Fem1b, and the regulation of Gli1
oncoprotein activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24076122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 8;288(45):32809-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.512962. Epub 2013
Sep 26.

Stabilization of speckle-type POZ protein (Spop) by Daz interacting protein 1
(Dzip1) is essential for Gli turnover and the proper output of Hedgehog
signaling.

Schwend T(1), Jin Z, Jiang K, Mitchell BJ, Jia J, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Comparative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61802.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is essential for embryonic development and adult tissue
homeostasis. The Gli/Cubitus interruptus (Ci) family of transcription factors
acts at the downstream end of the pathway to mediate Hh signaling. Both
Hh-dependent and -independent Gli regulatory mechanisms are important for the
output of Hh signaling. Daz interacting protein 1 (Dzip1) has bipartite positive 
and negative functions in the Hh pathway. The positive Hh regulatory function
appears to be attributed to a requirement for Dzip1 during ciliogenesis. The
mechanism by which Dzip1 inhibits Hh signaling, however, remains largely unclear.
We recently found that Dzip1 is required for Gli turnover, which may account for 
its inhibitory function in Hh signaling. Here, we report that Dzip1 regulates
Gli/Ci turnover by preventing degradation of speckle-type POZ protein (Spop), a
protein that promotes proteasome-dependent turnover of Gli proteins. We provide
evidence that Dzip1 regulates the stability of Spop independent of its function
in ciliogenesis. Partial knockdown of Dzip1 to levels insufficient for perturbing
ciliogenesis, sensitized Xenopus embryos to Hh signaling, leading to phenotypes
that resemble activation of Hh signaling. Importantly, overexpression of Spop was
able to restore proper Gli protein turnover and rescue phenotypes in
Dzip1-depleted embryos. Consistently, depletion of Dzip1 in Drosophila S2 cells
destabilized Hh-induced BTB protein (HIB), the Drosophila homolog of Spop, and
increased the level of Ci. Thus, Dzip1-dependent stabilization of Spop/HIB is
evolutionarily conserved and essential for proper regulation of Gli/Ci proteins
in the Hh pathway.

PMCID: PMC3820914
PMID: 24072710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4675-84. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1211. Epub 2013 Sep
24.

Dlk1 up-regulates Gli1 expression in male rat adrenal capsule cells through the
activation of ß1 integrin and ERK1/2.

Guasti L(1), Cavlan D, Cogger K, Banu Z, Shakur A, Latif S, King PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the
London, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ,
United Kingdom. p.j.king@qmul.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4446-9.

The development and maintenance of the zones of the adrenal cortex and their
steroidal output are extremely important in the control of gluconeogenesis, the
stress response, and blood volume. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the
adrenal cortex and signals to capsular cells, which can respond by migrating into
the cortex and converting into a steroidogenic phenotype. Delta-like homologue 1 
(Dlk1), a member of the Notch/Delta/Serrate family of epidermal growth
factor-like repeat-containing proteins, has a well-established role in inhibiting
adipocyte differentiation. We demonstrate that Shh and Dlk1 are coexpressed in
the outer undifferentiated zone of the male rat adrenal and that Dlk1 signals to 
the adrenal capsule, activating glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1
transcription in a ß1 integrin- and Erk1/2-dependent fashion. Moreover, Shh and
Dlk1 expression inversely correlates with the size of the zona glomerulosa in
rats after manipulation of the renin-angiotensin system, suggesting a role in the
homeostatic maintenance of the gland.

PMID: 24064361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2014 Jan;139:7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.09.007. 
Epub 2013 Sep 21.

Hedgehog-signaling is upregulated in non-producing human adrenal adenomas and
antagonism of hedgehog-signaling inhibits proliferation of NCI-H295R cells and an
immortalized primary human adrenal cell line.

Werminghaus P(1), Haase M, Hornsby PJ, Schinner S, Schott M, Malendowicz LK,
Lammers BJ, Goretzki PE, Müller-Mattheis V, Markus Giessing, Willenberg HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Medical Faculty, University of
Dusseldorf, D-40225 Duesseldorf, Germany; Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology,
Head and Neck Surgery, Medical Faculty, University of Dusseldorf, D-40225
Duesseldorf, Germany.

Hedgehog (Hh)-signaling pathway is important in embryonic development. Activation
of Hh-signaling is associated with tumorigenesis. Recent studies demonstrate that
Hh-signaling is involved in the development of the adrenal gland in mice and is
important in regulating adrenal proliferation. We studied the expression of Sonic
hedgehog (SHH), Smoothened (SMO), Patched1 (PTCH1) and GLI family zinc finger 1
(GLI1) in human adrenal and in adrenocortical tumors using immunohistochemistry
and semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Modulation
of GLI1 and SMO messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression was investigated
with forskolin. The role of Hh-signaling was studied in NCI-H295R cells and in an
immortalized primary cell line using the Hh-agonist smoothened agonist (SAG) and 
the Hh-antagonist cyclopamine. The Hh-pathway components SHH, GLI1, PTCH1 and SMO
were detectable in all adrenal glands. While in cortisol-producing adenomas
(CPA), Hh-signaling expression levels were comparable to that in normal adrenal
cortex, a much higher mRNA expression of GLI1, SMO and SHH was observed in
non-producing adenomas (NPA). Interestingly, stimulation of cultured adrenal
cells with forskolin led to a decrease in expression of GLI1 and SMO mRNAs.
Antagonism of Hh-signaling resulted in a lower proliferation rate of
adrenocortical cells, while Hh-agonism had no significant effect on adrenal cell 
proliferation. Our data show Hh-signaling activity in adult adrenal glands.
Activation of the PKA pathway results in lower expression of Hh-signaling
proteins. This might explain the lower expression of the Hh components GLI1 and
SMO in CPA in comparison to the higher expression in NPA. Hh-signaling might be
involved in the tumorigenesis of NPA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24063979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e75317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075317. eCollection
2013.

Hedgehog/GLI signaling activates suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) in
epidermal and neural tumor cells.

Laner-Plamberger S(1), Wolff F, Kaser-Eichberger A, Swierczynski S,
Hauser-Kronberger C, Frischauf AM, Eichberger T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria ;
Department of Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital 
of Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria ; Spinal Cord
Injury & Tissue Regeneration Center Salzburg (SCI-TReCS), Paracelsus Medical
University (PMU), Salzburg, Austria.

Sustained hedgehog (Hh) signaling mediated by the GLI transcription factors is
implicated in many types of cancer. Identification of Hh/GLI target genes
modulating the activity of other pathways involved in tumor development promise
to open new ways for better understanding of tumor development and maintenance.
Here we show that SOCS1 is a direct target of Hh/GLI signaling in human
keratinocytes and medulloblastoma cells. SOCS1 is a potent inhibitor of
interferon gamma (IFN-y)/STAT1 signaling. IFN-<U+0443>/STAT1 signaling can induce cell
cycle arrest, apoptosis and anti-tumor immunity. The transcription factors GLI1
and GLI2 activate the SOCS1 promoter, which contains five putative GLI binding
sites, and GLI2 binding to the promoter was shown by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Consistent with a role of GLI in SOCS1 regulation, STAT1
phosphorylation is reduced in cells with active Hh/GLI signaling and IFN-<U+0443>/STAT1 
target gene activation is decreased. Furthermore, IFN-<U+0443> signaling is restored by 
shRNA mediated knock down of SOCS1. Here, we identify SOCS1 as a novel Hh/GLI
target gene, indicating a negative role of Hh/GLI pathway in IFN-y/STAT1
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3769249
PMID: 24058673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cancer Lett. 2014 Feb 1;343(1):51-61. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.09.014. Epub
2013 Sep 15.

The GLI1 splice variant TGLI1 promotes glioblastoma angiogenesis and growth.

Zhu H(1), Carpenter RL(1), Han W(1), Lo HW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Sciences, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Sciences, Durham, NC 27710, USA;
Duke Center for RNA Biology, Durham, NC 27710, USA; Duke Cancer Institute, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Electronic address:
huiwen.lo@duke.edu.

We investigated truncated glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (TGLI1) that
behaves as gain-of-function GLI1 and promotes tumor cell migration and invasion. 
Herein, we report that TGLI1 had a higher propensity than GLI1 to enhance
glioblastoma angiogenesis and growth, both in vivo and in vitro. TGLI1 has gained
the ability to enhance expression of pro-angiogenic heparanase. In patient
glioblastomas, TGLI1 levels are correlated with heparanase expression. Together, 
we report that TGLI1 is a novel mediator of glioblastoma angiogenesis and that
heparanase is a novel transcriptional target of TGLI1, shedding new light on the 
molecular pathways that support tumor angiogenesis and aggressive growth.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3874262
PMID: 24045042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(22):4448-60. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00241-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
16.

A novel role for keratin 17 in coordinating oncogenic transformation and cellular
adhesion in Ewing sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Tanner JM, Bell R, Chaturvedi A, Randall RL, Beckerle MC, Lessnick
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of
Medicine, University of Utah.

Oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma is caused by EWS/FLI, an aberrant
transcription factor fusion oncogene. Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1)
is a critical target gene activated by EWS/FLI, but the mechanism by which GLI1
contributes to the transformed phenotype of Ewing sarcoma was unknown. In this
work, we identify keratin 17 (KRT17) as a direct downstream target gene
upregulated by GLI1. We demonstrate that KRT17 regulates cellular adhesion by
activating AKT/PKB (protein kinase B) signaling. In addition, KRT17 is necessary 
for oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma and accounts for much of the
GLI1-mediated transformation function but via a mechanism independent of AKT
signaling. Taken together, our data reveal previously unknown molecular functions
for a cytoplasmic intermediate filament protein, KRT17, in coordinating EWS/FLI- 
and GLI1-mediated oncogenic transformation and cellular adhesion in Ewing
sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3838177
PMID: 24043308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2013 Jun;21(6):452-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2013.06.016.

[Short hairpin RNA mediated glypican-3 silencing inhibits hepatoma cell
invasiveness and disrupts molecular pathways of angiogenesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu DD(1), Yao M, Chen J, Wang L, Yan MJ, Gu X, Qiu LW, Dong ZZ, Yao DF, Lu SL.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Clinical Medicine, Nantong University, Nantong 226001,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct glypican-3 (GPC-3) short hairpin RNA (shRNA) and
investigate the effects of GPC-3 transcription silencing on hepatoma cell
invasion and angiogenesis mechanisms.
METHODS: GPC-3-specific shRNA and non-target control shRNA were constructed and
transfected into the human hepatoma cell lines HepG2, MHCC-97H, and Huh7.
shRNA-mediated silencing of GPC-3 expression was confirmed at the mRNA and
protein levels by fluorescence quantitative reverse transcription (FQRT)-PCR and 
western blotting, respectively. The effect of silenced GPC-3 expression on cell
proliferation was detected by EdU and sulforhodamine B assays, on migration by
wound healing (scratch) assay, on invasion by transwell chamber assay, and on
apoptosis by luminescence assay of caspase-3/7 activity. The effect of silenced
GPC-3 expression on angiogenesis-related signaling factors was detected by
FQRT-PCR (for the glioma-associated oncogene homolog-1 hedgehog signaling factor,
GLI1, and the beta-catenin Wnt signaling factor, b-catenin), immunofluorescent
staining (for the insulin-like growth factor-II, IGF-II), and ELISA (for the
vascular endothelial growth factor, VEGF). Pairwise comparisons were made by the 
independent sample t-test, and multiple comparisons were made by one-way ANOVA.
RESULTS: In all cell lines, transfection with the GPC-3-specific shRNA
significantly reduced GPC-3 mRNA levels (% reduction as compared to the
non-target control shRNA: HepG2, 89.2+/-6.0%, t = -25.753, P less than 0.001;
MHCC-97H, 75.3+/-4.9%, t = -26.487, P less than 0.001; Huh7, 73.6+/-4.6%, t =
-27.607, P less than 0.001); the GPC-3 protein levels were similarly reduced. The
GPC-3 shRNA-silenced cells showed significantly reduced proliferative, migratory 
and invasive capacities, as well as significantly increased apoptosis. The
shRNA-mediated GPC-3 silencing was accompanied by significant down-regulation of 
b-catenin mRNA (HepG2, 46.9+/-0.6%; MHCC-97H, 67.5+/-2.7%; Huh7, 56.3+/-8.4%) and
significant up-regulation of GLI1 mRNA (HepG2, 49.2+/-28.6%; MHCC-97H,
54.6+/-24.4%; Huh7, 31.6+/-15.7%). At 72 h after transfection, the HepG2 cells
showed significant down-regulation of VEGF protein (54.3+/-1.5%, t = 46.746, P
less than 0.001).
CONCLUSION: GPC-3 contributes to migration, invasion, angiogenesis, and apoptosis
of hepatoma cells, possibly through its interactions with the Wnt/b-catenin and
Hedgehog signaling pathways. GPC-3 may represent a useful target for gene
silencing by molecular-based therapies to treat hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 24034848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Oct;36(5):421-35. doi: 10.1007/s13402-013-0149-1. Epub
2013 Sep 13.

Suppression of growth and migration by blocking the Hedgehog signaling pathway in
gastric cancer cells.

Yan R(1), Peng X, Yuan X, Huang D, Chen J, Lu Q, Lv N, Luo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, No.17 Yongwai street, Donghu district, Nanchang, 330006, China.

PURPOSE: Previous studies have indicated that Hedgehog signaling is essential for
gastric cancer development, but its precise role is still unclear. The aim of
this study was to clarify the role of Hedgehog signaling in gastric cancer
development.
METHODS: The expression of key Hedgehog signaling components in clinical samples 
of sequential gastric cancer stages was assessed by immunohistochemistry. The
roles and regulatory mechanisms of Hedgehog signaling in human gastric cancer
cells and normal gastric epithelial cells were investigated using multiple cell
biological approaches and cDNA microarray analyses.
RESULTS: Hedgehog signaling was found to be abnormally activated in a
ligand-independent manner during gastric cancer development. Gli1 over-expression
and reduced SuFu expression were found to be typical events in gastric cancer
tissues. Gli1 over-expression was found to correlate with a poorly differentiated
histology, advanced clinical stage, membrane serosa infiltration and lymph node
metastasis in patients with gastric cancer. Data obtained from multiple cell
biological assays showed that human gastric cancer cells require active Hedgehog 
signaling for survival, proliferation, migration and colony formation. N-Shh
treatment significantly enhanced the migration, invasion and colony formation of 
gastric cancer cells. Moreover, the results of cDNA microarray analyses indicated
that after treatment with cyclopamine or GANT61 (inhibitors of Hedgehog
signaling), differentially expressed genes in gastric cancer cells were enriched 
in the apoptosis and MAPK pathways. Inhibitors of the Hedgehog pathway were found
to suppress gastric cancer cell growth via apoptosis induction.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate a vital role of the activated Hedgehog
signaling pathway in promoting gastric initiation and progression. The Hedgehog
signaling pathway may serve as a target for gastric cancer therapy.

PMID: 24027019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Anticancer Res. 2013 Sep;33(9):3715-23.

Tumor-stromal interactions with direct cell contacts enhance motility of
non-small cell lung cancer cells through the hedgehog signaling pathway.

Choe C(1), Shin YS, Kim SH, Jeon MJ, Choi SJ, Lee J, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul
135-710, Republic of Korea. jkimsmc@skku.edu.

The metastatic potential of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been shown to 
be associated with interactions with the tumor microenvironment, which primarily 
comprises of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). Heterotypic cell-cell
interactions occur via released signaling molecules and direct physical contact. 
To investigate the differential contribution of direct cell-cell contact and
paracrine signaling factors to NSCLC metastasis, we performed two types of
co-cultures: direct co-cultures of the NSCLC cell line H358 with primary cultures
of CAFs from patients with resected NSCLC; and indirect co-cultures across a
separable membrane. We showed that CAFs more potently induce
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in NSCLC H358 cells through direct
contacts than through indirect interactions, as indicated by an elongated and
disseminated appearance. Immunocytochemical experiments show that EMT accompanies
the expression of mesenchymal cytoskeletal proteins, including vimentin. However,
H358 cells proliferate more slowly in direct co-culture than in indirect
co-culture. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
revealed that H358 cells in direct contact with CAFs up-regulate the expression
of the pan-mesenchymal markers a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), fibroblast
activation protein (FAP), transforming growth factor-ß (TGFß) signaling effector 
SMAD family number-3 (SMAD3), and hedgehog signaling effector GLI family zinc
finger-1 (GLI1), compared with the indirect co-culture system. Furthermore, we
found that the direct GLI1 transcription targets snail family zinc finger-1
(SNAI1) and SNAI2 are up-regulated, suggesting that the hedgehog signaling
pathway is active in direct co-culture. A scratch wound assay showed that direct 
contact co-culture increases the motility of H358 cells. In conclusion, these
findings provide evidence that paracrine factors and direct physical contact
between NSCLC cells and CAFs might control the metastatic potential of NSCLC
through the hedgehog signaling pathway.

PMID: 24023301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2668-75. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.037. Epub
2013 Sep 7.

RIO kinase 3 acts as a SUFU-dependent positive regulator of Hedgehog signaling.

Tariki M(1), Wieczorek SA, Schneider P, Bänfer S, Veitinger S, Jacob R, Fendrich 
V, Lauth M.

Author information: 
(1)Philipps University, Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), 
Emil-Mannkopff-Str. 2, 35037 Marburg, Germany.

Suppressor of fused (SUFU) is an essential negative regulator of the mammalian
Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway and its loss is associated with cancer
development. On a cellular level, endogenous SUFU can mainly be detected in the
cytoplasm and the nucleus. However, immunostaining of pancreatic cancer specimen 
revealed the existence of cell types showing selective enrichment of endogenous
SUFU in the nucleus. Following up on this observation, we found that a SUFU
construct which was experimentally tethered exclusively to the nucleus was unable
to antagonize endogenous HH signaling, in contrast to control SUFU. These data
suggest that alterations in the normal subcellular distribution of SUFU might
interfere with its established negative role on the HH pathway. Performing a
multi-well kinase screen in human cells identified RIO kinase 3 (RIOK3) as a
novel modulator of SUFU subcellular distribution. Functionally, RIOK3 acts as a
SUFU-dependent positive regulator of HH signaling. Taken together, we propose
that factors modulating the nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of SUFU impact on the
normal function of this tumor suppressing protein.

© 2013.

PMID: 24018050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Dec;20(12):1688-97. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.120. Epub 2013 
Sep 6.

PCAF ubiquitin ligase activity inhibits Hedgehog/Gli1 signaling in p53-dependent 
response to genotoxic stress.

Mazzà D(1), Infante P, Colicchia V, Greco A, Alfonsi R, Siler M, Antonucci L, Po 
A, De Smaele E, Ferretti E, Capalbo C, Bellavia D, Canettieri G, Giannini G,
Screpanti I, Gulino A, Di Marcotullio L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Rome La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates tissue development, and its aberrant
activation is a leading cause of malignancies, including medulloblastoma (Mb).
Hh-dependent tumorigenesis often occurs in synergy with other mechanisms, such as
loss of p53, the master regulator of the DNA damage response. To date, little is 
known about mechanisms connecting DNA-damaging events to morphogen-dependent
processes. Here, we show that genotoxic stress triggers a cascade of signals,
culminating with inhibition of the activity of Gli1, the final transcriptional
effector of Hh signaling. This inhibition is dependent on the p53-mediated
elevation of the acetyltransferase p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF). Notably, we
identify PCAF as a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase of Gli1. Indeed PCAF, but not a
mutant with a deletion of its ubiquitination domain, represses Hh signaling in
response to DNA damage by promoting Gli1 ubiquitination and its
proteasome-dependent degradation. Restoring Gli1 levels rescues the growth arrest
and apoptosis effect triggered by genotoxic drugs. Consistently, DNA-damaging
agents fail to inhibit Gli1 activity in the absence of either p53 or PCAF.
Finally, Mb samples from p53-null mice display low levels of PCAF and
upregulation of Gli1 in vivo, suggesting PCAF as potential therapeutic target in 
Hh-dependent tumors. Together, our data define a mechanism of inactivation of a
morphogenic signaling in response to genotoxic stress and unveil a p53/PCAF/Gli1 
circuitry centered on PCAF that limits Gli1-enhanced mitogenic and prosurvival
response.

PMCID: PMC3824589
PMID: 24013724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014 Feb;40(1):12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2013.08.003. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling in the gastrointestinal tract: targeting the
cancer microenvironment.

Merchant JL(1), Saqui-Salces M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular and Integrative Physiology,
Division of Gastroenterology, University of Michigan, United States. Electronic
address: merchanj@umich.edu.

This review summarizes emerging information regarding the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway during neoplastic transformation in the gastrointestinal tract. Although 
there is a role for the well-established canonical pathway in which Hedgehog
ligands interact with their receptor Patched, there is sufficient evidence that
downstream components of the Hh pathway, e.g., Gli1, are hijacked by non-Hh
signaling pathways to promote the conversion of the epithelium to dysplasia and
carcinoma. We review the canonical pathway and involvement of primary cilia, and 
then focus on current evidence for Hh signaling in luminal bowel cancers as well 
as accessory organs, i.e., liver, pancreas and biliary ducts. We conclude that
targeting the Hh pathway with small molecules, nutriceuticals and other
mechanisms will likely require a combination of inhibitors that target Gli
transcription factors in addition to canonical modulators such as Smoothened.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3823758
PMID: 24007940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jan 15;23(2):115-23. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0162. Epub 2013
Oct 8.

Morphological differences of primary cilia between human induced pluripotent stem
cells and their parental somatic cells.

Nathwani BB(1), Miller CH, Yang TL, Solimano JL, Liao JC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Columbia University , New York, New
York.

Human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) reprogramming possesses enormous
potential in stem cell research and disease modeling. Chemical and mechanical
signaling has been implicated in the maintenance of pluripotency of hiPSCs, as
well as their differentiation pathways toward various lineages. Primary cilia
have been shown to play a critical role in mechanochemical signaling across a
wide spectrum of cell types. The functions of primary cilia in hiPSCs and their
characteristic changes during the reprogramming process remain largely vague.
This work focused on understanding how reprogramming affects the mechanical
characteristics of primary cilia. Using immunofluorescence imaging assays, we
validated the presence of primary cilia on reprogrammed cells. These reprogrammed
cells had high expression levels of pluripotency markers, Nanog and Cripto, shown
by quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays. We also found high expression
of hedgehog signaling proteins Patched1 (Ptch1), Smoothened (Smo), Gli1, and Gli2
in reprogrammed cells. Stimulation of the hedgehog pathway resulted in the
concerted movement of Ptch1 out of the cilia and Smo into the cilia, implying
that the cilia on iPSCs contain functioning hedgehog machinery. The mean length
of primary cilia in reprogrammed cells was shorter than those of parental human
fibroblasts. Morphometric analyses revealed that reprogramming resulted in an
increase in the curvature of primary cilia from ~0.015 to 0.064<U+2009>µm(-1),
indicating an underlying approximately fourfold decrease in their rigidity, and a
decrease in length of primary cilia from ~2.38 to ~1.45<U+2009>µm. Furthermore,
reprogramming resulted in fewer primary cilia displaying kinked geometries.

PMID: 24007236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Oncogene. 2013 Dec 12;32(50):5574-81. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.343. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Imiquimod directly inhibits Hedgehog signalling by stimulating adenosine
receptor/protein kinase A-mediated GLI phosphorylation.

Wolff F(1), Loipetzberger A(1), Gruber W(1), Esterbauer H(2), Aberger F(1),
Frischauf AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Imiquimod (IMQ), a nucleoside analogue of the imidazoquinoline family, is used in
the topical treatment of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and other skin diseases. It
is reported to be a TLR7 and TLR8 agonist and, as such, initiates a Th1 immune
response by activating sentinel cells in the vicinity of the tumour. BCC is a
hedgehog (HH)-driven malignancy with oncogenic glioma-associated oncogene (GLI)
signalling activated in a ligand-independent manner. Here we show that IMQ can
also directly repress HH signalling by negatively modulating GLI activity in BCC 
and medulloblastoma cells. Further, we provide evidence that the repressive
effect of IMQ on HH signalling is not dependent on TLR/MYD88 signalling. Our
results suggest a mechanism for IMQ engaging adenosine receptors (ADORAs) to
control GLI signalling. Pharmacological activation of ADORA with either an ADORA 
agonist or IMQ resulted in a protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated GLI phosphorylation 
and reduction in GLI activator levels. The activation of PKA and HH pathway
target gene downregulation in response to IMQ were abrogated by ADORA inhibition.
Furthermore, activated Smoothened signalling, which positively signals to GLI
transcription factors, could be effectively counteracted by IMQ. These results
reveal a previously unknown mode of action of IMQ in the treatment of BCC and
also suggest a role for ADORAs in the regulation of oncogenic HH signalling.

PMCID: PMC3898320
PMID: 23995793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):90-105. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.015. Epub 2013
Aug 29.

Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 coordinate digit number in a Gli3-dependent manner.

Collette NM(1), Yee CS, Murugesh D, Sebastian A, Taher L, Gale NW, Economides AN,
Harland RM, Loots GG.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
7000 East Avenue, L-452, Livermore, CA 94550, USA.

WNT signaling is critical in most aspects of skeletal development and
homeostasis, and antagonists of WNT signaling are emerging as key regulatory
proteins with great promise as therapeutic agents for bone disorders. Here we
show that Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 emerged through ancestral genome
duplication and their expression patterns have diverged to delineate
non-overlapping domains in most organ systems including musculoskeletal,
cardiovascular, nervous, digestive, reproductive and respiratory. In the
developing limb, Sost and Sostdc1 display dynamic expression patterns with Sost
being restricted to the distal ectoderm and Sostdc1 to the proximal ectoderm and 
the mesenchyme. While Sostdc1(-/-) mice lack any obvious limb or skeletal
defects, Sost(-/-) mice recapitulate the hand defects described for Sclerosteosis
patients. However, elevated WNT signaling in Sost(-/-); Sostdc1(-/-) mice causes 
misregulation of SHH signaling, ectopic activation of Sox9 in the digit 1 field
and preaxial polydactyly in a Gli1- and Gli3-dependent manner. In addition, we
show that the syndactyly documented in Sclerosteosis is present in both Sost(-/-)
and Sost(-/-); Sostdc1(-/-) mice, and is driven by misregulation of Fgf8 in the
AER, a region lacking Sost and Sostdc1 expression. This study highlights the
complexity of WNT signaling in skeletal biology and disease and emphasizes how
redundant mechanism and non-cell autonomous effects can synergize to unveil new
intricate phenotypes caused by elevated WNT signaling.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3861057
PMID: 23994639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Onco Targets Ther. 2013 Aug 19;6:1129-38. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S49148. eCollection
2013.

Arsenic trioxide inhibits viability of pancreatic cancer stem cells in culture
and in a xenograft model via binding to SHH-Gli.

Han JB(1), Sang F, Chang JJ, Hua YQ, Shi WD, Tang LH, Liu LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of integrative Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China ; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Overexpression of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is an
essential characteristic of pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSCs) and arsenic
trioxide (ATO) is described as a SHH inhibitor. This study evaluates whether ATO 
has the potential to inhibit viability of PCSCs via binding to SHH-Gli proteins.
METHODS: Cell counting kit-8 and flow cytometry were used for analyzing apoptosis
in cells in vitro. The animal model was an athymic nude mouse model bearing
subcutaneous xenografts of SW1990 pancreatic cancer cells. The terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling assay and
immunohistochemistry were used for tumor tissue analysis. The interaction between
Gli1 and ATO was examined by a confocal system and an ultraviolet absorption
spectrum assay.
RESULTS: ATO induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells, especially
CD24(+)CD44(+) cells in vitro. Combination treatment of ATO and low dose
gemcitabine inhibited tumor growth by 60.9% (P = 0.004), and decreased the
expression of CD24, CD44, and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family, member A1
significantly in vivo. ATO changed the structure of the recombinant Gli1 zinc
finger peptides in a cell-free condition and the binding action of ATO to
recombinant Gli1 was observed in cultured pancreatic cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: ATO may have the potential to inhibit viability of PCSCs via binding 
to SHH-Gli proteins in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3753152
PMID: 23990729  [PubMed]


484. Methods. 2014 Apr 1;66(3):390-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.08.022. Epub 2013 Aug 
24.

Reagents for developmental regulation of Hedgehog signaling.

Lewis C(1), Krieg PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona College
of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, United States. (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, United States.
Electronic address: pkrieg@email.arizona.edu.

We have examined a number of reagents for their ability to modulate activity of
the Hh signaling pathway during embryonic development of Xenopus. In particular
we have focused on regulation of events occurring during tailbud stages and
later. Two inducible protein reagents based on the Gli1 and Gli3 transcription
factors were generated and the activity of these proteins was compared to the Hh 
signaling pathway inhibitor, cyclopamine, and the activators, Smoothened agonist 
(SAG) and purmorphamine (PMA). Effectiveness of reagents was assayed using both
molecular biological techniques and biological readouts. We found that the small 
molecule modulators of the Hh pathway were highly specific and effective and
produced results generally superior to the more conventional protein reagents for
examination of later stage developmental processes.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23981360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 15;73(20):6323-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4660. Epub 
2013 Aug 13.

Histone acetyltransferase PCAF is required for Hedgehog-Gli-dependent
transcription and cancer cell proliferation.

Malatesta M(1), Steinhauer C, Mohammad F, Pandey DP, Squatrito M, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC) and
Centre for Epigenetics, University of Copenhagen; The Danish Stem Cell Center
(Danstem), Copenhagen, Denmark; and F-BBVA Cancer Cell Biology Programme, Centro 
Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an important role in embryonic
patterning and development of many tissues and organs as well as in maintaining
and repairing mature tissues in adults. Uncontrolled activation of the Hh-Gli
pathway has been implicated in developmental abnormalities as well as in several 
cancers, including brain tumors like medulloblastoma and glioblastoma. Inhibition
of aberrant Hh-Gli signaling has, thus, emerged as an attractive approach for
anticancer therapy; however, the mechanisms that mediate Hh-Gli signaling in
vertebrates remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the histone
acetyltransferase PCAF/KAT2B is an important factor of the Hh pathway.
Specifically, we show that PCAF depletion impairs Hh activity and reduces
expression of Hh target genes. Consequently, PCAF downregulation in
medulloblastoma and glioblastoma cells leads to decreased proliferation and
increased apoptosis. In addition, we found that PCAF interacts with GLI1, the
downstream effector in the Hh-Gli pathway, and that PCAF or GLI1 loss reduces the
levels of H3K9 acetylation on Hh target gene promoters. Finally, we observed that
PCAF silencing reduces the tumor-forming potential of neural stem cells in vivo. 
In summary, our study identified the acetyltransferase PCAF as a positive
cofactor of the Hh-Gli signaling pathway, leading us to propose PCAF as a
candidate therapeutic target for the treatment of patients with medulloblastoma
and glioblastoma.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23943798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 25;8(7):e69756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069756. Print 2013.

Decrease of miR-202-3p expression, a novel tumor suppressor, in gastric cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Li C, Wang M, Su L, Qu Y, Li J, Yu B, Yan M, Yu Y, Liu B, Zhu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Department of Surgery, Shanghai 
Institute of Digestive Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Emerging studies have indicated that microRNAs are involved in the development
and progression of cancer. Here we found that miR-202-3p was frequently
down-regulated in gastric cancer tissues. Overexpression of miR-202-3p in gastric
cancer cells MKN-28 and BGC-823, markedly suppressed cell proliferation and
induced cell apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, Gli1 expression
was frequently positive in gastric cancer tissues and inversely correlated with
miR-133b expression. We demonstrate that the transcriptional factor Gli1 was a
target of miR-202-3p and plays an essential role as a mediator of the biological 
effects of miR-202-3p in gastric cancer. MiR-202-3p also inhibited the expression
of <U+03B3>-catenin and BCL-2. Taken together, these findings suggest that miR-202-3p
may function as a novel tumor suppressor in gastric cancer and its anti-tumor
activity may attribute the direct targeting and inhibition of Gli1.

PMCID: PMC3723650
PMID: 23936094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e69132. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069132. Print 2013.

Structural and logical analysis of a comprehensive hedgehog signaling pathway to 
identify alternative drug targets for glioma, colon and pancreatic cancer.

Chowdhury S(1), Pradhan RN, Sarkar RR.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering and Process Development, CSIR-National Chemical
Laboratory, Pune, Maharashtra, India.

Hedgehog is an evolutionarily conserved developmental pathway, widely implicated 
in controlling various cellular responses such as cellular proliferation and stem
cell renewal in human and other organisms, through external stimuli. Aberrant
activation of this pathway in human adult stem cell line may cause different
types of cancers. Hence, targeting this pathway in cancer therapy has become
indispensable, but the non availability of detailed molecular interactions,
complex regulations by extra- and intra-cellular proteins and cross talks with
other pathways pose a serious challenge to get a coherent understanding of this
signaling pathway for making therapeutic strategy. This motivated us to perform a
computational study of the pathway and to identify probable drug targets. In this
work, from available databases and literature, we reconstructed a complete
hedgehog pathway which reports the largest number of molecules and interactions
to date. Using recently developed computational techniques, we further performed 
structural and logical analysis of this pathway. In structural analysis, the
connectivity and centrality parameters were calculated to identify the important 
proteins from the network. To capture the regulations of the molecules, we
developed a master Boolean model of all the interactions between the proteins and
created different cancer scenarios, such as Glioma, Colon and Pancreatic. We
performed perturbation analysis on these cancer conditions to identify the
important and minimal combinations of proteins that can be used as drug targets. 
From our study we observed the under expressions of various oncoproteins in
Hedgehog pathway while perturbing at a time the combinations of the proteins
GLI1, GLI2 and SMO in Glioma; SMO, HFU, ULK3 and RAS in Colon cancer; SMO, HFU,
ULK3, RAS and ERK12 in Pancreatic cancer. This reconstructed Hedgehog signaling
pathway and the computational analysis for identifying new combinatory drug
targets will be useful for future in-vitro and in-vivo analysis to control
different cancers.

PMCID: PMC3720582
PMID: 23935937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 30;8(7):e69064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069064. Print 2013.

NVP-LDE225, a potent and selective SMOOTHENED antagonist reduces melanoma growth 
in vitro and in vivo.

Jalili A(1), Mertz KD, Romanov J, Wagner C, Kalthoff F, Stuetz A, Pathria G,
Gschaider M, Stingl G, Wagner SN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of
Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
ahmad.jalili@meduniwien.ac.at

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(9). doi:10.1371/annotation/ddd22094-5d8d-43ef-ad81-b95afe392ec7.

Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers and its incidence is increasing
worldwide. So far there are no curable therapies especially after metastasis. Due
to frequent mutations in members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathway, this pathway is constitutively active in melanoma. It has been
shown that the SONIC HEDGEHOG (SHH)-GLI and MAPK signaling pathway regulate cell 
growth in many tumors including melanoma and interact with each other in the
regulation of cell proliferation and survival. Here we show that the SHH-GLI
pathway is active in human melanoma cell lines as they express downstream target 
of this pathway GLI1. Expression of GLI1 was significantly higher in human
primary melanoma tissues harboring BRAF(V600E) mutation than those with wild type
BRAF. Pharmacologic inhibition of BRAF(V600E) in human melanoma cell lines
resulted in decreased expression of GLI1 thus demonstrating interaction of
SHH-GLI and MAPK pathways. Inhibition of SHH-GLI pathway by the novel small
molecule inhibitor of smoothened NVP-LDE225 was followed by inhibition of cell
growth and induction of apoptosis in human melanoma cell lines, interestingly
with both BRAF(V600E) and BRAF(Wild Type) status. NVP-LDE225 was potent in
reducing cell proliferation and inducing tumor growth arrest in vitro and in
vivo, respectively and these effects were superior to the natural compound
cyclopamine. Finally, we conclude that inhibition of SHH-GLI signaling pathway in
human melanoma by the specific smoothened inhibitor NVP-LDE225 could have
potential therapeutic application in human melanoma even in the absence of
BRAF(V600E) mutation and warrants further investigations.

PMCID: PMC3728309
PMID: 23935925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jul 1;135(1):1-6. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28424. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Nonclassical hedgehog-GLI signaling and its clinical implications.

Shevde LA(1), Samant RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The UAB Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Alabama, Birmingham, AL.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates embryonic patterning and organ morphogenesis.
It is also involved in regeneration and repair of tissues. Aberrant Hh pathway
activation is a feature of many human malignancies. Classical Hh signaling is
activated by Hh ligands that can signal in an autocrine or paracrine manner
generating a tumor-stromal crosstalk. In contrast to canonical Hh signaling that 
culminates in the activation of GLI transcription factors, "noncanonical" Hh
signaling does not involve GLI transcriptional activity. Several Hh pathway
inhibitors have progressed to clinical trials, where the outcomes have not been
very encouraging in many solid tumors. Here we discuss the likely role of
"nonclassical" Hh-GLI signaling that is activated by growth factors and cytokines
from the tumor and/or its microenvironment; these uncouple Hh signaling from the 
vital regulatory protein Smoothened, and result in the activation of GLI. While
efforts are being made to target tumor-intrinsic Hh targets, it is imperative to 
acknowledge the role of the complex molecular networks and crosstalk between
different components of the tumor microenvironment that can result in the
emergence of resistance to conventional Hh therapy. These considerations have an 
important bearing on appreciating the need to mitigate the effects of tumor
microenvironment to combat resistance to Hh inhibitors.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23929208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;42(4):262-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.04.011.

[Down-regulation of Smoothened gene expression inhibits proliferation of breast
cancer stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Mao J(1), Fan PH, Ma W, Zhang QQ, Wang B, Fan SJ, Li LH.

Author information: 
(1)The Center of Clinical Pathology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of down-regulating Smoothened (SMO) gene 
expression through short hairpin RNA (shRNA) on the proliferation of breast
cancer stem cells.
METHODS: Human SMO shRNA was designed, synthesized chemically, and transfected
into MCF-7 cells to down-regulate SMO gene. By using G418, stable cells with
down-regulated SMO were selected. In vitro proliferation of these cells was
measured by CCK8 assay. The proportion of CD44(+)/CD24(-) cells was detected by
flow cytometry and the mammospheres formation was determined by suspension sphere
culture. The expression of SMO, GLI1 and Oct4 was detected by Western blot. In
vivo, the volume of tumor was measured every 3 days and the expression of SMO,
GLI1 and Oct4 detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: In vitro, the cells were transfected with SMO-shRNA and selected by G418
after 21 days. SMO-shRNA effectively down-regulated the expression of SMO gene
and protein, and inhibited the proliferation of MCF-7 and markedly reduced the
proportion of CD44(+)/CD24(-) cells and mammospheres. In vivo, SMO-shRNA
treatment of MCF-7 significantly inhibited the volume of tumor. The positive rate
of SMO in negative control and SMO-shRNA group was 5/5 and 2/5, respectively. The
expression of SMO, GLI1 and Oct4 in different groups were 0.72 ± 0.17 and 0.21 ± 
0.09, 1.21 ± 0.21 and 0.47 ± 0.12, 0.83 ± 0.13 and 0.25 ± 0.07. SMO, GLI1 and
Oct4 down-regulation significantly suppressed at protein levels (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The shRNA by chemical synthesis can effectively down-regulate SMO
gene expression and inhibit the proliferation of breast cancer stem cells.

PMID: 23928535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Oct;11(10):1215-22. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0170. Epub
2013 Aug 8.

Menin directly represses Gli1 expression independent of canonical Hedgehog
signaling.

Gurung B(1), Feng Z, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Abramson Cancer Center, Abramson Family Cancer
Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 421
Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104. huax@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-1), is a familial tumor syndrome
resulting from mutations in the tumor suppressor gene menin (MEN1). Menin plays
an essential role in both repressing and activating gene expression. However, it 
is not well understood how menin represses expression of multiple genes. Upon
MEN1 excision, the transcription factor Gli1 and its target genes, including
Ptch1 and c-Myc, were shown to be elevated in the absence of an apparent
Hedgehog) pathway-activating ligand or when Smoothened (SMO), a key component of 
the pathway, is inhibited. Menin binds to the GLI1 promoter and recruits PRMT5, a
histone arginine methyltransferase associated with transcriptional repression.
Both PRMT5 binding and histone H4 arginine 3 methylation (H4R3m2s) are decreased 
at the GLI1 promoter in MEN1-excised cells. Moreover, MEN1 ablation resulted in
increased binding of transcriptionally active Gli1 at the GLI1 promoter in a
manner not influenced by the canonical Hedgehog signaling pathway. Inhibition of 
Gli1 by the small-molecule inhibitor GANT-61 led to decreased expression of Gli1 
and its target genes in MEN1-depeleted cells. Furthermore, GANT-61 potently
suppressed proliferation of MEN1-excised cells as compared with control cells.
These findings uncover a novel epigenetic link whereby menin directly represses
Gli1 expression, independent of the canonical Hedgehog signaling pathway, via
PRMT5 and its repressive H4R3m2s mark.IMPLICATIONS: Inhibition of GLI1 suppresses
neuroendocrine tumors harboring mutations in the MEN1 gene.

PMCID: PMC4028077
PMID: 23928057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 1;382(1):82-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.07.022. Epub 2013
Aug 2.

Multiple Shh signaling centers participate in fungiform papilla and taste bud
formation and maintenance.

Liu HX(1), Ermilov A, Grachtchouk M, Li L, Gumucio DL, Dlugosz AA, Mistretta CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, School of Dentistry, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The adult fungiform taste papilla is a complex of specialized cell types residing
in the stratified squamous tongue epithelium. This unique sensory organ includes 
taste buds, papilla epithelium and lateral walls that extend into underlying
connective tissue to surround a core of lamina propria cells. Fungiform papillae 
must contain long-lived, sustaining or stem cells and short-lived, maintaining or
transit amplifying cells that support the papilla and specialized taste buds. Shh
signaling has established roles in supporting fungiform induction, development
and patterning. However, for a full understanding of how Shh transduced signals
act in tongue, papilla and taste bud formation and maintenance, it is necessary
to know where and when the Shh ligand and pathway components are positioned. We
used immunostaining, in situ hybridization and mouse reporter strains for Shh,
Ptch1, Gli1 and Gli2-expression and proliferation markers to identify cells that 
participate in hedgehog signaling. Whereas there is a progressive restriction in 
location of Shh ligand-expressing cells, from placode and apical papilla cells to
taste bud cells only, a surrounding population of Ptch1 and Gli1 responding cells
is maintained in signaling centers throughout papilla and taste bud development
and differentiation. The Shh signaling targets are in regions of active cell
proliferation. Using genetic-inducible lineage tracing for Gli1-expression, we
found that Shh-responding cells contribute not only to maintenance of filiform
and fungiform papillae, but also to taste buds. A requirement for normal Shh
signaling in fungiform papilla, taste bud and filiform papilla maintenance was
shown by Gli2 constitutive activation. We identified proliferation niches where
Shh signaling is active and suggest that epithelial and mesenchymal compartments 
harbor potential stem and/or progenitor cell zones. In all, we report a set of
hedgehog signaling centers that regulate development and maintenance of taste
organs, the fungiform papilla and taste bud, and surrounding lingual cells. Shh
signaling has roles in forming and maintaining fungiform papillae and taste buds,
most likely via stage-specific autocrine and/or paracrine mechanisms, and by
engaging epithelial/mesenchymal interactions.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3968530
PMID: 23916850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Oncotarget. 2013 Aug;4(8):1149-57.

Gli1 transcriptional activity is negatively regulated by AKT2 in neuroblastoma.

Paul P(1), Volny N, Lee S, Qiao J, Chung DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA.

Activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been implicated in a
variety of malignancies including neuroblastoma. Expression of Gli1, a downstream
effector of Hh, correlates with a favorable prognosis in patients with
neuroblastoma. Moreover, Gli1 overexpression reduces mitotic index and induces
transcription of genes involved in the differentiation of neuroblastoma cells;
however, much remains unknown regarding the regulation of Gli1 transcriptional
activity. Here, we report a novel negative regulation of Gli1 transcriptional
activity by PI3K/AKT2 signal transduction pathway. Constitutively active PI3K
subunit, p110a, inhibited Gli1 transcriptional activity in neuroblastoma cells,
whereas, overexpression of an inactive form of PI3K subunit, p85, enhanced its
activity. Specifically, the AKT2 isoform inhibited Gli1 luciferase activity.
Silencing AKT2 using siRNA increased Gli1 transcriptional activity and
conversely, overexpression of constitutively active AKT2 (myr-AKT2) decreased
Gli1 transcriptional activity. Furthermore, Gli1 overexpression-mediated decrease
in anchorage-independent growth was rescued by AKT2 overexpression. We also
demonstrated that AKT2 overexpression regulates the nuclear-cytoplasmic
distribution of exogenous Gli1 protein in neuroblastoma cells by relieving a
GSK3ß-mediated destabilization of SUFU, a negative regulator of Gli1 nuclear
translocation. Inhibition of nuclear Gli1 accumulation may explain for the
suppression of the tumor-suppressive function of Gli1. Collectively, our findings
suggest an important role of Gli1 as a tumor suppressor in neuroblastoma, and
offer a mechanism by which AKT2 regulates the subcellular localization, and in
turn, inhibits the tumor-suppressive function of Gli1 in neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3787147
PMID: 23900341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nature. 2013 Aug 29;500(7464):589-92. doi: 10.1038/nature12358. Epub 2013 Jul 21.

Coordination of heart and lung co-development by a multipotent cardiopulmonary
progenitor.

Peng T(1), Tian Y, Boogerd CJ, Lu MM, Kadzik RS, Stewart KM, Evans SM, Morrisey
EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Co-development of the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems is a recent
evolutionary adaption to terrestrial life that couples cardiac output with the
gas exchange function of the lung. Here we show that the murine pulmonary
vasculature develops even in the absence of lung development. We have identified 
a population of multipotent cardiopulmonary mesoderm progenitors (CPPs) within
the posterior pole of the heart that are marked by the expression of Wnt2, Gli1
and Isl1. We show that CPPs arise from cardiac progenitors before lung
development. Lineage tracing and clonal analysis demonstrates that CPPs generate 
the mesoderm lineages within the cardiac inflow tract and lung including
cardiomyocytes, pulmonary vascular and airway smooth muscle, proximal vascular
endothelium, and pericyte-like cells. CPPs are regulated by hedgehog expression
from the foregut endoderm, which is required for connection of the pulmonary
vasculature to the heart. Together, these studies identify a novel population of 
multipotent cardiopulmonary progenitors that coordinates heart and lung
co-development that is required for adaptation to terrestrial existence.

PMCID: PMC3758448
PMID: 23873040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;383(1-2):85-93. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1757-9. Epub
2013 Jul 19.

Shh signaling, negatively regulated by BMP signaling, inhibits the
osteo/dentinogenic differentiation potentials of mesenchymal stem cells from
apical papilla.

Jiang Q(1), Du J, Yin X, Shan Z, Ma Y, Ma P, Du J, Fan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling and Stem Cells Therapy, Molecular Laboratory
for Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tooth
Regeneration and Function Reconstruction, Capital Medical University School of
Stomatology, Tiantan Xili No.4, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100050, China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) derived from dental tissues show promise for use in
tooth-related tissue regeneration, but the molecular mechanisms underlying their 
directed differentiation remain unclear, limiting their usefulness. Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh) signaling is a major signaling pathway that regulates cell
differentiation and osteogenesis. We found that when Shh signaling was activated 
by human recombinant SHH-N protein or by overexpression of active mutant
M2-Smoothened (SMO) in stem cells from apical papilla (SCAPs), GLI1, a key
downstream transcription factor and a marker of Shh signaling, was upregulated.
Subsequently, in vitro osteo/dentinogenic differentiation and in vivo
osteogenesis were inhibited in SCAPs. Moreover, the expression of GLI1 and SMO
were downregulated by BMP signaling while osteo/dentinogenic differentiation in
SCAPs was upregulated. These results provide insights into the role of Shh
signaling in the directed differentiation of MSCs derived from dental tissues and
suggest possible target genes for optimizing the use of stem cells of dental
origin for tissue regeneration applications.

PMID: 23867990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Acta Haematol. 2013;130(4):260-7. doi: 10.1159/000351603. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Arsenic trioxide inhibits the Hedgehog pathway which is aberrantly activated in
acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Yang D(1), Cao F, Ye X, Zhao H, Liu X, Li Y, Shi C, Wang H, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Health Ministry Key Lab of Cell Transplantation, Heilongjiang Institute of
Hematology and Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Dysregulated Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated in
several human malignancies. Hh signaling inhibitors are predicted to have a
minimal effect when the Smoothened receptor is mutated. Implications that Gli
proteins are molecular targets of arsenic trioxide (ATO) action prompted us to
investigate the expression of Hh signaling in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) 
and the influence of ATO on the Hh signaling pathway in APL.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
and Western blot were employed to analyze the expression of Hh pathway components
and the influence of ATO on the Hh signaling pathway in APL.
RESULTS: The expression of Hh pathway components was significantly upregulated in
APL. In newly diagnosed APL patients, Gli2 expression was significantly
positively correlated with Gli1 (R = 0.57, p < 0.001) and Smo (R = 0.56, p <
0.001) and the expression of Hh pathway components was significantly higher in
the high WBC group (p < 0.05). ATO can significantly downregulate the expression 
of Hh pathway components in vitro and in vivo (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The Hh pathway is aberrantly activated in APL and associated with a
bad prognostic factor. ATO can effectively inhibit the expression of the Hh
pathway. The obtained data give the first clinical evidence for the application
of ATO in tumors exhibiting an aberrantly activated Hh pathway.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23867347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Lung. 2013 Oct;191(5):511-21. doi: 10.1007/s00408-013-9490-4. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Expression of Bmi1, FoxF1, Nanog, and <U+03B3>-catenin in relation to hedgehog signaling
pathway in human non-small-cell lung cancer.

Gialmanidis IP(1), Bravou V, Petrou I, Kourea H, Mathioudakis A, Lilis I,
Papadaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Patras, 26500, Rio
Patras, Greece, gialmanidis_nikea@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog signaling is known to be involved in both lung organogenesis
and lung carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to examine potential
downstream targets of the hedgehog signaling pathway in non-small-cell lung
cancer.
METHODS: Protein expression of Bmi1, FoxF1, Nanog, and <U+03B3>-catenin was examined by 
immunohistochemistry in 80 non-small-cell lung cancer samples. Correlations with 
the previously immunohistochemically recovered results for sonic hedgehog, Ptch1,
Smo, Gli1, and Gli2 in the same cohort of tumors as well as the
clinicopathological characteristics of the tumors were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Bmi1 was expressed in 78/80 (97.5 %) cases of non-small-cell lung cancer
and correlated with male gender and expression of Gli1. Positive expression of
FoxF1 was found in 62/80 (77.5 %) cases. Expression of FoxF1 correlated with
lymph node metastases, Bmi1, and hedgehog pathway activation. Overexpression of
Nanog was also noted in 74/80 (92.5 %) tumors and correlated with Bmi1.
Cytoplasmic accumulation of <U+03B3>-catenin was observed in 85 % (68/80) of the tumors 
and correlated with the expression of Bmi1, FoxF1, and Nanog.
CONCLUSION: Several developmental pathways seem to be implicated in
non-small-cell lung cancer. It is also suggested that Bmi1 and FoxF1 may
cooperate with hedgehog signaling in non-small-cell lung carcinogenesis.

PMID: 23864317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 8;8(7):e69466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069466. Print 2013.

Arsenic trioxide prevents osteosarcoma growth by inhibition of GLI transcription 
via DNA damage accumulation.

Nakamura S(1), Nagano S, Nagao H, Ishidou Y, Yokouchi M, Abematsu M, Yamamoto T, 
Komiya S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.

The Hedgehog pathway is activated in various types of malignancies. We previously
reported that inhibition of SMO or GLI prevents osteosarcoma growth in vitro and 
in vivo. Recently, it has been reported that arsenic trioxide (ATO) inhibits
cancer growth by blocking GLI transcription. In this study, we analyzed the
function of ATO in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. Real-time PCR showed that
ATO decreased the expression of Hedgehog target genes, including PTCH1, GLI1, and
GLI2, in human osteosarcoma cell lines. WST-1 assay and colony formation assay
revealed that ATO prevented osteosarcoma growth. These findings show that ATO
prevents GLI transcription and osteosarcoma growth in vitro. Flow cytometric
analysis showed that ATO promoted apoptotic cell death. Comet assay showed that
ATO treatment increased accumulation of DNA damage. Western blot analysis showed 
that ATO treatment increased the expression of <U+03B3>H2AX, cleaved PARP, and cleaved
caspase-3. In addition, ATO treatment decreased the expression of Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL. These findings suggest that ATO treatment promoted apoptotic cell death
caused by accumulation of DNA damage. In contrast, Sonic Hedgehog treatment
decreased the expression of <U+03B3>H2AX induced by cisplatin treatment. ATO re-induced 
the accumulation of DNA damage attenuated by Sonic Hedgehog treatment. These
findings suggest that ATO inhibits the activation of Hedgehog signaling and
promotes apoptotic cell death in osteosarcoma cells by accumulation of DNA
damage. Finally, examination of mouse xenograft models showed that ATO
administration prevented the growth of osteosarcoma in nude mice. Because ATO is 
an FDA-approved drug for treatment of leukemia, our findings suggest that ATO is 
a new therapeutic option for treatment of patients with osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3704531
PMID: 23861973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e67431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067431. Print 2013.

LKB1 inhibits breast cancer partially through repressing the Hedgehog signaling
pathway.

Zhuang Z(1), Wang K, Cheng X, Qu X, Jiang B, Li Z, Luo J, Shao Z, Duan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Constitutive activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been
implicated in the development of many human malignancies. Hh targets, such as
Patched (PTCH), smoothened (SMO), Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and glioma-associated
oncogene homologue 1 (GLI1), are markers of Hh signaling activation and expressed
in most Hh-associated tumors. The protein kinase LKB1 has been shown to slow
proliferation and induce cell-cycle arrest in many cell lines. In this study, we 
observed that activated LKB1 decreased the expression of factors related to Hh
reporter activity in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, including of SMO, SHH and
GLI1. In contrast, LKB1 siRNA increased the expression of these target genes. The
same results were shown to inhibit the Hh factors Sufu and Hip. Furthermore, we
also observed negative correlation between LKB1 and glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 1 (GLI1) in three breast cancer cell lines. Meanwhile, LKB1 siRNA
rescued the inhibition of cell growth by
3-Keto-N-(aminoethyl-N'-aminocaproyldihydrocinnamoyl) cyclopamine
(KAAD-cyclopamine), an antagonist of the Hh element SMO, which suggests that LKB1
acts as the downstream of SMO. In vivo, LKB1 siRNA increased tumor growth in the 
mammary fat pad, and the expression levels of Hh displayed similar results in
vitro. Overexpression of the LKB1 protein in human breast cancers is associated
with the expression of Hh. We found that breast carcinomas with detectable Hh had
weak or undetectable expression of LKB1, whereas tumors that expressed high
levels of LKB1 had undetectable Hh signaling. In this study, we find that LKB1
are negatively correlated with the expression of Hh related transcription
factors. These findings suggest that LKB1 may inhibit tumorigenesis by regulating
Hh signaling in certain cancers.

PMCID: PMC3701543
PMID: 23861764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Endocrine. 2014 Apr;45(3):439-47. doi: 10.1007/s12020-013-0015-y. Epub 2013 Jul
17.

Expression of hedgehog signalling pathway in anaplastic thyroid cancer.

Hinterseher U(1), Wunderlich A, Roth S, Ramaswamy A, Bartsch DK, Hauptmann S,
Greene BH, Fendrich V, Hoffmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral, Thoracic- and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital
Marburg, Baldingerstrasse, 35043, Marburg, Germany.

The purpose of this work is to study the activation of the hedgehog signalling
pathway is associated with tumour progression in various types of cancer, hence
the development of specific antagonists raises hope for new therapeutic
strategies. Therefore, the expression of hedgehog pathway components in
anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) and effects of the hedgehog inhibitor Cyclopamine
on ATC cells were investigated in this study. Expression of the ligand Sonic
Hedgehog (SHh), the transmembrane protein Smoothened (Smo), the receptor Patched 
(Ptc) and the target gene Gli-1 was evaluated in two ATC cell lines (Hth 74,
C643) by RT-PCR and in tumour specimens by immunohistochemistry. The
corresponding gene products were examined by western blotting analysis. After
treatment with different concentrations of Cyclopamine the time-dependent course 
of cell viability in ATC cell lines was evaluated by MTT assay. SHh, Smo, Ptc and
Gli were clearly expressed on mRNA and protein levels in both cell lines and in
tumour samples (41 %SHh, 65 %Smo, 65 %Ptc and 65 %Gli). Treatment with
Cyclopamine showed a time- and dose-dependent inhibition of cell numbers with
IC50 values between 1 and 4 µM in both cell lines, comparable to other types of
cancer. In conclusion, we believe that the hedgehog pathway is expressed in
anaplastic thyroid carcinoma specimens and proliferation of ATC cell lines can be
influenced by the Hh inhibitor Cyclopamine. Aberrant activation of this pathway
might be involved in the aggressive biology of anaplastic cancer and further
evaluation regarding a possible clinical impact of pathway inhibition is
warranted.

PMID: 23860623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Oncology. 2013;85(2):86-94. doi: 10.1159/000353452. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Nuclear expression of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B 
is associated with a poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer.

Yang SH(1), Hsu CH, Lee JC, Tien YW, Kuo SH, Cheng AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the association of the hedgehog pathway with nuclear
factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B and clinical outcomes in pancreatic cancer patients.
METHODS: We analyzed tissue samples for the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B (RelA/p65), sonic
hedgehog (Shh) and glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1) by
immunohistochemistry and investigated their expression in association with
clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Eighty-one patients with pancreatic cancer were investigated. Expression
of Shh and nuclear expression of Gli1 and NF-<U+03BA>B were found in 63 of 66 (96%), 28 
of 68 (41%) and 22 of 68 cases (32%), respectively. Nuclear Gli1 expression was
closely associated with nuclear expression of NF-<U+03BA>B (p < 0.001). Patients with
nuclear Gli1 had significantly worse prognoses than those without (median
survival 7.9 vs. 13.9 months; p = 0.009). Similarly, patients with nuclear
expression of NF-<U+03BA>B had shorter overall survival than those with negative or
cytoplasmic expression of NF-<U+03BA>B (median survival 5.5 vs. 13.9 months; p < 0.001).
Shh expression had no prognostic significance. In the multivariate analysis,
NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear expression was closely associated with unfavorable overall survival
(p = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that nuclear expression of Gli1 or NF-<U+03BA>B is a
strong predictor of poor prognosis in pancreatic cancer. Additional investigation
of the biologic significance of this association is warranted.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23860225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):695-702. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2010. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Anti-apoptotic role of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in the proliferation 
of ameloblastoma.

Kanda S(1), Mitsuyasu T, Nakao Y, Kawano S, Goto Y, Matsubara R, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial
Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is crucial to growth and patterning during
organogenesis. Aberrant activation of the SHH signaling pathway can result in
tumor formation. We examined the expression of SHH signaling molecules and
investigated the involvement of the SHH pathway in the proliferation of
ameloblastoma, the most common benign tumor of the jaws. We used
immunohistochemistry on ameloblastoma specimens and immunocytochemistry and
reverse transcription-PCR on the ameloblastoma cell line AM-1. We also used the
inhibitors of SHH signaling, SHH neutralizing antibody and cyclopamine, to assess
the effects of SHH on the proliferation of AM-1 cells. We detected expression of 
SHH, patched, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 in the ameloblastoma specimens and AM-1 cells. 
The proliferation of these cells was significantly inhibited in the presence of
SHH neutralizing antibody or cyclopamine; this was confirmed by BrdU
incorporation assays. Furthermore, in the presence of SHH neutralizing antibody, 
nuclear translocation of GLI1 and GLI2 was abolished, apoptosis was induced,
BCL-2 expression decreased and BAX expression increased. Our results suggest that
the SHH signaling pathway is constitutively active in ameloblastoma and plays an 
anti-apoptotic role in the proliferation of ameloblastoma cells through autocrine
loop stimulation.

PMCID: PMC3787891
PMID: 23835807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 24;8(6):e66685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066685. Print 2013.

Mutational analysis of hedgehog signaling pathway genes in human malignant
mesothelioma.

Lim CB(1), Prêle CM, Cheah HM, Cheng YY, Klebe S, Reid G, Watkins DN, Baltic S,
Thompson PJ, Mutsaers SE.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Institute of Western Australia and Centre for Asthma, Allergy and
Respiratory Research, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is critical for embryonic
development and adult homeostasis. Recent studies have identified regulatory
roles for this pathway in certain cancers with mutations in the HH pathway genes.
The extent to which mutations of the HH pathway genes are involved in the
pathogenesis of malignant mesothelioma (MMe) is unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Real-time PCR analysis of HH pathway genes PTCH1,
GLI1 and GLI2 were performed on 7 human MMe cell lines. Exon sequencing of 13 HH 
pathway genes was also performed in cell lines and human MMe tumors. In silico
programs were used to predict the likelihood that an amino-acid substitution
would have a functional effect. GLI1, GLI2 and PTCH1 were highly expressed in MMe
cells, indicative of active HH signaling. PTCH1, SMO and SUFU mutations were
found in 2 of 11 MMe cell lines examined. A non-synonymous missense SUFU mutation
(p.T411M) was identified in LO68 cells. In silico characterization of the SUFU
mutant suggested that the p.T411M mutation might alter protein function. However,
we were unable to demonstrate any functional effect of this mutation on Gli
activity. Deletion of exons of the PTCH1 gene was found in JU77 cells, resulting 
in loss of one of two extracellular loops implicated in HH ligand binding and the
intracellular C-terminal domain. A 3-bp insertion (69_70insCTG) in SMO,
predicting an additional leucine residue in the signal peptide segment of SMO
protein was also identified in LO68 cells and a MMe tumour.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We identified the first novel mutations in PTCH1, SUFU 
and SMO associated with MMe. Although HH pathway mutations are relatively rare in
MMe, these data suggest a possible role for dysfunctional HH pathway in the
pathogenesis of a subgroup of MMe and help rationalize the exploration of HH
pathway inhibitors for MMe therapy.

PMCID: PMC3691204
PMID: 23826113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Stem Cells. 2013 Oct;31(10):2279-85. doi: 10.1002/stem.1464.

Brief report: SRF-dependent MiR-210 silences the sonic hedgehog signaling during 
cardiopoesis.

Zheng G(1), Tao Y, Yu W, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Serum response factor (SRF) wields potent gene silencing activity through its
regulation over numerous microRNAs (miRs). Here, SRF directs embryonic stem cell 
(ESC) progenitor cell lineage specification in part by silencing genes through
miR-210. Viral expression of miR-210 in murine ESCs-derived embryoid bodies (EBs)
inhibited cell growth and inhibited the appearance of cardiac progenitor markers 
Nkx2.5 and Gata4 and terminal differentiated contractile proteins Mlc2v and ßMHC.
Knockdown of miR-210 expression via antisense RNA activated cardiac progenitor
gene activity. miR-210 inhibitory activity was attributed to silencing of the
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway, which fosters the cardiac progenitor
program. miR-210 directly silenced Shh via targeting of the Shh 3'UTR, comparable
to the chemical Shh inhibitor, cyclopamine. miR-210 silencing of Shh/Gli1
signaling also blocked expression of the cell cycle regulators Cyclin D1 and
Cyclin D2, and EB cell expansion. Absence of SRF expression in SRF null EBs
blocked miR-210 expression, coincident with enhanced Shh, and Gli1 gene activity.
Thus, SRF-dependent miR-210 expression may operate as a novel silencer of the Shh
signaling pathway.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23818299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Pharmacogenomics J. 2014 Apr;14(2):142-50. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2013.20. Epub 2013
Jul 2.

Association of common gene variants in the WNT/ß-catenin pathway with colon
cancer recurrence.

Páez D(1), Gerger A(2), Zhang W(3), Yang D(4), Labonte MJ(5), Benhanim L(3), Kahn
M(3), Lenz F(3), Lenz C(3), Ning Y(3), Wakatsuki T(3), Loupakis F(3), Lenz HJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2]
Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, 
Spain. (2)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 
[2] Division of Clinical Oncology, Research Unit Genetic Epidemiology and
Pharmacogenetics, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz,
Graz, Austria. (3)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. (4)Department of Preventive Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (5)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Department of Biology and Chemistry, Azusa
Pacific University, Azusa, CA, USA. (6)1] Division of Medical Oncology, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] University of Southern California, Center
for Molecular Pathways and Drug Discovery, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has a central role in the development and progression of 
most colon cancers (CCs). Germline variants in Wnt/ß-catenin pathway genes may
result in altered gene function and/or activity, thereby causing inter-individual
differences in relation to tumor recurrence capacity and chemoresistance. We
investigated germline polymorphisms in a comprehensive panel of Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway genes to predict time to tumor recurrence (TTR) in patients with stage
III and high-risk stage II CC. A total of 234 patients treated with
5-fluorouracil-based chemotherapy were included in this study. Whole-blood
samples were analyzed for putative functional germline polymorphisms in SFRP3,
SFRP4, DKK2, DKK3, Axin2, APC, TCF7L2, WNT5B, CXXC4, NOTCH2 and GLI1 genes by
PCR-based restriction fragment-length polymorphism or direct DNA sequencing.
Polymorphisms with statistical significance were validated in an independent
study cohort. The minor allele of WNT5B rs2010851 T>G was significantly
associated with a shorter TTR (10.7 vs 4.9 years; hazard ratio: 2.48; 95% CI,
0.96-6.38; P=0.04) in high-risk stage II CC patients. This result remained
significant in multivariate Cox's regression analysis. This study shows that the 
WNT5B germline variant rs2010851 was significantly identified as a
stage-dependent prognostic marker for CC patients after 5-fluorouracil-based
adjuvant therapy.

PMID: 23817222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Hepatogastroenterology. 2013 Jul-Aug;60(125):1169-73. doi: 10.5754/hge12902.

Inhibiting K-ras signaling reserves the epithelial-mesenchymal transition of
pancreatic cancer cells and its mechanisms.

Liu XE, Sun XD.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To investigate the effects of K-ras siRNA on pancreatic cancer
cells and the expression levels of GLI1, E-cadherin and vimentin in pancreatic
cancer cells transfected with K-ras siRNA.
METHODOLOGY: Ppancreatic cancer cells PANC-1 were transfected with K-ras siRNA.
Growth inhibition ratio of the cells were measured by MTT assay, apoptosis was
detected by flow cytometery, expression level of GLI1, E-cadherin and vimentin
were detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: The expression of K-ras protein was efficiently inhibited by K-ras siRNA
in PANC-1 cells. The growth inhibition rates of the cells were significantly
different to the control groups. Apoptosis rates were significantly different
with that of control group. The expression of GLI1 was significantly
down-regulated, E-cadherin was up-regulated, while vimentin was also
down-regulated in K-ras siRNA transfected cells compared with that of control
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibiting K-ras signaling by K-ras siRNA can inhibit proliferation 
and induce apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells, down-regulate GLI1's and
vimentin's expression, and up-regulate E-cadherin's expression. Inhibiting K-ras 
signaling by K-ras siRNA may reduce epithelial to mesenchymal transition of
pancreatic cancer cell PANC-1.

PMID: 23803380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Oncogene. 2014 May 8;33(19):2432-40. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.199. Epub 2013 Jun 24.

The oncogenic GLI transcription factors facilitate keratinocyte survival and
transformation upon exposure to genotoxic agents.

Harrison W(1), Cochrane B(2), Neill G(1), Philpott M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. (2)Safety
and Environmental Assurance Centre, Unilever, Colworth Science Park, Bedford, UK.

Ultraviolet B (UVB) light is the principal aetiological factor associated with
non-melanoma skin cancer, the most prevalent group of malignancies in the
Caucasian population. Exposure to environmental chemicals has also been shown to 
promote skin carcinogenesis and, as for UVB, this is associated with the
acquisition of genomic DNA damage. Cells respond to DNA damage by inducing cell
cycle arrest to facilitate DNA repair, although apoptosis will occur if the
damage is excessive. Oncogenes may drive carcinogenesis by disrupting the
balanced control of cell cycle progression, DNA repair and apoptosis, allowing
for the propagation of cells with damaged DNA. The transcription factors GLI1 and
GLI2 have been implicated in both the initiation and progression of several
cancers, including basal cell carcinoma. Here we show that GLI1 and an active
mutant of GLI2 (<U+0394>NGLI2) promote apoptotic resistance in N/TERT human
keratinocytes upon exposure to UVB and the DNA-alkylating chemicals such as
methyl methanesulphonate (MMS) and N-ethyl-N-nitrosurea. Compared with control
and untreated N/TERT-GLI1 and -GLI2 cells, those that survived genotoxic insult
formed significantly more colonies in soft agar and were significantly more
invasive when grown in three-dimensional organotypic collagen gel cultures.
Indeed, surviving N/TERT-GLI1 and -GLI2 cells expressed higher levels of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers Snail and vimentin, and a
subpopulation of MMS-treated cells displayed an elongated fibroblast-like
morphology with decreased levels of E-cadherin. Finally, whereas Bcl2 was
strongly increased in N/TERT-GLI2 cells, the level of induction was weak in
N/TERT-GLI1 cells, indicating that GLI1 may activate anti-apoptotic mechanisms(s)
independently of Bcl2. In summary, our results show that GLI1 and GLI2 facilitate
the propagation of cells with damaged DNA, and thus their expression may be
naturally higher in cells that form the earliest precursor tumour lesions.

PMID: 23792444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Spine J. 2013 Oct;13(10):1309-20. doi: 10.1016/j.spinee.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 21.

Phenotype variations affect genetic association studies of degenerative disc
disease: conclusions of analysis of genetic association of 58 single nucleotide
polymorphisms with highly specific phenotypes for disc degeneration in 332
subjects.

Rajasekaran S(1), Kanna RM, Senthil N, Raveendran M, Cheung KM, Chan D,
Subramaniam S, Shetty AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Spine Surgery, Ganga Hospital, 313,
Mettupalayam Rd, Coimbatore 641 011, India. Electronic address:
sr@gangahospital.com.

BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Although the influence of genetics on the process of disc
degeneration is well recognized, in recently published studies, there is a wide
variation in the race and selection criteria for such study populations. More
importantly, the radiographic features of disc degeneration that are selected to 
represent the disc degeneration phenotype are variable in these studies. The
study presented here evaluates the association between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of candidate genes and three distinct radiographic features 
that can be defined as the degenerative disc disease (DDD) phenotype.
PURPOSE: The study objectives were to examine the allelic diversity of 58 SNPs
related to 35 candidate genes related to lumbar DDD, to evaluate the association 
in a hitherto unevaluated ethnic Indian population that represents more than
one-sixth of the world population, and to analyze how genetic associations can
vary in the same study subjects with the choice of phenotype.
STUDY DESIGN: A cross-sectional, case-control study of an ethnic Indian
population was carried out.
METHODS: Fifty-eight SNPs in 35 potential candidate genes were evaluated in 342
subjects and the associations were analyzed against three highly specific markers
for DDD, namely disc degeneration by Pfirrmann grading, end-plate damage
evaluated by total end-plate damage score, and annular tears evaluated by disc
herniations and hyperintense zones. Genotyping of cases and controls was
performed on a genome-wide SNP array to identify potential associated disease
loci. The results from the genome-wide SNP array were then used to facilitate SNP
selection and genotype validation was conducted using Sequenom-based genotyping.
RESULTS: Eleven of the 58 SNPs provided evidence of association with one of the
phenotypes. For annular tears, rs1042631 SNP of AGC1 and rs467691 SNP of ADAMTS5 
were highly significantly associated (p<.01) and SNPs in NGFB, IL1B, IL18RAP, and
MMP10 were also significantly associated (p<.05). The rs4076018 SNP of NGFB was
highly significant (p<.01) and rs2292657 SNP of GLI1 was significantly (p<.05)
correlated to disc degeneration. For end-plate damage, the rs2252070 SNP of MMP
13 showed a significant association (p<.05). Previously associated genes such as 
COL 9, SKT, CHST 3, CILP, IGFR, SOXp, BMP, MMP 2-12, ADH2, IL1RN, and COX2 were
not significantly associated and new associations (NGFB and GLI1) were
identified. The validity of all the associations was found to be phenotype
dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, genetic associations with DDD have been
performed in an Indian population. Apart from identifying new associations, the
highlight of the study was that in the same study population with DDD, SNP
associations completely changed when different radiographic features were used to
define the DDD phenotype. Our study results therefore indicate that
standardization of the phenotypes chosen to study the genetics of disc
degeneration is essential and should be strongly considered before planning
genetic association studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cancer Lett. 2013 Oct 10;339(2):185-94. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.06.010. Epub
2013 Jun 18.

Adenovirus vector-mediated Gli1 siRNA induces growth inhibition and apoptosis in 
human pancreatic cancer with Smo-dependent or Smo-independent Hh pathway
activation in vitro and in vivo.

Guo J(1), Gao J, Li Z, Gong Y, Man X, Jin J, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is a core molecular mechanism in
pancreatic carcinogenesis. However, the inhibition of upstream Hh signals does
not inhibit the growth of a subset of pancreatic cancer (PC). This study was to
examine the effect of siRNA targeting Gli1, the downstream component of Hh
pathway, on PC cells and to provide some insight into the underlying mechanisms. 
A Gli1siRNA-expressing adenovirus (Ad-U6-Gli1siRNA) was constructed, and its
effect on PC cells was investigated in vitro and in vivo. Gli1 was expressed in
83.3% (20/24) PC tissues, whereas no expression was found in normal pancreatic
ductal epithelium. Gli1 was expressed in SW1990 and CFPAC cells in which Smo was 
completely absent, as well as in PaTu8988, Panc-1 and BxPC-3 cells in which Smo
was concomitantly present. Ad-U6-Gli1siRNA induced cell growth inhibition, strong
G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in all five human PC cell lines. Meanwhile,
Ad-U6-Gli1siRNA significantly suppressed the expression of Gli1, Ptch1 and two
target genes, Cyclin D2 and Bcl-2, in all five lines. Furthermore, two tumor
xenograft nude mice models were established by subcutaneously injecting
Smo-positive Panc-1 cells or Smo-negative SW1990 cells. The in vivo experimental 
results demonstrated that Ad-U6-Gli1siRNA inhibited the growth of both
Panc1-derived and SW1990-derived tumors and induced cell apoptosis. Our study
indicates that Gli1-targeting siRNA could induce growth inhibition and apoptosis 
in PC through knockdown of Gli1 and its target genes; and this method may
represent a more effective therapeutic strategy for PC with Smo-dependent or
Smo-independent Hh pathway activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cancer Gene Ther. 2013 Jul;20(7):379-85. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2013.36. Epub 2013 Jun 
21.

The glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 promotes epithelial--mesenchymal
transition in human esophageal squamous cell cancer by inhibiting E-cadherin via 
Snail.

Min S(1), Xiaoyan X, Fanghui P, Yamei W, Xiaoli Y, Feng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, China.

The glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) family of zinc finger
transcription factors is the nuclear mediator of the Hedgehog pathway that
regulates genes essential for various stages of tumor development and
progression. However, the role and mechanism by which high expression of GLI1
contributes to the invasion and metastasis of human esophageal squamous cell
cancer (ESCC) has not been fully elucidated. In the present study, we
demonstrated that GLI1 was over-expressed in human ESCC tissues, especially in
ESCC tissues with deep invasion and lymph-node metastasis. Moreover, GLI1 was
also over-expressed in ESCC cell lines and correlated with the aggressiveness of 
ESCC cell lines. In addition, GLI signaling pathway agonist purmorphamine could
increase the invasion and metastasis ability of ESCC cells in vitro. There is
increasing evidence for the contribution of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) to ESCC invasion and metastasis, therefore we investigated GLI1's role in
EMT. Our results showed that high expression of GLI1 dampened expression of
E-cadherin and enhanced the expression of Vimentin, and it also improved the
expression of Snail, indicative of its role in EMT occurrence. Mechanistic
studies showed that down-expression of Snail reversed GLI1 activation-regulated
expression of EMT markers, suggesting the role of Snail in GLI1-mediated EMT.
Taken together, our results had revealed that GLI1 could participate in the
invasion and metastasis of ESCC through EMT. These studies indicated that in
ESCC, GLI1 could be a useful target for cancer prevention and therapy.

PMID: 23788111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cancer. 2013 Jun 20;12:66. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-66.

Hedgehog signaling regulates hypoxia induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition
and invasion in pancreatic cancer cells via a ligand-independent manner.

Lei J(1), Ma J, Ma Q, Li X, Liu H, Xu Q, Duan W, Sun Q, Xu J, Wu Z, Wu E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an 710061Shaanxi
Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Hypoxia plays a vital role in cancer epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and invasion. However, it is not quite clear how hypoxia may
contribute to these events. Here we investigate the role of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling in hypoxia induced pancreatic cancer EMT and invasion.
METHODS: Pancreatic cancer cells were cultured under controlled hypoxia
conditions (3% O2) or normoxic conditions. HIF-1a siRNA, cyclopamine (a SMO
antagonist) and GLI1 siRNA were used to inhibit HIF-1a transcription or Hh
signaling activation. The effect of hypoxia and Hh signaling on cancer cell EMT
and invasion were evaluated by Quantitative real-time PCR analysis, Western blot 
analysis and invasion assay.
RESULTS: Here, we show that non-canonical Hh signaling is required as an
important role to switch on hypoxia-induced EMT and invasion in pancreatic cancer
cells. Moreover, our data demonstrate hypoxia induces EMT process as well as
invasion, and activates the non-canonical Hh pathway without affecting sonic
hedgehog homolog (SHH) expression. Moreover, these effects are reversible upon
HIF-1a siRNA interference with unchanged SHH and patched1 (PTCH1) level.
Furthermore, our data demonstrate that hypoxia induced invasion and EMT process
are effectively inhibited by Smoothened (SMO) antagonist cyclopamine and GLI1
siRNA. In addition, GLI1 interference inhibited EMT progress with significantly
suppressed vimentin expression, whereas inhibition of SMO through cyclopamine
could not reduce vimentin level. This data indicate that hypoxia could trigger
other factors (such as TGF-ß, KRAS or RTK) bypassing SMO to activate GLI1
directly.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that Hh signaling modulates hypoxia induced
pancreatic cancer EMT and invasion in a ligand-independent manner. Thus, Hh
signaling may represent a promising therapeutic target for preventing pancreatic 
cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3699387
PMID: 23786654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol. 2014 Mar;42(2):182-9. doi: 10.1111/ceo.12139. Epub
2013 Aug 4.

Heparanase-1 and components of the hedgehog signalling pathway are increased in
untreated alveolar orbital rhabdomyosarcoma.

Tang WQ(1), Hei Y, Kang L, Xiao LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, the First Affiliated Hospital of General Hospital
of People's Liberation Army, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: To assess the activities of heparanase-1 and elements of the hedgehog
signalling pathway in alveolar orbital rhabdomyosarcoma.
METHODS: Specimens (n = 23) were divided into two groups, those from patients
with preoperative chemoradiotherapy or untreated patients; six samples of normal 
extraocular muscle were used as a normal muscle group. The presence of
heparanase-1, patched, smoothened and glioma-associated oncogene homologue-1
protein expression was determined in 23 cases of archival paraffin-embedded
alveolar orbital rhabdomyosarcoma after immunohistochemistry. RNA was extracted
from three groups of paraffin-embedded specimens and messenger RNA expressions of
heparanase-1, smoothened and glioma-associated oncogene homologue-1 compared
using nested reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and a limiting
dilution analysis.
RESULTS: The heparanase-1, patched, smoothened and glioma-associated oncogene
homologue-1 protein was expressed in 91.3%, 87.0%, 91.3% and 78.3%, respectively,
of the alveolar orbital rhabdomyosarcoma specimens. Untreated rhabdomyosarcoma
samples tended to stain intensely, but staining was relatively weak in tissue
obtained from the chemoradiotherapy group. The expression levels of heparanase-1,
smoothened and glioma-associated oncogene homologue-1 messenger RNA in untreated 
and chemoradiotherapy groups paralleled that seen with immunology, and there were
no significant differences in heparanase-1, smoothened and glioma-associated
oncogene homologue-1 messenger RNA levels between the chemoradiotherapy group and
the normal muscle group (P > 0.05). However, the messenger RNA in the untreated
group were all significantly higher than those in the chemoradiotherapy and
normal muscle groups (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Both heparanase-1 and hedgehog signalling pathway are involved in
the pathogenesis of alveolar orbital rhabdomyosarcoma; however, chemotherapy
and/or radiotherapy appears to significantly inhibit their upregulation.

© 2013 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists.

PMID: 23777428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 6;8(6):e65718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065718. Print 2013.

Gli2 acetylation at lysine 757 regulates hedgehog-dependent transcriptional
output by preventing its promoter occupancy.

Coni S(1), Antonucci L, D'Amico D, Di Magno L, Infante P, De Smaele E, Giannini
G, Di Marcotullio L, Screpanti I, Gulino A, Canettieri G.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7277, Inserm 1091, Institut de Biologie Valrose (iBV), Centre de
Biochimie, Nice, France.

The morphogenic Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates postnatal cerebellar
development and its aberrant activation leads to medulloblastoma. The
transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 are the activators of Hh pathway and their
function is finely controlled by different covalent modifications, such as
phosphorylation and ubiquitination. We show here that Gli2 is endogenously
acetylated and that this modification represents a key regulatory step for
Hedgehog signaling. The histone acetyltransferase (HAT) coactivator p300, but not
other HATs, acetylates Gli2 at the conserved lysine K757 thus inhibiting Hh
target gene expression. By generating a specific anti acetyl-Gli2(Lys757)
antisera we demonstrated that Gli2 acetylation is readily detectable at
endogenous levels and is attenuated by Hh agonists. Moreover, Gli2 K757R mutant
activity is higher than wild type Gli2 and is no longer enhanced by Hh agonists, 
indicating that acetylation represents an additional level of control for signal 
dependent activation. Consistently, in sections of developing mouse cerebella
Gli2 acetylation correlates with the activation status of Hedgehog signaling.
Mechanistically, acetylation at K757 prevents Gli2 entry into chromatin.
Together, these data illustrate a novel mechanism of regulation of the Hh
signaling whereby, in concert with Gli1, Gli2 acetylation functions as a key
transcriptional checkpoint in the control of morphogen-dependent processes.

PMCID: PMC3675076
PMID: 23762415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 10;8(6):e65411. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065411. Print 2013.

A role for hedgehog signaling in the differentiation of the insertion site of the
patellar tendon in the mouse.

Liu CF(1), Breidenbach A, Aschbacher-Smith L, Butler D, Wylie C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

Tendons are typically composed of two histologically different regions: the
midsubstance and insertion site. We previously showed that Gli1, a downstream
effector of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, is expressed only in the
insertion site of the mouse patellar tendon during its differentiation. To test
for a functional role of Hh signaling, we targeted the Smoothened (Smo) gene in
vivo using a Cre/Lox system. Constitutive activation of the Hh pathway in the
mid-substance caused molecular markers of the insertion site, e.g. type II
collagen, to be ectopically expressed or up-regulated in the midsubstance. This
was confirmed using a novel organ culture method in vitro. Conversely, when Smo
was excised in the scleraxis-positive cell population, the development of the
fibrocartilaginous insertion site was affected. Whole transcriptome analysis
revealed that the expression of genes involved in chondrogenesis and
mineralization was down-regulated in the insertion site, and expression of
insertion site markers was decreased. Biomechanical testing of murine adult
patellar tendon, which developed in the absence of Hh signaling, showed
impairment of tendon structural properties (lower linear stiffness and greater
displacement) and material properties (greater strain), although the linear
modulus of the mutant group was not significantly lower than controls. These
studies provide new insights into the role of Hh signaling during tendon
development.

PMCID: PMC3677907
PMID: 23762363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 10;8(6):e65403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065403. Print 2013.

Synergism between Hedgehog-GLI and EGFR signaling in Hedgehog-responsive human
medulloblastoma cells induces downregulation of canonical Hedgehog-target genes
and stabilized expression of GLI1.

Götschel F(1), Berg D, Gruber W, Bender C, Eberl M, Friedel M, Sonntag J,
Rüngeler E, Hache H, Wierling C, Nietfeld W, Lehrach H, Frischauf A,
Schwartz-Albiez R, Aberger F, Korf U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center-DKFZ,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (HH) signaling has been identified as a key
etiologic factor in many human malignancies. Signal strength, target gene
specificity, and oncogenic activity of HH signaling depend profoundly on
interactions with other pathways, such as epidermal growth factor
receptor-mediated signaling, which has been shown to cooperate with HH/GLI in
basal cell carcinoma and pancreatic cancer. Our experimental data demonstrated
that the Daoy human medulloblastoma cell line possesses a fully inducible
endogenous HH pathway. Treatment of Daoy cells with Sonic HH or Smoothened
agonist induced expression of GLI1 protein and simultaneously prevented the
processing of GLI3 to its repressor form. To study interactions between HH- and
EGF-induced signaling in greater detail, time-resolved measurements were carried 
out and analyzed at the transcriptomic and proteomic levels. The Daoy cells
responded to the HH/EGF co-treatment by downregulating GLI1, PTCH, and HHIP at
the transcript level; this was also observed when Amphiregulin (AREG) was used
instead of EGF. We identified a novel crosstalk mechanism whereby EGFR signaling 
silences proteins acting as negative regulators of HH signaling, as AKT- and
ERK-signaling independent process. EGFR/HH signaling maintained high GLI1 protein
levels which contrasted the GLI1 downregulation on the transcript level.
Conversely, a high-level synergism was also observed, due to a strong and
significant upregulation of numerous canonical EGF-targets with putative
tumor-promoting properties such as MMP7, VEGFA, and IL-8. In conclusion,
synergistic effects between EGFR and HH signaling can selectively induce a switch
from a canonical HH/GLI profile to a modulated specific target gene profile. This
suggests that there are more wide-spread, yet context-dependent interactions,
between HH/GLI and growth factor receptor signaling in human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3677915
PMID: 23762360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 10;8(6):e65032. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065032. Print 2013.

Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway supports cancer cell growth during cancer
radiotherapy.

Ma J(1), Tian L, Cheng J, Chen Z, Xu B, Wang L, Li C, Huang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Center, First People's Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

Tumor growth after radiotherapy is a commonly recognized cause of therapeutic
failure. In this way, we examined tumor cell growth after radiotherapy by
establishing a cancer cell growth model in vitro. We accomplished this model by
seeding non-irradiated firefly luciferase2 and green fluorescent protein fusion
gene (Fluc) labeled living cancer reporter cells onto a feeder layer of
irradiated cancer cells. The living tumor cell growth was monitored by
bioluminescence imaging. The living reporter cells grew faster when seeded onto
lethally irradiated feeder cells than when seeded onto non-irradiated feeder
cells or when seeded in the absence of feeder cells. We found that the expression
levels of the Shh and Gli1 proteins, both of which are critical proteins in Sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signaling, were increased after irradiation and that this
expression was positively correlated with reporter cell growth. Moreover, the
dying cell stimulation of living tumor cell growth was enhanced by the addition
of SHH signaling agonists and inhibited by SHH signaling antagonists. SHH
agonists also enhanced reporter cell growth in the absence of irradiated feeder
cells, suggesting this mechanism plays a role in feeder cell growth stimulation. 
Given these results, we conclude that SHH signaling activation plays an important
role during tumor repopulation after radiotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3677896
PMID: 23762282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Oncol Rep. 2013 Aug;30(2):904-10. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2534. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

Role of GLI-1 in epidermal growth factor-induced invasiveness of ARCaPE prostate 
cancer cells.

Zhu G(1), Zhou J, Song W, Wu D, Dang Q, Zhang L, Li L, Wang X, He D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of the Medical College of
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, PR China.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling and Hedgehog (HH) signaling are both
involved in prostate cancer (PCa) progression, yet the mechanisms through which
these two pathways are synergistically linked require elucidation. In the present
study, we aimed to ascertain how EGF and the HH signaling transcription factor
GLI-1 are linked in prostate cancer invasiveness. ARCaP human prostate cancer
cells, which included ARCaPE and ARCaPM cells, were used as a model in the
present study. The expression of EGF receptor (EGFR) and the HH signaling
transcriptional factor GLI-1 were detected in ARCaPE cells by immunofluorescence,
and the ARCaPE cells were treated with human recombinant EGF protein (hrEGF) for 
4 consecutive days in vitro. Transwell invasion assays were performed in the
ARCaPE cells following treatment with DMSO (vehicle control), hrEGF, GATN61
(GLI-1-specific inhibitor), hrEGF plus GANT61 and in the ARCaPM cells. The
expression of phosphorylated extracellular signal regulated kinase (p-ERK), total
ERK and GLI-1 was detected by western blotting in ARCaPE cells at different
time-points following treatment with hrEGF. The expression of EGFR and GLI-1 was 
detected in ARCaPE cells, which exhibited a cobblestone-like morphology, while
after treatment with hrEGF, the cell morphology was altered to a spindle-shaped
mesenchymal cell morphology. Transwell invasion assays demonstrated that hrEGF
dramatically enhanced the invasive capability of the ARCaPE cells (p<0.05).
Additionally, western blot assay demonstrated that the expression levels of p-ERK
and GLI-1 in ARCaPE cells increased in a time-dependent manner after treatment
with hrEGF (p<0.05); however, the expression levels of total ERK in the cells
remained relatively unchanged. It also demonstrated that the GLI-1 inhibitor
GANT61 could reverse the enhanced invasive effect induced by EGF in ARCaPE cells 
(p<0.05). Our preliminary in vitro study showed that EGF signaling may increase
the invasive capability of ARCaPE human prostate cancer cells via upregulation of
p-ERK and the HH signaling transcriptional factor GLI-1. Additionally, this
enhanced cell invasive effect was reversed by a GLI-1-specific inhibitor
in vitro. Consequently, it indicates that both EGF and HH signaling are
synergistically involved in the progression of human prostate cancer ARCaP cells,
and GlI-1 may be one of the important effectors, which is activated by EGF
downstream signaling, to promote the invasiveness of ARCaPE prostate cancer
cells.

PMID: 23757299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Reprod Toxicol. 2013 Nov;41:49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2013.05.012. Epub 2013
Jun 7.

Sonic hedgehog expression is disrupted following in ovo ethanol exposure during
early chick eye development.

Brennan D(1), Giles S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Ireland. brennan.deirdre@gmail.com

The eye is particularly sensitive to ethanol's teratogenic effects. Our previous 
work, using a chick embryo model system, has shown that ethanol acts rapidly to
perturb vital processes of early eye development producing defects of the lens
and retina. Ethanol-induced disruption of the midline ventral telencephalon, a
key site for expression of ocular morphogens such as sonic hedgehog (Shh), was
further established. Consequently, in this study we have examined the effects of 
ethanol on the Shh pathway during the period of optic vesicle/optic cup
formation. Chick embryos were injected in ovo with 125µL of a 20% ethanol
solution directly into the yolk-sac at HH-stage 7, resulting in peak ethanol
uptake of 0.294g/dL. Subsequent molecular analysis at 12, 24 and 48h
post-treatment revealed that ethanol had no affect on Shh transcription, while, a
significant reduction in the expression of the active signalling Shh protein was 
found. Surprisingly, none of the downstream Shh pathway members (Ptc, Gli1 and
Gli3) were significantly altered by ethanol exposure. Overall, our results
indicate that ethanol's disruption of Shh may be mediated through some
alternative mechanism independent of the classical signalling pathway. However,
the precise role of Shh in relation to ethanol teratogenicity continues to be
debated. Thus, in conclusion, our findings are discussed in relation to the
varied and often conflicting reports of ethanol-induced Shh perturbation found in
the literature.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23751449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 19;288(29):21389-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.443440. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

Activation of the transcription factor GLI1 by WNT signaling underlies the role
of SULFATASE 2 as a regulator of tissue regeneration.

Nakamura I(1), Fernandez-Barrena MG, Ortiz-Ruiz MC, Almada LL, Hu C, Elsawa SF,
Mills LD, Romecin PA, Gulaid KH, Moser CD, Han JJ, Vrabel A, Hanse EA, Akogyeram 
NA, Albrecht JH, Monga SP, Sanderson SO, Prieto J, Roberts LR, Fernandez-Zapico
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Clinic
Cancer Center, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Tissue regeneration requires the activation of a set of specific growth signaling
pathways. The identity of these cascades and their biological roles are known;
however, the molecular mechanisms regulating the interplay between these pathways
remain poorly understood. Here, we define a new role for SULFATASE 2 (SULF2) in
regulating tissue regeneration and define the WNT-GLI1 axis as a novel downstream
effector for this sulfatase in a liver model of tissue regeneration. SULF2 is a
heparan sulfate 6-O-endosulfatase, which releases growth factors from
extracellular storage sites turning active multiple signaling pathways. We
demonstrate that SULF2-KO mice display delayed regeneration after partial
hepatectomy (PH). Mechanistic analysis of the SULF2-KO phenotype showed a
decrease in WNT signaling pathway activity in vivo. In isolated hepatocytes,
SULF2 deficiency blocked WNT-induced ß-CATENIN nuclear translocation, TCF
activation, and proliferation. Furthermore, we identified the transcription
factor GLI1 as a novel target of the SULF2-WNT cascade. WNT induces GLI1
expression in a SULF2- and ß-CATENIN-dependent manner. GLI1-KO mice phenocopied
the SULF2-KO, showing delayed regeneration and decreased hepatocyte
proliferation. Moreover, we identified CYCLIN D1, a key mediator of cell growth
during tissue regeneration, as a GLI1 transcriptional target. GLI1 binds to the
cyclin d1 promoter and regulates its activity and expression. Finally, restoring 
GLI1 expression in the liver of SULF2-KO mice after PH rescues CYCLIN D1
expression and hepatocyte proliferation to wild-type levels. Thus, together these
findings define a novel pathway in which SULF2 regulates tissue regeneration in
part via the activation of a novel WNT-GLI1-CYCLIN D1 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3774406
PMID: 23740243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Urol. 2013 Nov;190(5):1884-92. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.05.061. Epub 2013 May
30.

Hypospadias and genes related to genital tubercle and early urethral development.

Carmichael SL(1), Ma C, Choudhry S, Lammer EJ, Witte JS, Shaw GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, California. Electronic address: scarmichael@stanford.edu.

PURPOSE: We determined whether variants in genes associated with genital tubercle
(the anlage for the penis) and early urethral development were associated with
hypospadias in humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined 293 relatively common tag single nucleotide
polymorphisms in BMP4, BMP7, FGF8, FGF10, FGFR2, HOXA13, HOXD13, HOXA4, HOXB6,
SRY, WT1, WTAP, SHH, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3. The analysis included 624 cases (81
mild, 319 moderate, 209 severe, 15 undetermined severity) and 844 population
based nonmalformed male controls born in California from 1990 to 2003.
RESULTS: There were 28 single nucleotide polymorphisms for which any of the
comparisons (ie overall or for a specific severity) had a p value of less than
0.01. The homozygous variant genotypes for 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms in
BMP7 were associated with at least a twofold increased risk of hypospadias
regardless of severity. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms for FGF10 were
associated with threefold to fourfold increased risks, regardless of severity.
For 4 of them the results were restricted to whites. For GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3
there were 12 associated single nucleotide polymorphisms but results were
inconsistent by severity and race/ethnicity. For SHH 1 single nucleotide
polymorphism was associated with a 2.4-fold increased risk of moderate
hypospadias. For WT1 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms were associated with
approximately a twofold increased risk, primarily for severe hypospadias.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms in
several genes that contribute to genital tubercle and early urethral development 
are associated with hypospadias risk.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4103581
PMID: 23727413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Dec;20 Suppl 3:S570-6. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3022-6. Epub 
2013 May 26.

High expression of Sonic hedgehog signaling proteins is related to the favorable 
outcome, EGFR mutation, and lepidic predominant subtype in primary lung
adenocarcinoma.

Kim JE(1), Kim H, Choe JY, Sun P, Jheon S, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 
National University Bundang Hospital, 300 Gumi-dong, Bundang-gu, Seongnam,
463-707, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Dec;20 Suppl 3:S755.

BACKGROUND: Dysregulation of the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway has been 
identified in many human malignancies. However, it remains unclear whether this
pathway is activated in human lung adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: We investigated the expression of the SHH ligand and its downstream
molecules, such as glioma-associated oncogene homologue (GLI)-1, GLI-2, GLI-3,
and ATP-binding cassette G2 (ABCG2), in 166 cases of surgically resected lung
adenocarcinoma by immunohistochemistry. Correlations between the expression of
SHH-related proteins and clinicopathologic parameters, histologic subtypes, and
prognostic significance were statistically analyzed.
RESULTS: SHH was highly expressed in the 36.1 % (60/166), GLI-1, GLI-2, and ABCG2
were found in 90/164 (54.9 %), 26/166 (15.7 %), and 139/165 (84.2 %),
respectively, and GLI-3 was positive in all cases. SHH was more frequently highly
expressed in nonsmokers, patients with no recurrences, lepidic predominant
subtype, and with EGFR mutation (p < 0.05, respectively). The high expression of 
SHH and GLI-1 was related to better overall survival and progression-free
survival (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The SHH signaling pathway is frequently up-regulated in a subset of 
lung adenocarcinoma and is significantly associated with EGFR mutation and
lepidic subtype. Although SHH signaling protein expression is not an independent 
prognostic marker, the expression of these proteins can predict a better
prognostic outcome.

PMID: 23709101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Onkologie. 2013;36(5):279-86. doi: 10.1159/000350322. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Overexpression of the Hedgehog signalling pathway in head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma.

Dimitrova K(1), Stoehr M, Dehghani F, Dietz A, Wichmann G, Bertolini J, Mozet C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Leipzig,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the Hedgehog (HH) signalling pathway has been
described in several malignancies and is associated with a poor prognosis. HH
signalling blockade reduces tumour growth in vitro and in vivo. We aimed to
determine whether head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) express HH
proteins in comparison to healthy mucosa.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue sections of 10 
patients with HNSCC were stained with fluorescence-labelled antibodies for
cytokeratin and HH proteins (SHH, PTCH1/2, SMO, Gli1-3) and photographs were
taken with a laser scanning microscope. The pixel count and colour intensity were
analysed in RGB (red/green/blue) colour mode, and expression levels were compared
to healthy mucosa.
RESULTS: Image analysis in RGB mode provided objective evidence for the
over-expression of HH signalling components in HNSCC, particularly with regard to
the transcription factors Gli1 (10-fold) and SHH (5-fold) in comparison with
healthy mucosa. The lowest levels were found for Gli3 in HNSCC.
CONCLUSIONS: We postulate pivotal roles of Gli1 and SHH expression in the
carcinogenesis of HNSCC. HH pathway overexpression appears to be involved in the 
initiation of tumour growth and spread due to its stem cell-modulating
properties. Detection of HH pathway components, and especially Gli1 and SHH, in
HNSCC might offer a promising target for further anticancer research in HNSCC.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23689223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Oncogene. 2014 Apr 17;33(16):2087-97. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.164. Epub 2013 May
20.

Targeting Gli transcription activation by small molecule suppresses tumor growth.

Bosco-Clément G(1), Zhang F(2), Chen Z(3), Zhou HM(4), Li H(1), Mikami I(5),
Hirata T(5), Yagui-Beltran A(1), Lui N(1), Do HT(1), Cheng T(1), Tseng HH(1),
Choi H(1), Fang LT(1), Kim IJ(1), Yue D(6), Wang C(7), Zheng Q(8), Fujii N(9),
Mann M(10), Jablons DM(1), He B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Program, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (2)1] Thoracic Oncology Program, Department of Surgery, Helen
Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA [2] Tsinghua University Graduate School at
Shenzhen, Division of Life and Health Sciences, Shenzhen, China. (3)1] Thoracic
Oncology Program, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA [2] School
of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. (4)School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. (5)1] Thoracic Oncology Program,
Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA [2] Department of 
Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. (6)1]
Thoracic Oncology Program, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA [2] Department of Lung Cancer, Tianjin Medical University
Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, China. (7)Department of Lung Cancer,
Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, China. (8)1]
Thoracic Oncology Program, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA [2] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research (Ministry of Education), Thoracic Surgery II, Peking University Cancer
Hospital and Institute, Beijing, China. (9)Department of Chemical Biology and
Therapeutics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(10)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Targeted inhibition of Hedgehog signaling at the cell membrane has been
associated with anticancer activity in preclinical and early clinical studies.
Hedgehog signaling involves activation of Gli transcription factors that can also
be induced by alternative pathways. In this study, we identified an interaction
between Gli proteins and a transcription coactivator TBP-associated factor 9
(TAF9), and validated its functional relevance in regulating Gli transactivation.
We also describe a novel, synthetic small molecule, FN1-8, that efficiently
interferes with Gli/TAF9 interaction and downregulate Gli/TAF9-dependent
transcriptional activity. More importantly, FN1-8 suppresses cancer cell
proliferation in vitro and inhibits tumor growth in vivo. Our results suggest
that blocking Gli transactivation, an important control point of multiple
oncogenic pathways, may be an effective anticancer strategy.

PMCID: PMC3947751
PMID: 23686308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 1;380(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.05.005. Epub 2013
May 15.

The cytoskeletal protein Zyxin inhibits Shh signaling during the CNS patterning
in Xenopus laevis through interaction with the transcription factor Gli1.

Martynova NY(1), Ermolina LV, Ermakova GV, Eroshkin FM, Gyoeva FK, Baturina NS,
Zaraisky AG.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 117997, Russia.

Zyxin is a cytoskeletal protein that controls cell movements by regulating actin 
filaments assembly, but it can also modulate gene expression owing to its
interactions with the proteins involved in signaling cascades. Therefore,
identification of proteins that interact with Zyxin in embryonic cells is a
promising way to unravel mechanisms responsible for coupling of two major
components of embryogenesis: morphogenetic movements and cell differentiation.
Now we show that in Xenopus laevis embryos Zyxin can bind to and suppress
activity of the primary effector of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling cascade, the
transcription factor Gli1. By using loss- and gain-of-function approaches, we
demonstrate that Zyxin is essential for reduction of Shh signaling within the
dorsal part of the neural tube of X. laevis embryo. Thus, our finding discloses a
novel function of Zyxin in fine tuning of the central neural system patterning
which is based on the ventral-to-dorsal gradient of Shh signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23685334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Autoimmun Rev. 2013 Sep;12(11):1070-5. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2013.04.001. Epub
2013 May 16.

What causes relapses of autoimmune diseases? The etiological role of autoreactive
T cells.

Wildner G(1), Kaufmann U.

Author information: 
(1)Klinikum der Universität München, Dept. of Ophthalmology, Mathildenstr. 8,
80336 Munich, Germany. Gerhild.Wildner@med.uni-muenchen.de

Most human autoimmune diseases have a relapsing-remitting or a chronic
progressive course, while animal models are usually acute and monophasic. In our 
experimental animal model the disease can be either monophasic or remitting,
depending on the autoantigen used for induction, and it appears to lie in the
effector phenotype of the elicited T helper cell response. Since both, monophasic
and relapsing courses of disease are induced by immunization as well as by
adoptive transfer of peptide-specific, CD4(+) T cells, we were able to directly
compare the transcriptomes of pathogenic T cell lines by gene array analysis and 
qPCR as well as protein expression. Upregulated genes were only determined in T
cells inducing relapsing uveitis and belong to certain pathways of antigen
presentation, activation, inflammation, migration and survival, comprising WNT,
Hedgehog, MAP-kinase and JAK/STAT-pathways. These pathways are partially
interacting with each other, and the central molecule upregulated in T cells
causing relapsing disease was found to be IFN-<U+03B3>. Here the course of the
autoimmune diseases strictly depends on the characteristics of the autoreactive T
cells, which are already determined at their early stage of antigen-specific
activation. Our rat models of experimental autoimmune uveitis could help
elucidating the immune mechanisms behind relapsing autoimmunity in order to
develop better therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23685277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cancer Lett. 2013 Sep 1;337(2):210-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.05.009. Epub
2013 May 16.

Ellagic acid inhibits human pancreatic cancer growth in Balb c nude mice.

Zhao M(1), Tang SN, Marsh JL, Shankar S, Srivastava RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Ellagic acid (EA) is a polyphenol found in several plants and fruits. The
objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which EA
inhibits pancreatic cancer growth in Balb C nude mice. PANC-1 cells were injected
subcutaneously into Balb c nude mice, and tumor-bearing mice were treated with
EA. The expression of Akt, Shh and Notch and their target gene products were
measured by the immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. Treatment of
PANC-1 xenografted mice with EA resulted in significant inhibition in tumor
growth which was associated with suppression of cell proliferation and caspase-3 
activation, and induction of PARP cleavage. EA inhibited the expression of Bcl-2,
cyclin D1, CDK2, and CDK6, and induced the expression of Bax in tumor tissues
compared to untreated control group. EA inhibited the markers of angiogenesis
(COX-2, HIF1a, VEGF, VEGFR, IL-6 and IL-8), and metastasis (MMP-2 and MMP-9) in
tumor tissues. Furthermore, treatment of mice with EA caused a significant
inhibition in phospho-Akt, Gli1, Gli2, Notch1, Notch3, and Hey1. EA also reversed
epithelial to mesenchymal transition by up-regulating E-cadherin and inhibiting
the expression of Snail, MMP-2 and MMP-9. These data suggest that EA can inhibit 
pancreatic cancer growth, angiogenesis and metastasis by suppressing Akt, Shh and
Notch pathways. In view of the fact that EA could effectively inhibit human
pancreatic cancer growth by suppressing Akt, Shh and Notch pathways, our findings
suggest that the use of EA would be beneficial for the management of pancreatic
cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2013 Jun;13(5):580-95.

Inhibition of hedgehog/Gli signaling by botanicals: a review of compounds with
potential hedgehog pathway inhibitory activities.

Drenkhahn SK(1), Jackson GA, Slusarz A, Starkey NJ, Lubahn DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is an important therapeutic target in cancer;
involvement of the Hh pathway has been shown in a variety of cancers including
basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma, leukemia, and gastrointestinal, breast,
prostate, lung, and pancreatic cancers [1-10]. Currently, several Hh pathway
inhibitory drugs are in clinical development, and the FDA recently approved
Erivedge (vismodegib) from Curis/Genentech [11-15]. These new drugs are effective
in many, but not all patients [16]. In fact there are documented reports of
tumors developing mutations that confer resistance to the drugs [14, 17-19]. This
highlights the importance of finding second generation drugs that can be used on 
cancers that develop resistance to the first generation Hh inhibitors. Botanicals
may serve as the backbone for such research. The gold-standard pathway inhibitor,
cyclopamine, is itself a naturally occurring alkaloid found in Veratrum
californicum [20]. In this review we will summarize the available literature on
botanical compounds in Hh-related studies. In particular we will look at
curcumin, genistein, EGCG, resveratrol, quercetin, baicalen, and apigenin along
with novel compounds isolated from Southeast Asian plants, such as the potent
sub-micromolar gitoxigenin derivatives. Due to the nature of the pathway, most of
the research published has focused on functional Gli-transcriptional assays,
which we will describe and summarize.

PMID: 23675897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2013 Sep;16(3):233-8. doi: 10.1038/pcan.2013.12.
Epub 2013 May 14.

BRCA1 and p53 regulate critical prostate cancer pathways.

De Luca P(1), Moiola CP, Zalazar F, Gardner K, Vazquez ES, De Siervi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Sciences (FCEN), University of
Buenos Aires (UBA), IQUIBICEN-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Loss or mutations of the BRCA1 gene are associated with increased
risk of breast and ovarian cancers and with prostate cancer (PCa) aggressiveness.
Previously, we identified GADD153 as a target of BRCA1 protein, which increases
doxorubicin sensitivity in human p53 -/- PCa cells (PC3). Considering that p53 is
a crucial target in cancer therapy, in this work we investigated p53 role in the 
regulation of transcription of GADD153.
METHODS: We performed reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), western
blot and luciferase assays to analyze GADD153 and/or BRCA1 expression in response
to ultraviolet or doxorubicin exposure in PC3 p53 stable-transfected cells and
LNCaP (p53+/+) cells. BRCA1 protein recruitment to GADD153 promoter was studied
by chromatin immunoprecipitation-qPCR. To assess expression of BRCA1 and/or p53
target genes, we used a panel of stable-transfected PCa cell lines. We finally
analyzed these genes in vivo using BRCA1-depleted PCa xenograft models.
RESULTS: We found that GADD153 was highly induced by doxorubicin in PC3 cells;
however, this response was totally abolished in LNCaP (p53wt) and in
p53-restituted PC3 cells. Furthermore, BRCA1 protein associates to GADD153
promoter after DNA damage in the presence of p53. Additionally, we demonstrated
that BRCA1 and/or p53 modulate genes involved in DNA damage and cell cycle
regulation (cyclin D1, BLM, BRCA2, DDB2, p21(WAF1/CIP1), H3F3B, GADD153, GADD45A,
FEN1, CCNB2), EMT (E-cadherin, ß-catenin, vimentin, fibronectin, slug, snail) and
Hedgehog pathways (SHH, IHH, DHH, Gli1, PATCH1). Furthermore, xenograft studies
demonstrated that BRCA1 knockdown in PC3 cells increased tumor growth and
modulated these genes in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Although BRCA1 induces GADD153 in a p53 independent manner, p53
abolished GADD153 induction in response to DNA damage. In addition, several
important PCa targets are modulated by BRCA1 and p53. Altogether, these data
might be important to understand the therapy response of PCa patients.

PMID: 23670255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063226. Print 2013.

Gli1 mediates lung cancer cell proliferation and Sonic Hedgehog-dependent
mesenchymal cell activation.

Bermudez O(1), Hennen E, Koch I, Lindner M, Eickelberg O.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Pneumology Center, University Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Non-Small-Cell-Lung-Cancer (NSCLC) represents approximately 85% of all lung
cancers and remains poorly understood. While signaling pathways operative during 
organ development, including Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and associated Gli
transcription factors (Gli1-3), have recently been found to be reactivated in
NSCLC, their functional role remains unclear. Here, we hypothesized that
Shh/Gli1-3 could mediate NSCLC autonomous proliferation and epithelial/stromal
signaling in the tumoral tissue. In this context, we have investigated the
activity of Shh/Gli1-3 signaling in NSCLC in both, cancer and stromal cells. We
report here that inhibition of Shh signaling induces a significant decrease in
the proliferation of NSCLC cells. This effect is mediated by Gli1 and Gli2, but
not Gli3, through regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin D2 expression. While
exogenous Shh was unable to induce signaling in either A549 lung adenocarcinoma
or H520 lung squamous carcinoma cells, both cells were found to secrete Shh
ligand, which induced fibroblast proliferation, survival, migration, invasion,
and collagen synthesis. Furthermore, Shh secreted by NSCLC mediates the
production of proangiogenic and metastatic factors in lung fibroblasts. Our
results thus provide evidence that Shh plays an important role in mediating
epithelial/mesenchymal crosstalk in NSCLC. While autonomous Gli activity controls
NSCLC proliferation, increased Shh expression by NSCLC is associated with
fibroblast activation in tumor-associated stroma. Our study highlights the
relevance of studying stromal-associated cells in the context of NSCLC regarding 
new prognosis and therapeutic options.

PMCID: PMC3646741
PMID: 23667589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Anticancer Res. 2013 May;33(5):2107-14.

Clinical significances of cancer stem cells markers in patients with intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma who underwent hepatectomy.

Nanashima A(1), Hatachi G, Tsuchiya T, Matsumoto H, Arai J, Abo T, Murakami G,
Tominaga T, Takagi K, Nagayasu T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology and Department of Surgery, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, 8528012 Japan. 
a-nanasm@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

The present study aimed to elucidate the relationship between cancer stem cells
markers (CSCs), according to cell adhesion molecule (CD44) and glioma-associated 
oncogene homolog-1 (GLI1) expression, and clinicopathological factors and
prognosis in 38 patients with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) who underwent
hepatectomy. CD44 and GLI1 expression was examined by immunohistochemical
staining methods. The relationship with tumor angiogenesis or proliferation
activity was also analyzed. Positivity of CD44 was 18% and that of GLI1 was 39%, 
but there was no significant correlation between the expressions of both. On
macroscopic findings, CD44 expression in the periductal infiltration-type of ICC 
was significantly higher than in other types (p<0.01), and this type showed
significantly worse survival after hepatectomy. Positive expression of GLI1 was
significantly associated with older age. Although expression of neither CD44 nor 
GLI1 was significantly associated with disease-free survival, positive expression
of both CD44 and GLI1 led to a significantly lower 3-year disease-free survival
rate (0%; p<0.05). With respect to 5-year overall survival after hepatectomy,
expression of both CD44 and GLI1 was not significantly associated with survival
rate. CSCs might be useful markers for tumor-free survival in patients with ICC
after hepatectomy and further investigation in larger series is warranted.

PMID: 23645762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int Orthop. 2013 Jul;37(7):1399-404. doi: 10.1007/s00264-013-1902-9. Epub 2013
May 5.

Dexamethasone induces osteogenesis via regulation of hedgehog signalling
molecules in rat mesenchymal stem cells.

Ma X(1), Zhang X, Jia Y, Zu S, Han S, Xiao D, Sun H, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, 
Jinan 250013, China.

PURPOSE: Hedgehog signalling plays an important role during the development of
tissues and organs, including bone and limb. Dexamethasone (DEX), a synthetic and
widely used glucocorticoid, affects osteogenesis of bone marrow mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs), while the signalling pathway by which DEX affects osteoblast
differentiation remains obscure. This study aimed to investigate expressions of
hedgehog signalling molecules Shh, Ihh and Gli1 during DEX-induced osteogenesis
of rat MSCs in vitro.
METHODS: DEX promoted osteoblast differentiation of MSCs at 10(-8) mol/L from
seven days to 21 days, demonstrated by enhancing alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity and osteoblast-associated marker type I collagen expression during
osteoblastic differentiation. Gene and protein expressions of hedgehog signalling
molecules, Shh, Ihh and Gli1 were tested by RT-PCR and western blot analysis
during osteoblast differentiation.
RESULTS: Shh expression was increased compared to the control while Ihh and Gli1 
expressions were decreased on both mRNA and protein level during DEX-induced
osteoblast differentiation of MSCs from seven days to 21 days. Altogether, these 
data demonstrate that DEX can enhance Shh expression via a Gli1-independent
mechanism during osteoblast differentiation of MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that different patterns of hedgehog
signalling are involved in DEX-induced osteogenesis and these findings provide
insights into the mechanistic link between glucocorticoid-induced osteogenesis
and hedgehog signalling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3685673
PMID: 23645083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Brain Res. 2013 Jun 26;1518:26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.04.038. Epub 2013
Apr 28.

Umbilical cord blood cells regulate endogenous neural stem cell proliferation via
hedgehog signaling in hypoxic ischemic neonatal rats.

Wang XL(1), Zhao YS, Hu MY, Sun YQ, Chen YX, Bi XH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Imaging Center, Department of Imaging, Weifang Medical University,
Weifang, PR China.

Umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells (UCBMC) transplantation may improve
hypoxia-induced brain injury in neonatal rats, but the mechanism is unclear. This
study examines whether UCBMC promote neural stem cell (NSC) proliferation via the
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway. The rats underwent left carotid ligation 
followed by hypoxic stress. UCBMC were transplanted 24h after hypoxia ischemia
(HI), and immunohistochemistry, immmunoblotting, and morphology analyses were
performed at different time points after transplantation. Increased numbers of
NSCs were observed in the subventrical zone (SVZ) of the HI+UCBMC group, but
these increases were attenuated by cyclopamine treatment. There were significant 
increases in Shh and Gli1 protein levels after transplantation in the HI group
treated with UCBMC compared to HI rats treated with phosphate-buffered solution
(PBS). Significantly more Gli1(+)DAPI(+) cells were observed in the SVZ of the
HI+UCBMC group compared to the HI+PBS and N+UCBMC groups, but few Gli1(+)DAPI(+) 
cells were found in the SVZ of the HI+cyclopamine+UCBMC group. The HI+UCBMC group
had significantly less neuronal loss in the cortex and CA1 sector of the
hippocampus compared to the HI+PBS group, but more neuron loss was observed in
the HI+cyclopamine+UCBMC group compared to HI+UCBMC. These results indicate that 
UCBMC may promote NSC proliferation and alleviate brain injury in HI neonatal
rats via Shh signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23632377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061457. Print 2013.

Lithium inhibits tumorigenic potential of PDA cells through targeting
hedgehog-GLI signaling pathway.

Peng Z(1), Ji Z, Mei F, Lu M, Ou Y, Cheng X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines and School of Life Science and
Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.

Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a critical role in the initiation and
development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) and represents an
attractive target for PDA treatment. Lithium, a clinical mood stabilizer for
mental disorders, potently inhibits the activity of glycogen synthase kinase 3ß
(GSK3ß) that promotes the ubiquitin-dependent proteasome degradation of GLI1, an 
important downstream component of hedgehog signaling. Herein, we report that
lithium inhibits cell proliferation, blocks G1/S cell-cycle progression, induces 
cell apoptosis and suppresses tumorigenic potential of PDA cells through
down-regulation of the expression and activity of GLI1. Moreover, lithium
synergistically enhances the anti-cancer effect of gemcitabine. These findings
further our knowledge of mechanisms of action for lithium and provide a
potentially new therapeutic strategy for PDA through targeting GLI1.

PMCID: PMC3634073
PMID: 23626687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Neural Dev. 2013 Apr 26;8:8. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-8-8.

Temporal and spatial requirements of Smoothened in ventral midbrain neuronal
development.

Tang M(1), Luo SX, Tang V, Huang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have indicated that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) regulates
the expansion of dopaminergic (DA) progenitors and the subsequent generation of
mature DA neurons. This prevailing view has been based primarily on in vitro
culture results, and the exact in vivo function of Shh signaling in the
patterning and neurogenesis of the ventral midbrain (vMB) remains unclear.
METHODS: We characterized the transcriptional codes for the vMB progenitor
domains, and correlated them with the expression patterns of Shh signaling
effectors, including Shh, Smoothened, Patched, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3.
RESULTS: While Shh and its downstream effectors showed robust expression in the
neurogenic niche for DA progenitors at embryonic day (E)8 to E8.5, their
expression shifted to the lateral domains from E9.5 to E12.5. Consistent with
this dynamic change, conditional mutants with region-specific removal of the Shh 
receptor Smoothened in the vMB progenitors (Shh-Cre;Smo(fl/fl)) showed a
transient reduction in DA progenitors and DA neurons at E10.5, but had more
profound defects in neurons derived from the more lateral domains, including
those in the red nucleus, oculomotor nucleus, and raphe nuclei. Conversely,
constitutive activation of Smoothened signaling in vMB (Shh-Cre;SmoM2) showed
transient expansion of the same progenitor population. To further characterize
the nature of Shh-Smoothened signaling in vMB, we examined the BAT-GAL reporter
and the expression of Wnt1 in vMB, and found that the antagonistic effects of Shh
and Wnt signaling critically regulate the development of DA progenitors and DA
neurons.
CONCLUSION: These results highlight previously unrecognized effects of
Shh-Smoothened signaling in the region-specific neurogenesis within the vMB.

PMCID: PMC3680293
PMID: 23618354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Knee. 2014 Mar;21(2):553-6. doi: 10.1016/j.knee.2013.03.010. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Posterior femoral condylar offsets of a Chinese population.

Wang W(1), Tsai TY(2), Yue B(3), Kwon YM(2), Li G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA;
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Medical School of 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. (2)Bioengineering
Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (3)Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai, Shanghai, China.
(4)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
Electronic address: gli1@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: The effect of posterior condylar offset (PCO) on maximal flexion of
the knee after TKA is controversial. Another parameter, the posterior condylar
offset ratio (PCOR), has been recently introduced to describe the posterior
condylar geometry. This study measured the posterior femoral condyle geometry of 
a Chinese population and compared with those of a Western population published in
the literature.
METHODS: We measured the PCO and PCOR of 100 Chinese knees (50 males, 50
females). The distances from the anterior and posterior femoral shaft cortex line
to the most posterior femoral condyle tangent line were defined as the
anterior-posterior dimension (ACP) and posterior condylar offset (PCO). The PCOR 
was calculated as PCO/ACP. The measured PCO and PCOR were compared to those of a 
Western population reported in the literature.
RESULTS: The PCOs were 25.80±2.71 and 27.32±2.34 mm for the Chinese females and
males, respectively, where the PCO of the females was significantly smaller than 
that of the males (p<0.05). The PCORs were 0.47±0.04 and 0.46±0.03 for the
Chinese females and males, respectively, where the PCORs were similar among the
Chinese males and females (p>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: While the PCO of the Chinese females was smaller than that of the
males, their PCORs were similar. Compared to the data of a Western population
reported in literature, the PCO of the Chinese population is significantly
smaller, but the PCOR is significantly larger.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23587633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 24;288(21):15390-401. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.425249. Epub
2013 Apr 10.

Transcriptional regulation of serine/threonine protein kinase (AKT) genes by
glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1.

Agarwal NK(1), Qu C, Kunkalla K, Liu Y, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 5;288(27):19647. Kunkulla, Kranthi [corrected to Kunkalla, 
Kranthi].

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog signaling has been described in a growing number 
of cancers, including malignant lymphomas. Here, we report that canonical
Hedgehog signaling modulates the transcriptional expression of AKT genes and that
AKT1 is a direct transcriptional target of GLI1. We identified two putative
binding sites for GLI1 in the AKT1 promoter region and confirmed their
functionality using chromatin immunoprecipitation, luciferase reporter, and
site-directed mutagenesis assays. Moreover, we provide evidence that GLI1
contributes to the survival of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells and
that this effect occurs in part through promotion of the transcription of AKT
genes. This finding is of interest as constitutive activation of AKT has been
described in DLBCL, but causative factors that explain AKT expression in this
lymphoma type are not completely known. In summary, we demonstrated the existence
of a novel cross-talk at the transcriptional level between Hedgehog signaling and
AKT with biological significance in DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC3663557
PMID: 23580656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e61034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061034. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

The hedgehog receptor patched1 in T cells is dispensable for adaptive immunity in
mice.

Michel KD(1), Uhmann A, Dressel R, van den Brandt J, Hahn H, Reichardt HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Immunology, University of Göttingen
Medical School, Göttingen, Germany.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling modulates T cell development and function but its exact
role remains a matter of debate. To further address this issue we made use of
conditional knock-out mice in which the Hh receptor Patched1 (Ptch) is
inactivated in the T cell lineage. Thymocyte development was moderately
compromised by the deletion of Ptch as characterized by reduced numbers of CD4
and CD8 single-positive cells. In contrast, peripheral T cells were not affected.
Proliferation and IFN<U+03B3> secretion by Ptch-deficient T cells were indistinguishable
from controls irrespectively of whether we used strong or suboptimal conditions
for stimulation. Analysis of CTL and Treg cell functions did not reveal any
differences between both genotypes, and T cell apoptosis induced by
glucocorticoids or <U+03B3>-irradiation was also similar. Surprisingly, absence of Ptch 
did not lead to an activation of canonic Hh signaling in peripheral T cells as
indicated by unaltered expression levels of Gli1 and Gli2. To test whether we
could uncover any role of Ptch in T cells in vivo we subjected the mutant mice to
three different disease models, namely allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
mimicking graft-versus-host disease, allergic airway inflammation as a model of
asthma and growth of adoptively transferred melanoma cells as a means to test
tumor surveillance by the immune system. Nonetheless, we were neither able to
demonstrate any difference in the disease courses nor in any pathogenic parameter
in these three models of adaptive immunity. We therefore conclude that the Hh
receptor Ptch is dispensable for T cell function in vitro as well as in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3620050
PMID: 23577186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 1;73(11):3381-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4047. Epub
2013 Apr 10.

Hedgehog signaling alters reliance on EGF receptor signaling and mediates
anti-EGFR therapeutic resistance in head and neck cancer.

Keysar SB(1), Le PN, Anderson RT, Morton JJ, Bowles DW, Paylor JJ, Vogler BW,
Thorburn J, Fernandez P, Glogowska MJ, Takimoto SM, Sehrt DB, Gan GN,
Eagles-Soukup JR, Serracino H, Hirsch FR, Lucia MS, Thorburn A, Song JI, Wang XJ,
Jimeno A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Departments of
Pharmacology, Pathology, Radiation Oncology, and Otolaryngology, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The EGF receptor (EGFR)-directed monoclonal antibody cetuximab is the only
targeted therapy approved for the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck (HNSCC) but is only effective in a minority of patients.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been implicated as a drug
resistance mechanism in multiple cancers, and the EGFR and Hedgehog pathways
(HhP) are relevant to this process, but the interplay between the two pathways
has not been defined in HNSCC. Here, we show that HNSCC cells that were naturally
sensitive to EGFR inhibition over time developed increased expression of the HhP 
transcription factor GLI1 as they became resistant after long-term EGFR inhibitor
exposure. This robustly correlated with an increase in vimentin expression.
Conversely, the HhP negatively regulated an EGFR-dependent, EMT-like state in
HNSCC cells, and pharmacologic or genetic inhibition of HhP signaling pushed
cells further into an EGFR-dependent phenotype, increasing expression of ZEB1 and
VIM. In vivo treatment with cetuximab resulted in tumor shrinkage in four of six 
HNSCC patient-derived xenografts; however, they eventually regrew. Cetuximab in
combination with the HhP inhibitor IPI-926 eliminated tumors in two cases and
significantly delayed regrowth in the other two cases. Expression of EMT genes
TWIST and ZEB2 was increased in sensitive xenografts, suggesting a possible
resistant mesenchymal population. In summary, we report that EGFR-dependent HNSCC
cells can undergo both EGFR-dependent and -independent EMT and HhP signaling is a
regulator in both processes. Cetuximab plus IPI-926 forces tumor cells into an
EGFR-dependent state, delaying or completely blocking tumor recurrence.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3674118
PMID: 23576557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Oncogenesis. 2013 Apr 8;2:e42. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.5.

NVP-LDE-225 (Erismodegib) inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and human
prostate cancer stem cell growth in NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice by regulating Bmi-1 
and microRNA-128.

Nanta R(1), Kumar D, Meeker D, Rodova M, Van Veldhuizen PJ, Shankar S, Srivastava
RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS, USA.

Prostate cancer stem cells (CSCs) are defined by their extensive self-renewal,
differentiation and tumor initiation properties. It is now clear that CSCs are
involved in tumor growth and recurrence, and resistance to conventional
treatments. The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway has a crucial role in stemness and
tumorigenesis. Thus, the strategy that suppresses stemness and consequently
tumorigenic potential of CSCs could be considered for the management of prostate 
cancer. The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms, by
which NVP-LDE-225/Erismodegib (smoothened inhibitor) regulates stem cell
characteristics and tumor growth in prostate cancer. The effects of NVP-LDE-225
on CSC's viability, sphere formation, apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and tumor growth in NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice were examined.
NVP-LDE-225 inhibited cell viability and spheroid formation, and induced
apoptosis by activation of caspase-3 and cleavage of poly-ADP ribose polymerase
(PARP). NVP-LDE-225 induced expression of Bax and Bak, and inhibited the
expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, XIAP, cIAP1, cIAP2 and survivin. NVP-LDE-225
inhibited Gli transcriptional activity, Gli-DNA interaction and the expression of
Gli1, Gli2, Patched1 and Patched-2 in prostate CSCs. Interestingly, NVP-LDE-225
induced PDCD4 and apoptosis and inhibited cell viability by suppressing miR-21.
Furthermore, NVP-LDE-225 inhibited pluripotency-maintaining factors Nanog, Oct-4,
c-Myc and Sox-2. The inhibition of Bmi-1 by NVP-LDE-225 was regulated by
upregulation of miR-128. NVP-LDE-225 suppressed EMT by upregulating E-cadherin
and inhibiting N-cadherin, Snail, Slug and Zeb1 by regulating the miR-200 family.
Finally, NVP-LDE-225 inhibited CSC tumor growth, which was associated with the
suppression of Gli1, Gli2, Patched-1, Patched-2, Cyclin D1, Bmi-1 and PCNA and
cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP in tumor tissues derived from NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null 
mice. Overall, our findings suggest that inhibition of the Shh signaling pathway 
could therefore be a novel therapeutic option in treating prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3641359
PMID: 23567619  [PubMed]


40. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 8;13:11. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-11.

Expression of SHH signaling molecules in the developing human primary dentition.

Hu X(1), Zhang S, Chen G, Lin C, Huang Z, Chen Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology, College of Life
Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Our current knowledge on tooth development derives primarily from
studies in mice. Very little is known about gene expression and function during
human odontogenesis. Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling has been demonstrated to play
crucial roles in the development of multiple organs in mice, including the tooth.
However, if SHH signaling molecules are expressed and function in the developing 
human embryonic tooth remain unknown.
RESULTS: We conducted microarray assay to reveal the expression profile of SHH
signaling pathway molecules. We then used in situ hybridization to validate and
reveal spatial and temporal expression patterns of a number of selected
molecules, including SHH, PTC1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, in the developing
human embryonic tooth germs, and compared them with that in mice. We found that
all these genes exhibit similar but slightly distinct expression patterns in the 
human and mouse tooth germ at the cap and bell stages.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the operation of active SHH signaling in the
developing human tooth and suggest a conserved function of SHH signaling pathway 
during human odontogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3639830
PMID: 23566240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Cancer. 2013 Oct 15;133(8):1955-66. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28193. Epub 2013 May
6.

TAK-441, a novel investigational smoothened antagonist, delays
castration-resistant progression in prostate cancer by disrupting paracrine
hedgehog signaling.

Ibuki N(1), Ghaffari M, Pandey M, Iu I, Fazli L, Kashiwagi M, Tojo H, Nakanishi
O, Gleave ME, Cox ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is a highly conserved intercellular and intracellular
communication mechanism that governs organogenesis and is dysregulated in cancers
of numerous tissues, including prostate. Up-regulated expression of the Hh
ligands, Sonic (Shh) and Desert (Dhh), has been reported in androgen-deprived and
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In a cohort of therapy naive, short-
and long-term neoadjuvant hormone therapy-treated (NHT), and CRPC specimens, we
observed elevated Dhh expression predominantly in long-term NHT specimens and
elevated Shh expression predominantly in CRPC specimens. Together with previously
demonstrated reciprocal signaling between Shh-producing prostate cancer (PCa)
cells and urogenital mesenchymal fibroblasts, these results suggest that
castration-induced Hh expression promotes CRPC progression through reciprocal
paracrine signaling within the tumor microenvironment. We tested whether the
orally available Smoothened (Smo) antagonist, TAK-441, could impair
castration-resistant progression of LNCaP PCa xenografts by disrupting paracrine 
Hh signaling. Although TAK-441 or cyclopamine did not affect androgen
withdrawal-induced Shh up-regulation or viability of LNCaP cells,
castration-resistant progression of LNCaP xenografts was significantly delayed in
animals treated with TAK-441. In TAK-441-treated xenografts, expression of murine
orthologs of the Hh-activated genes, Gli1, Gli2 and Ptch1, was substantially
suppressed, while expression of the corresponding human orthologs was unaffected.
As androgen-deprived LNCaP cells up-regulate Shh expression, but are not
sensitive to Smo antagonists, these studies indicate that TAK-441 leads to
delayed castration-resistant progression of LNCaP xenografts by disrupting
paracrine Hh signaling with the tumor stroma. Thus, paracrine Hh signaling may
offer unique opportunities for prognostic biomarker development, drug targeting
and therapeutic response monitoring of PCa progression.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23564295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jun;29(6):2401-7. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2385. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Curcumin reverses the epithelial-mesenchymal transition of pancreatic cancer
cells by inhibiting the Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Sun XD(1), Liu XE, Huang DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's
Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310014, P.R. China.

Curcumin, a phenolic compound extracted from Zingiberaceae turmeric, has strong
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and antitumor properties. However, the
anticarcinogenic mechanism of curcumin has yet to be fully elucidated.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) induced by transforming growth factor-ß1 
(TGF-ß1) is involved in the promotion of tumor invasion and metastasis, and is
closely related to the drug resistance of tumor cells. The abnormal activation of
Hedgehog signaling also plays an important role in tumorigenesis and metastasis. 
In order to investigate whether curcumin can reverse the TGF-ß1-stimulated EMT of
pancreatic cancer PANC-1 cells, and its possible mechanism, the pancreatic cancer
cell line PANC-1 was stimulated with TGF-ß1 (5 ng/ml) for 7 days to induce
formation of EMT, and the TGF-ß1-stimulated PANC-1 cells were treated with
different concentrations of curcumin (10, 20 and 30 µmol/ml) for 48 h. The growth
inhibition rate of the cells was measured by MTT assay, apoptosis was detected by
flow cytometry, the expression levels of Shh, GLI1, E-cadherin and vimentin were 
detected by western blot analysis, and cell invasion and migration ability were
examined by transwell cell invasion assay and wound healing assay. Following
stimulation with TGF-ß1, the expression levels of Shh, GLI1 and vimentin in the
TGF-ß1-stimulated group were significantly increased, compared with those in the 
control group (P<0.01, respectively). The expression levels of E-cadherin in the 
TGF-ß1-stimulated group were significantly decreased, compared with those in the 
control group (P<0.01). The TGF-ß1-stimulated PANC-1 cells were treated with
curcumin and the results showed that curcumin significantly inhibited
TGF-ß1-stimulated PANC-1 cell proliferation and induced apoptosis, compared with 
other groups (P<0.01), and the expression levels of Shh, GLI1 and vimentin in the
curcumin-treated group were significantly decreased compared with those in the
control group (P<0.01, respectively). The expression level of E-cadherin in the
curcumin-treated group was significantly increased compared with that in the
control group (P<0.01). Cell invasion in the curcumin-treated group (30 µmol/ml) 
was significantly decreased compared with that in the control group (P<0.01). The
scratch wounds in the curcumin-treated group healed slower compared with those in
the control group (P<0.01). Curcumin significantly inhibited the invasion and
migration of TGF-ß1-stimulated PANC-1 cells. These results indicate that curcumin
can inhibit the proliferation of TGF-ß1-stimulated PANC-1 cells, it can induce
apoptosis, and reverse the EMT. The possible underlying molecular mechanisms are 
through inhibition of the Shh-GLI1 signaling pathway.

PMID: 23563640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060145. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Expression of the glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (gli1) in advanced serous 
ovarian cancer is associated with unfavorable overall survival.

Ciucci A(1), De Stefano I, Vellone VG, Lisi L, Bottoni C, Scambia G, Zannoni GF, 
Gallo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy.

Recent evidence links aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling with the
pathogenesis of several cancers including medulloblastoma, glioblastoma, melanoma
as well as pancreas, colorectal, and prostate carcinomas. Here we investigated
the role of the transcription factor Gli1 in ovarian cancer. To this end, the
expression profile of Gli1 was examined in normal ovaries, ovarian tumors, and
ovarian cancer cell lines, and the in vitro effects of a specific Hh-pathway
blocker, KAAD-cyclopamine, or a specific Gli1 inhibitor (GANT58) on cell
proliferation and on Hh target gene expression were also assessed. Results
obtained showed that epithelial cells in ovarian cancer tissue express
significantly higher levels of nuclear Gli1 than in normal ovarian tissue, where 
the protein was almost undetectable. In addition, multivariate analysis showed
that nuclear Gli1 was independently associated to poor survival in advanced
serous ovarian cancer patients (HR = 2.2, 95%CI 1.0-5.1, p = 0.04). In vitro
experiments demonstrated Gli1 expression in the three ovarian carcinoma cell
lines tested, A2780, SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3. Remarkably, although KAAD-cyclopamine
led to decreased cell proliferation, this treatment did not inhibit hedgehog
target gene expression in any of the three ovarian cancer cell lines, suggesting 
that the inhibition of cell proliferation was a nonspecific or toxic effect. In
line with these data, no differences on cell proliferation were observed when
cell lines were treated with GANT58. Overall, our clinical data support the role 
of Gli1 as a prognostic marker in advanced serous ovarian cancer and as a
possible therapeutic target in this disease. However, our in vitro findings draw 
attention to the need for selection of appropriate experimental models that
accurately represent human tumor for testing future therapies involving Hh
pathway inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3610749
PMID: 23555905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(3):e1001505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001505. Epub 2013 Mar 
12.

Secretion and signaling activities of lipoprotein-associated hedgehog and
non-sterol-modified hedgehog in flies and mammals.

Palm W(1), Swierczynska MM, Kumari V, Ehrhart-Bornstein M, Bornstein SR, Eaton S.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.

Hedgehog (Hh) proteins control animal development and tissue homeostasis. They
activate gene expression by regulating processing, stability, and activation of
Gli/Cubitus interruptus (Ci) transcription factors. Hh proteins are secreted and 
spread through tissue, despite becoming covalently linked to sterol during
processing. Multiple mechanisms have been proposed to release Hh proteins in
distinct forms; in Drosophila, lipoproteins facilitate long-range Hh mobilization
but also contain lipids that repress the pathway. Here, we show that mammalian
lipoproteins have conserved roles in Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) release and pathway
repression. We demonstrate that lipoprotein-associated forms of Hh and Shh
specifically block lipoprotein-mediated pathway inhibition. We also identify a
second conserved release form that is not sterol-modified and can be released
independently of lipoproteins (Hh-N*/Shh-N*). Lipoprotein-associated Hh/Shh and
Hh-N*/Shh-N* have complementary and synergistic functions. In Drosophila wing
imaginal discs, lipoprotein-associated Hh increases the amount of full-length Ci,
but is insufficient for target gene activation. However, small amounts of
non-sterol-modified Hh synergize with lipoprotein-associated Hh to fully activate
the pathway and allow target gene expression. The existence of Hh secretion forms
with distinct signaling activities suggests a novel mechanism for generating a
diversity of Hh responses.

PMCID: PMC3595218
PMID: 23554573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Dig Dis. 2013 Aug;14(8):417-24. doi: 10.1111/1751-2980.12060.

Aberrant expression of sonic hedgehog pathway in colon cancer and melanosis coli.

Wang ZC(1), Gao J, Zi SM, Yang M, Du P, Cui L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anorectal Surgery and Colorectal Cancer Center, Xin Hua Hospital
affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway correlated with the
development of colon cancer and melanosis coli.
METHODS: Protein and mRNA levels of Hh signaling pathway components (sonic
hedgehog [Shh], protein patched homolog 1 [Ptch 1], GLI family zinc finger 1 [Gli
1] and suppressor of fused homolog [Drosophila] [Sufu]) in 127 patients with
colon cancer, 36 with melanosis coli and 20 adjacent normal mucosal tissues taken
from surgical specimens were evaluated using antibody staining and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In adjacent normal tissue Shh and Ptch1, but not Gli1 or Sufu, were
weakly expressed and mainly in the lining epithelium of the colonic mucosa. In
cancerous tissues Shh and Gli1 were uniformly strong while Ptch1 was patchy and
weak, and Sufu uniformly weak, which paralleled their levels of corresponding
mRNA. Elevated protein levels of Shh and Ptch were significantly associated with 
mucinous colonic tissues. Elevated Sufu protein levels were positively correlated
with the diameter and invasion of the tumor. In patients with melanosis coli,
mRNA levels of Shh, Ptch1, Gli1 and Sufu were very low, which was similar to
those of adjacent normal tissues; but protein levels of Shh, Ptch1 and Gli1, but 
not Sufu, were high, which was similar to those of cancerous tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: The mRNA and protein levels of Hh pathway components are aberrantly 
elevated in colon cancer, which may be the potential molecular classification
markers. Further studies are required to determine the role of melanosis coli in 
the colon tumorigenesis.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Digestive Diseases © 2013 Wiley Publishing Asia
Pty Ltd and Chinese Medical Association Shanghai Branch, Chinese Society of
Gastroenterology, Renji Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine.

PMID: 23551431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cancer Lett. 2013 Aug 19;336(2):347-58. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.03.025. Epub
2013 Mar 31.

Guggulsterone sensitizes glioblastoma cells to Sonic hedgehog inhibitor SANT-1
induced apoptosis in a Ras/NF<U+03BA>B dependent manner.

Dixit D(1), Ghildiyal R, Anto NP, Ghosh S, Sharma V, Sen E.

Author information: 
(1)National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Haryana 122 050, India.

Since Shh pathway effector, Gli1, is overexpressed in gliomas, we investigated
the effect of novel Shh inhibitor SANT-1 on glioma cell viability. Though SANT-1 
failed to induce apoptosis, it reduced proliferation of glioma stem-like cells.
Apart from canonical Shh cascade, Gli1 is also induced by non-canonical pathways 
including NF<U+03BA>B. Therefore, a combinatorial strategy with Ras/NF<U+03BA>B inhibitor,
Guggulsterone, was employed to enhance effectiveness of SANT-1. Guggulsterone
inhibited Ras and NF<U+03BA>B activity and sensitized cells to SANT-1 induced apoptosis 
via intrinsic apoptotic mechanism. Inhibition of either Ras or NF<U+03BA>B activity was 
sufficient to sensitize cells to SANT-1. Guggulsterone induced ERK activation
also contributed to Caspase-9 activation. Since SANT-1 and Guggulsterone
differentially target stem-like and non-stem glioma cells respectively, this
combination warrants investigation as an effective anti-glioma therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23548480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2013 Mar;14(2):133-40.

Essential role of Gli proteins in glioblastoma multiforme.

Santoni M(1), Burattini L, Nabissi M, Morelli MB, Berardi R, Santoni G, Cascinu
S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica di Oncologia Medica, AOU Ospedali Riuniti, Universita Politecnica
delle Marche, via Conca, 60020, Ancona, Italy. mattymo@alice.it

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant primary brain
tumor in adults. Despite several advances, little is known about GBM-specific
aberrant signalling processes. The hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway plays a
central role in GBM pathogenesis and tumor progression. Its activation is
mediated by sonic hedgehog (Shh), which binds to its receptor patched, PTCH,
promoting Gli1 activation. Gli1 is a member of the Kruppel family of zinc finger 
transcription factors. Hh/Gli1 axis controls glioma stem cells (GSCs) behaviour, 
which is essential to GBM chemoand radioresistance. Thus, Gli1 modulates the
expression of stemness genes and the self-renewal of CD133(+) GSCs. The
activation of Hh/Gli1 in GSCs seems to be dependent on the insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) signaling, which also contributes to intrinsic and acquired
resistance of GSCs to temozolomide (TMZ). Beyond Hh signals, Gli1 activity is
also regulated by several elements, including Ras, Myc, Akt, p53 and PTEN.
Recently, a truncated variant of Gli1 (tGli1) has been demonstrated to gain the
ability to regulate expression of genes that are not modulated by Gli1, such as
the migration/invasion-associated CD24 or the human vascular endothelial growth
factor-A (VEGF-A), leading to their upregulation. This review will summarize the 
role of Gli proteins in GBM tumorigenesis and their potential impact on GBM
therapy and treatment resistance.

PMID: 23544423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Jun;11(6):604-15. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0441. Epub
2013 Mar 22.

Noncanonical regulation of the Hedgehog mediator GLI1 by c-MYC in Burkitt
lymphoma.

Yoon JW(1), Gallant M, Lamm ML, Iannaccone S, Vieux KF, Proytcheva M, Hyjek E,
Iannaccone P, Walterhouse D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Ann & Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of
Chicago Research Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Illinois 60614, USA.

Although Hedgehog signaling plays a major role in GLI1 transcription, there is
now evidence suggesting that other pathways/genes, such as c-MYC, may also
regulate GLI1 expression. We initiated studies in Burkitt lymphoma cells, which
constitutively express c-MYC due to a chromosomal translocation, to determine
whether Hedgehog or c-MYC regulates GLI1 expression. We show that all Burkitt
lymphoma cell lines tested express GLI1, PTCH1, and SMO and that five of six
Burkitt lymphomas express GLI1. Exposure to Sonic or Indian Hedgehog or
cyclopamine (SMO inhibitor) does not modulate GLI1 expression, cell
proliferation, or apoptosis in most Burkitt lymphoma cell lines. Sequence
analysis of PTCH1, SMO, and SuFu failed to show mutations that might explain the 
lack of Hedgehog responsiveness, and we did not detect primary cilia, which may
contribute to it. We show that c-MYC interacts with the 5'-regulatory region of
GLI1, using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, and E-box-dependent
transcriptional activation of GLI1 by c-MYC in NIH3T3 and HeLa cells. The c-MYC
small-molecule inhibitor 10058-F4 downregulates GLI1 mRNA and protein and reduces
the viability of Burkitt lymphoma cells. Inhibition of GLI1 by GANT61 increases
apoptosis and reduces viability of some Burkitt lymphoma cells. Collectively, our
data provide evidence that c-MYC directly regulates GLI1 and support an
antiapoptotic role for GLI1 in Burkitt lymphoma. Burkitt lymphoma cells do not
seem to be Hedgehog responsive. These findings suggest a mechanism for resistance
to SMO inhibitors and have implications for using SMO inhibitors to treat human
cancers.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 23525267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58935. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058935. Epub 2013 Mar 8.

Gli1 deletion prevents Helicobacter-induced gastric metaplasia and expansion of
myeloid cell subsets.

El-Zaatari M(1), Kao JY, Tessier A, Bai L, Hayes MM, Fontaine C, Eaton KA,
Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Chronic inflammation in the stomach induces metaplasia, the pre-cancerous lesion 
that precedes inflammation-driven neoplastic transformation. While Hedgehog
signaling contributes to the initiation of some cancers, its role in gastric
transformation remains poorly defined. We found that Helicobacter-infected
C57BL/6 mice develop extensive mucous cell metaplasia at 6 month but not at 2
months post-infection. Gastric metaplasia coincided with the appearance of
CD45(+)MHCII(+)CD11b(+)CD11c(+) myeloid cells that were normally not present in
the chronic gastritis at 2 months. The myeloid regulatory gene Schlafen-4 was
identified in a microarray analysis comparing infected WT versus Gli1 null mice
and was expressed in the CD11b(+)CD11c(+) myeloid population. Moreover this same 
population expressed IL-1ß and TNFa pro-inflammatory cytokines. By 6 months, the 
mucous neck cell metaplasia (SPEM) expressed IL-6, phosphorylated STAT3 and the
proliferative marker Ki67. Expression was not observed in Gli1 mutant mice
consistent with the requirement of Gli1 to induce this pre-neoplastic phenotype. 
Ectopic Shh ligand expression alone was not sufficient to induce SPEM, but with
Helicobacter infection synergistically increased the histologic severity observed
with the inflammation. Therefore Hedgehog signaling is required, but is not
sufficient to generate pre-neoplastic changes during chronic gastritis.
Gli1-dependent myeloid cell differentiation plays a pivotal role in the
appearance of myeloid cell subtypes ostensibly required for SPEM development.
Moreover, it suggests that therapies capable of targeting this phenotypic switch 
might prevent progression to metaplasia, the pre-neoplastic change that develops 
prior to dysplasia and gastric cancer, which also occurs in other
epithelial-derived neoplasias initiated by chronic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3592845
PMID: 23520544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 26;288(17):11824-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.432302. Epub
2013 Mar 18.

Nonclassical activation of Hedgehog signaling enhances multidrug resistance and
makes cancer cells refractory to Smoothened-targeting Hedgehog inhibition.

Das S(1), Samant RS, Shevde LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,Birmingham,
Alabama 35233, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is critical in normal development. However, it has been
reported to be up-regulated in numerous cancers and implicated in tumorigenicity 
and metastasis. Classical activation of Hh signaling initiated by Hh ligands
results in activation of Smoothened (SMOH) and culminates in the activation of
the GLI transcription factors. Classical Hh signaling is autocrine or paracrine
(involving interaction between tumor cells and their stroma/microenvironment).
The tumor milieu is rich in inflammatory cytokines that can modulate tumor cell
behavior. Here, we show for the first time that the Hh pathway can be
nonclassically up-regulated by the inflammatory cytokine, osteopontin (OPN).
OPN-initiated Akt-GSK3ß signaling mediates the subcellular distribution and
activation of GLI1 resulting in the modulation of epithelial mesenchymal
plasticity and drug resistance. Interestingly, the SMOH inhibitor cyclopamine was
unable to uncouple the effects of OPN on Hh signaling, indicating that OPN
nonclassically activates GLI-mediated transcription. Given the fact that OPN is
itself transcriptionally activated upon Hh signaling, our current findings
highlight the possibility of a feedforward vicious cycle such that the Hh pathway
might be turned on nonclassically by stimuli from the tumor milieu. Thus, drugs
that target the classical Hh ligand-mediated activation of Hh signaling may be
compromised in their ability to interfere with the functioning of the pathway.

PMCID: PMC3636870
PMID: 23508962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Apr;5(4):483-5. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201302505. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

GLI1 finds a new role in cancer stem cell biology.

Fernandez-Zapico ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology Research, Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. fernandezzapico.martin@mayo.edu

Comment on
    EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Apr;5(4):488-508.

PMCID: PMC3628101
PMID: 23505092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Hepatology. 2013 Sep;58(3):995-1010. doi: 10.1002/hep.26394. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Hedgehog signaling pathway regulates autophagy in human hepatocellular carcinoma 
cells.

Wang Y(1), Han C, Lu L, Magliato S, Wu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in embryonic development and in
the regulation of a variety of cellular functions. Aberrant activation of Hh
signaling has been implicated in several human cancers including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). In this study we examined the pathobiological functions and
molecular mechanisms of the Hh signaling pathway in HCC cells. Treatment of
cultured human HCC cells (Huh7, Hep3B, and HepG2) with the Hh signaling ligand
(recombinant Shh) or agonist, SAG and purmorphamine, prevented the induction of
autophagy. In contrast, GANT61 (a small molecule inhibitor of Gli1 and Gli2)
induced autophagy, as determined by immunoblotting for microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3 (LC3) and p62, GFP-LC3 puncta, monodansylcadaverine (MDC)
staining, and transmission electron microscopy. Hh inhibition-induced autophagy
was associated with up-regulation of Bnip3, as determined by immunoblotting and
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Knockdown of Bnip3 by RNAi
impaired GANT61-induced autophagy. Additionally, Hh inhibition-induced autophagy 
was associated with Bnip3-mediated displacement of Bcl-2 from Beclin-1, as
determined by immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation assays. Furthermore,
inhibition of Hh signaling increased HCC cell apoptosis and decreased cell
viability, as determined by caspase and WST-1 assays. Pharmacological or genetic 
inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine (3-MA) or Beclin-1 small interfering
RNA (siRNA) partially suppressed GANT61-induced cell apoptosis and cytotoxicity. 
In a tumor xenograft model using SCID mice inoculated with Huh7 cells,
administration of GANT61 inhibited tumor formation and decreased tumor volume;
this effect was partially blocked by the autophagy inhibitor, 3-MA.CONCLUSION:
These findings provide novel evidence that Hh inhibition induces autophagy
through up-regulation of Bnip3 and that this mechanism contributes to apoptosis. 
Therefore, the status of autophagy is a key factor that determines the
therapeutic response to Hh-targeted therapies.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3706478
PMID: 23504944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 15;19(8):2014-24. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0349.
Epub 2013 Mar 14.

The prognostic significance and therapeutic potential of hedgehog signaling in
intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma.

Tang L(1), Tan YX, Jiang BG, Pan YF, Li SX, Yang GZ, Wang M, Wang Q, Zhang J,
Zhou WP, Dong LW, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
P.R. China.

PURPOSE: The correlation of the hedgehog signaling pathway with the progression, 
prognosis, and therapeutics of intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma (ICC) has
not been well documented. The study aimed to investigate the expression,
prognostic significance, and therapeutic value of hedgehog components in ICC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Two independent cohorts of 200 patients with ICC were
enrolled. By real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry assay, hedgehog components
expression was evaluated. The prognostic values of hedgehog proteins were
identified and verified. Cyclopamine or siRNA-targeting Gli was used to block the
hedgehog signaling. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were observed by CCK8, cell 
cycle, and annexin V staining assays. In vivo murine tumor model was used to
evaluate the role of hedgehog in ICC.
RESULTS: In ICC tissues, the Gli1 nuclear immune-intensity was associated with
intrahepatic metastasis and the expression of Gli2 was associated with
intrahepatic metastasis, venous invasion, and Unio Internationale Contra Cancrum 
(UICC) pT characteristics. In survival analysis, high Gli1 or Gli2 expressers had
an unfavorable overall survival (OS) prognosis and a shorter disease-free
survival (DFS) than those with low expression. In multivariate analysis, Gli1
expression was found to be an independent prognostic factor of OS, which was
validated by another independent cohort. Furthermore, blocking the hedgehog
signaling by cyclopamine or siRNA-targeting Gli1 resulted in apoptosis and growth
inhibition in ICC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows, for the first time, activation of hedgehog pathway
associated with the progression and metastasis in ICC, which may provide
prognostic and therapeutic values for this tumor.

PMID: 23493353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jul 28;335(2):289-98. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.02.041. Epub
2013 Feb 26.

Protein-bound polysaccharide decreases invasiveness and proliferation in
pancreatic cancer by inhibition of hedgehog signaling and HIF-1a pathways under
hypoxia.

Onishi H(1), Morisaki T, Nakao F, Odate S, Morisaki T, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. ohnishi@surg1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

To develop an effective therapeutic approach to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
(PDAC), we focused on the antitumor mechanism of protein-bound polysaccharide
(PSK) under hypoxia. PSK decreased proliferation in PDAC cells under hypoxia but 
not normoxia. PSK also showed anti-tumor effects in vivo, inhibited invasiveness 
of PDAC cells, and decreased the expression of HIF-1a and hedgehog (Hh)
signaling-related molecules under hypoxia. Inhibition of HIF-1a and Hh signaling 
reduced proliferation and invasiveness in PDAC cells under hypoxia. In
conclusion, we found new PSK-related pathways in invasiveness and proliferation
in PDAC under hypoxia. PSK may be a promising therapeutic drug to treat
refractory PDAC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57346. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057346. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Gli as a novel therapeutic target in malignant pleural mesothelioma.

Li H(1), Lui N, Cheng T, Tseng HH, Yue D, Giroux-Leprieur E, Do HT, Sheng Q, Jin 
JQ, Luh TW, Jablons DM, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Program, Department of Surgery, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly aggressive tumor with poor
prognosis. Current treatment is rarely curative, thus novel meaningful therapies 
are urgently needed. Inhibition of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling at the cell membrane
level in several cancers has shown anti-cancer activity in recent clinical
studies. Evidence of Hh-independent Gli activation suggests Gli as a more potent 
therapeutic target. The current study is aimed to evaluate the potential of Gli
as a therapeutic target to treat MPM. The expression profiles of Gli factors and 
other Hh signaling components were characterized in 46 MPM patient tissue samples
by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Cultured cell lines were employed to
investigate the requirement of Gli activation in tumor cell growth by inhibiting 
Gli through siRNA or a novel small molecule Gli inhibitor (Gli-I). A xenograft
model was used to evaluate Gli-I in vivo. In addition, a side by side comparison 
between Gli and Smoothened (Smo) inhibition was conducted in vitro using siRNA
and small molecule inhibitors. Our study reported aberrant Gli1 and Gli2
activation in a large majority of tissues. Inhibition of Gli by siRNAs or Gli-I
suppressed cell growth dramatically both in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of Gli 
exhibited better cytotoxicity than that of Smo by siRNA and small molecule
inhibitors vismodegib and cyclopamine. Combination of Gli-I and pemetrexed, as
well as Gli-I and vismodegib demonstrated synergistic effects in suppression of
MPM proliferation in vitro. In summary, Gli activation plays a critical role in
MPM. Inhibition of Gli function holds strong potential to become a novel,
clinically effective approach to treat MPM.

PMCID: PMC3590216
PMID: 23483902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Stem Cell Res Ther. 2012 Feb 19;2(1):1-8.

Blockade of Autocrine TGF-ß Signaling Inhibits Stem Cell Phenotype, Survival, and
Metastasis of Murine Breast Cancer Cells.

Liu Z(1), Bandyopadhyay A, Nichols RW, Wang L, Hinck AP, Wang S, Sun LZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA ; Department of Breast Surgery, the
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road,
210029 Nanjing, China.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß) signaling has been implicated in driving 
tumor progression and metastasis by inducing stem cell-like features in some
human cancer cell lines. In this study, we have utilized a novel murine cell line
NMuMG-ST, which acquired cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotypes during spontaneous
transformation of the untransformed murine mammary cell line NMuMG, to
investigate the role of autocrine TGF-ß signaling in regulating their survival,
metastatic ability, and the maintenance of cancer stem cell characteristics. We
have retrovirally transduced a dominant-negative TGF-ß type II receptor (DNRII)
into the NMuMG-ST cell to abrogate autocrine TGF-ß signaling. The expression of
DNRII reduced TGF-ß sensitivity of the NMuMG-ST cells in various cell-based
assays. The blockade of autocrine TGF-ß signaling reduced the ability of the cell
to grow anchorage-independently and to resist serum deprivation-induced
apoptosis. These phenotypes were associated with reduced levels of active and
phosphorylated AKT and ERK, and Gli1 expression suggesting that these pathways
contribute to the growth and survival of this model system. More interestingly,
the abrogation of autocrine TGF-ß signaling also led to the attenuation of
several features associated with mammary stem cells including
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, mammosphere formation, and expression of stem 
cell markers. When xenografted in athymic nude mice, the DNRII cells were also
found to undergo apoptosis and induced significantly lower lung metastasis burden
than the control cells even though they formed similar size of xenograft tumors. 
Thus, our results indicate that autocrine TGF-ß signaling is involved in the
maintenance and survival of stem-like cell population resulting in the enhanced
metastatic ability of the murine breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3593047
PMID: 23482850  [PubMed]


57. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Jun;15(6):691-706. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not011. Epub 2013 Mar
12.

NPV-LDE-225 (Erismodegib) inhibits epithelial mesenchymal transition and
self-renewal of glioblastoma initiating cells by regulating miR-21, miR-128, and 
miR-200.

Fu J(1), Rodova M, Nanta R, Meeker D, Van Veldhuizen PJ, Srivastava RK, Shankar
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common form of primary brain
tumor, often characterized by poor survival. Glioblastoma initiating cells (GICs)
regulate self-renewal, differentiation, and tumor initiation properties and are
involved in tumor growth, recurrence, and resistance to conventional treatments. 
The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is essential for normal development
and embryonic morphogenesis. The objectives of this study were to examine the
molecular mechanisms by which GIC characteristics are regulated by NPV-LDE-225
(Smoothened inhibitor;
(2,2'-[[dihydro-2-(4-pyridinyl)-1,3(2H,4H)-pyrimidinediyl]bis(methylene)]bis[N,N-
dimethylbenzenamine).
METHODS: Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by XTT and annexin
V-propidium iodide assay, respectively. Gli translocation and transcriptional
activities were measured by immunofluorescence and luciferase assay,
respectively. Gene and protein expressions were measured by quantitative
real-time PCR and Western blot analyses, respectively.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: NPV-LDE-225 inhibited cell viability, neurosphere
formation, and Gli transcriptional activity and induced apoptosis by activation
of caspase-3 and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. NPV-LDE-225 increased
the expression of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-R1/DR4, TRAIL-R2/DR5, and Fas and decreased the expression of platelet
derived growth factor receptor-a and Bcl2, and these effects were abrogated by
Gli1 plus Gli2 short hairpin RNAs. NPV-LDE-225 enhanced the therapeutic potential
of FasL and TRAIL by upregulating Fas and DR4/5, respectively. Interestingly,
NPV-LDE-225 induced expression of programmed cell death 4 and apoptosis and
inhibited cell viability by suppressing micro RNA (miR)-21. Furthermore,
NPV-LDE-225 inhibited pluripotency-maintaining factors Nanog, Oct4, Sox2, and
cMyc. The inhibition of Bmi1 by NPV-LDE-225 was regulated by induction of
miR-128. Finally, NPV-LDE-225 suppressed epithelial-mesenchymal transition by
upregulating E-cadherin and inhibiting N-cadherin, Snail, Slug, and Zeb1 through 
modulating the miR-200 family. Our data highlight the importance of the SHH
pathway for self-renewal and early metastasis of GICs.

PMCID: PMC3661095
PMID: 23482671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 26;288(17):11786-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438846. Epub
2013 Mar 12.

Loss of the transcription factor GLI1 identifies a signaling network in the tumor
microenvironment mediating KRAS oncogene-induced transformation.

Mills LD(1), Zhang Y, Marler RJ, Herreros-Villanueva M, Zhang L, Almada LL, Couch
F, Wetmore C, Pasca di Magliano M, Fernandez-Zapico ME.

Author information: 
(1)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Although the biological role of KRAS is clearly established in carcinogenesis,
the molecular mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are not completely
understood. In this study, we provide evidence of a novel signaling network
regulated by the transcription factor GLI1 mediating KRAS-induced carcinogenesis.
Using pancreatic cancer (a disease with high prevalence of KRAS mutations) as a
model, we show that loss of GLI1 blocks the progression of KRAS-induced
pancreatic preneoplastic lesions in mice with pancreas-specific Cre-activated
oncogenic mutant kras. Mice lacking GLI1 develop only low-grade lesions at low
frequency, and in most cases, the pancreata are histologically normal. Further
characterization of the phenotype showed a decrease in the activation of STAT3 in
pancreatic preneoplastic lesions; STAT3 is a transcription factor required for
the development of premalignant lesions and their progression into pancreatic
cancer. Analysis of the mechanisms revealed a key role for GLI1 in maintaining
the levels of activated STAT3 through the modulation of IL-6 signaling. GLI1
binds to the IL-6 mouse promoter and regulates the activity and expression of
this cytokine. This newly identified GLI1/IL-6 axis is active in fibroblasts, a
known source of IL-6 in the tumor microenvironment. Sonic hedgehog induces GLI1
binding to the IL-6 promoter and increases IL-6 expression in fibroblasts in a
paracrine manner. Finally, we demonstrate that mutant KRAS initiates this cascade
by inducing the expression of Sonic hedgehog in cancer cells. Collectively, these
results define a novel role for GLI1 in carcinogenesis acting as a downstream
effector of oncogenic KRAS in the tumor microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC3636867
PMID: 23482563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dis Model Mech. 2013 May;6(3):595-607. doi: 10.1242/dmm.010835. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Transmembrane voltage potential is an essential cellular parameter for the
detection and control of tumor development in a Xenopus model.

Chernet BT(1), Levin M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology and Department of Biology,
Tufts University, 200 Boston Avenue, Medford, MA 02155, USA.

Understanding mechanisms that orchestrate cell behavior into appropriately
patterned tissues and organs within the organism is an essential element of
preventing, detecting and treating cancer. Bioelectric signals (resting
transmembrane voltage potential gradients in all cells) underlie an important and
broadly conserved set of control mechanisms that regulate pattern formation. We
tested the role of transmembrane potential in tumorigenesis mediated by canonical
oncogenes in Xenopus laevis. Depolarized membrane potential (Vmem) was a
characteristic of induced tumor-like structures (ITLSs) generated by
overexpression of Gli1, Kras(G12D), Xrel3 or p53(Trp248). This bioelectric
signature was also present in precursor ITLS sites. Vmem is a bioelectric marker 
that reveals ITLSs before they become histologically and morphologically
apparent. Moreover, voltage was functionally important: overexpression of
hyperpolarizing ion transporters caused a return to normal Vmem and significantly
reduced ITLS formation in vivo. To characterize the molecular mechanism by which 
Vmem change regulates ITLS phenotypes, we performed a suppression screen. Vmem
hyperpolarization was transduced into downstream events via Vmem-regulated
activity of SLC5A8, a sodium-butyrate exchanger previously implicated in human
cancer. These data indicate that butyrate, a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, might be responsible for transcriptional events that mediate
suppression of ITLSs by hyperpolarization. Vmem is a convenient cellular
parameter by which tumors induced by human oncogenes can be detected in vivo and 
represents a new diagnostic modality. Moreover, control of resting membrane
potential is functionally involved in the process by which oncogene-bearing cells
depart from normal morphogenesis programs to form tumors. Modulation of Vmem
levels is a novel and promising strategy for tumor normalization.

PMCID: PMC3634644
PMID: 23471912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 May;83(5):1020-9. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.084590. Epub 2013 Feb 
28.

Discovery, molecular and pharmacological characterization of GSA-10, a novel
small-molecule positive modulator of Smoothened.

Gorojankina T(1), Hoch L, Faure H, Roudaut H, Traiffort E, Schoenfelder A, Girard
N, Mann A, Manetti F, Solinas A, Petricci E, Taddei M, Ruat M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UPR-3294, Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Développement, Institut de
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard IFR2118, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Aug;84(2):303.

Activation of the Smoothened (Smo) receptor mediates Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. Hh 
inhibitors are in clinical trials for cancer, and small-molecule Smo agonists may
have therapeutic interests in regenerative medicine. Here, we have generated and 
validated a pharmacophoric model for Smo agonists and used this model for the
virtual screening of a library of commercially available compounds. Among the 20 
top-scoring ligands, we have identified and characterized a novel
quinolinecarboxamide derivative, propyl
4-(1-hexyl-4-hydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxamido) benzoate,
(GSA-10), as a Smo agonist. GSA-10 fits to the agonist pharmacophoric model with 
two hydrogen bond acceptor groups and four hydrophobic regions. Using
pharmacological, biochemical, and molecular approaches, we provide compelling
evidence that GSA-10 acts at Smo to promote the differentiation of multipotent
mesenchymal progenitor cells into osteoblasts. However, this molecule does not
display the hallmarks of reference Smo agonists. Remarkably, GSA-10 does not
recognize the classic bodipy-cyclopamine binding site. Its effect on cell
differentiation is inhibited by Smo antagonists, such as MRT-83, SANT-1, LDE225, 
and M25 in the nanomolar range, by GDC-0449 in the micromolar range, but not by
cyclopamine and CUR61414. Thus, GSA-10 allows the pharmacological
characterization of a novel Smo active site, which is notably not targeted to the
primary cilium and strongly potentiated by forskolin and cholera toxin. GSA-10
belongs to a new class of Smo agonists and will be helpful for dissecting Hh
mechanism of action, with important implications in physiology and in therapy.

PMID: 23448715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nature. 2013 Feb 28;494(7438):484-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11889.

GLI activation by atypical protein kinase C <U+03B9>/<U+03BB> regulates the growth of basal
cell carcinomas.

Atwood SX(1), Li M, Lee A, Tang JY, Oro AE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2013 Jul;45(7):610-1.

Growth of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) requires high levels of hedgehog (HH)
signalling through the transcription factor GLI. Although inhibitors of membrane 
protein smoothened (SMO) effectively suppress HH signalling, early tumour
resistance illustrates the need for additional downstream targets for therapy.
Here we identify atypical protein kinase C <U+03B9>/<U+03BB> (aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB>) as a novel GLI
regulator in mammals. aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> and its polarity signalling partners co-localize
at the centrosome and form a complex with missing-in-metastasis (MIM), a
scaffolding protein that potentiates HH signalling. Genetic or pharmacological
loss of aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> function blocks HH signalling and proliferation of BCC cells.
Prkci is a HH target gene that forms a positive feedback loop with GLI and exists
at increased levels in BCCs. Genome-wide transcriptional profiling shows that
aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> and SMO control the expression of similar genes in tumour cells.
aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> functions downstream of SMO to phosphorylate and activate GLI1,
resulting in maximal DNA binding and transcriptional activation. Activated
aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> is upregulated in SMO-inhibitor-resistant tumours and targeting aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB>
suppresses signalling and growth of resistant BCC cell lines. These results
demonstrate that aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> is critical for HH-dependent processes and implicates
aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> as a new, tumour-selective therapeutic target for the treatment of
SMO-inhibitor-resistant cancers.

PMCID: PMC3761364
PMID: 23446420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Dyn. 2013 May;242(5):539-49. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23955. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Heat-shock-mediated conditional regulation of hedgehog/gli signaling in
zebrafish.

Shen MC(1), Ozacar AT, Osgood M, Boeras C, Pink J, Thomas J, Kohtz JD, Karlstrom 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts
01003, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is required for embryogenesis and continues
to play key roles postembryonically in many tissues, influencing growth, stem
cell proliferation, and tumorigenesis. Systems for conditional regulation of Hh
signaling facilitate the study of these postembryonic Hh functions.
RESULTS: We used the hsp70l promoter to generated three heat-shock-inducible
transgenic lines that activate Hh signaling and one line that represses Hh
signaling. Heat-shock activation of these transgenes appropriately recapitulates 
early embryonic loss or gain of Hh function phenotypes. Hh signaling remains
activated 24 hr after heat shock in the Tg(hsp70l:shha-EGFP) and
Tg(hsp70l:dnPKA-BGFP) lines, while a single heat shock of the
Tg(hsp70l:gli1-EGFP) or Tg(hsp70l:gli2aDR-EGFP) lines results in a 6- to 12-hr
pulse of Hh signal activation or inactivation, respectively. Using both in situ
hybridization and quantitative polymerase chain reaction, we show that these
lines can be used to manipulate Hh signaling through larval and juvenile stages. 
A ptch2 promoter element was used to generate new reporter lines that allow clear
visualization of Hh responding cells throughout the life cycle, including graded 
Hh responses in the embryonic central nervous system.
CONCLUSIONS: These zebrafish transgenic lines provide important new experimental 
tools to study the embryonic and postembryonic roles of Hh signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23441066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Apr;5(4):488-508. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201202078. Epub 2013 Feb
21.

GLI1 regulates a novel neuropilin-2/a6ß1 integrin based autocrine pathway that
contributes to breast cancer initiation.

Goel HL(1), Pursell B, Chang C, Shaw LM, Mao J, Simin K, Kumar P, Vander Kooi CW,
Shultz LD, Greiner DL, Norum JH, Toftgard R, Kuperwasser C, Mercurio AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA. hira.goel@umassmed.edu

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Apr;5(4):483-5.

The characterization of cells with tumour initiating potential is significant for
advancing our understanding of cancer and improving therapy. Aggressive,
triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are enriched for tumour-initiating cells
(TICs). We investigated that hypothesis that VEGF receptors expressed on TNBC
cells mediate autocrine signalling that contributes to tumour initiation. We
discovered the VEGF receptor neuropilin-2 (NRP2) is expressed preferentially on
TICs, involved in the genesis of TNBCs and necessary for tumour initiation. The
mechanism by which NRP2 signalling promotes tumour initiation involves
stimulation of the a6ß1 integrin, focal adhesion kinase-mediated activation of
Ras/MEK signalling and consequent expression of the Hedgehog effector GLI1. GLI1 
also induces BMI-1, a key stem cell factor, and it enhances NRP2 expression and
the function of a6ß1, establishing an autocrine loop. NRP2 can be targeted in
vivo to retard tumour initiation. These findings reveal a novel autocrine pathway
involving VEGF/NRP2, a6ß1 and GLI1 that contributes to the initiation of TNBC.
They also support the feasibility of NRP2-based therapy for the treatment of TNBC
that targets and impedes the function of TICs.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3628099
PMID: 23436775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Aug;53(8):625-34. doi: 10.1002/mc.22015. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Hedgehog signaling regulates drug sensitivity by targeting ABC transporters ABCB1
and ABCG2 in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Chen Y(1), Bieber MM, Teng NN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Stanford University, Stanford, California.

A major challenge of successful chemotherapy in ovarian cancer is overcoming
intrinsic or acquired multi-drug resistance caused by active drug efflux mediated
by ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters. Regulation of these transporters in
ovarian cancer is poorly understood. We have found that abnormal expression of
the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway transcription factor Gli1 is involved in the 
regulation of ABC transporters ABCB1 and ABCG2 in ovarian cancer. Hh is a known
regulator of cancer cell proliferation and differentiation in several other types
of invasive and metastatic malignancies. Our work has demonstrated that Gli1 is
abnormally activated in a portion of ovarian cancers. Inhibition of Gli1
expression decreases ABCB1 and ABCG2 gene expression levels and enhances the
response of ovarian cancer cells to certain chemotherapeutic drugs. The
underlying mechanism is a direct association of Gli1 with a specific consensus
sequence located in the promoter region of ABCB1 and ABCG2 genes. This study
provides new understanding of ABC gene regulation by Hh signaling pathway, which 
may lead to the identification of new markers to detect and to anticipate ovarian
cancer chemotherapy drug sensitivity.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23423781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 5;288(14):9924-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.409342. Epub 2013 
Feb 19.

Hedgehog-Gli activators direct osteo-chondrogenic function of bone morphogenetic 
protein toward osteogenesis in the perichondrium.

Hojo H(1), Ohba S, Taniguchi K, Shirai M, Yano F, Saito T, Ikeda T, Nakajima K,
Komiyama Y, Nakagata N, Suzuki K, Mishina Y, Yamada M, Konno T, Takato T,
Kawaguchi H, Kambara H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Specification of progenitors into the osteoblast lineage is an essential event
for skeletogenesis. During endochondral ossification, cells in the perichondrium 
give rise to osteoblast precursors. Hedgehog (Hh) and bone morphogenetic protein 
(BMP) are suggested to regulate the commitment of these cells. However,
properties of perichondrial cells and regulatory mechanisms of the specification 
process are still poorly understood. Here, we investigated the machineries by
combining a novel organ culture system and single-cell expression analysis with
mouse genetics and biochemical analyses. In a metatarsal organ culture
reproducing bone collar formation, activation of BMP signaling enhanced the bone 
collar formation cooperatively with Hh input, whereas the signaling induced
ectopic chondrocyte formation in the perichondrium without Hh input. Similar
phenotypes were also observed in compound mutant mice, where signaling activities
of Hh and BMP were genetically manipulated. Single-cell quantitative RT-PCR
analyses showed heterogeneity of perichondrial cells in terms of natural
characteristics and responsiveness to Hh input. In vitro analyses revealed that
Hh signaling suppressed BMP-induced chondrogenic differentiation; Gli1 inhibited 
the expression of Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 (SRY box-containing gene 9) as well as
transactivation by Sox9. Indeed, ectopic expression of chondrocyte maker genes
were observed in the perichondrium of metatarsals in Gli1(-/-) fetuses, and the
phenotype was more severe in Gli1(-/-);Gli2(-/-) newborns. These data suggest
that Hh-Gli activators alter the function of BMP to specify perichondrial cells
into osteoblasts; the timing of Hh input and its target populations are critical 
for BMP function.

PMCID: PMC3617292
PMID: 23423383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Biosyst. 2013 May;9(5):1012-8. doi: 10.1039/c3mb25567k.

Hh signaling inhibitors from Vitex negundo; naturally occurring inhibitors of the
GLI1-DNA complex.

Arai MA(1), Fujimatsu T, Uchida K, Sadhu SK, Ahmed F, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana,
Chiba 260-8675, Japan. midori_arai@chiba-u.jp

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has crucial roles in embryonic development,
cell maintenance and proliferation, and is also known to contribute to cancer
cell growth. New naturally occurring Hh inhibitors (1, 7 and 9) were isolated
from Vitex negundo using our previously constructed cell-based assay. Bioactivity
guided isolation provided 9 natural compounds including a new diterpene,
nishindanol (9). Compounds 7 and 9 showed cytotoxicity against cancer cell lines 
in which Hh signaling was aberrantly activated. Vitetrifolin D (7; GLI1
transcriptional inhibition IC50 = 20.2 µM) showed inhibition of Hh related
protein (PTCH and BCL2) production. Interestingly, the constructed
electrophoresis mobility shift assay revealed that vitetrifolin D (7) disrupted
GLI1 binding on its DNA binding domain. epi-Sclareol (8; inactive), possessing a 
similar structure to 7, did not show inhibition of GLI1DNA complex formation.
This is the first example of naturally occurring inhibitors of GLI1DNA complex
formation.

PMID: 23403897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. FEBS Lett. 2013 Apr 2;587(7):826-32. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.01.050. Epub
2013 Feb 8.

Tumor suppressor protein VHL inhibits Hedgehog-Gli activation through suppression
of Gli1 nuclear localization.

Cho HK(1), Kim SY, Kim KH, Kim HH, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

The transcription factor Gli1 acts in the last known step of the Hedgehog
signaling, and deregulation of Gli1 is implicated in human cancers. VHL protein
is widely expressed in both fetal and adult tissues and acts as a tumor
suppressor. Here, we demonstrate the molecular mechanism through which VHL
inhibits the Hedgehog-Gli pathway. VHL decreased Gli1-mediated promoter
transactivation as well as the expression of Hedgehog/Gli pathway target genes.
Nuclear translocation of cytosolic Gli1 protein was inhibited by VHL via
protein-protein interaction. These results indicate that overexpression of VHL
may antagonize Hedgehog-Gli activation at the post-translational level in
Hedgehog pathway-induced cancers.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23395608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055296. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Ihh and Runx2/Runx3 signaling interact to coordinate early chondrogenesis: a
mouse model.

Kim EJ(1), Cho SW, Shin JO, Lee MJ, Kim KS, Jung HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division in Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Department of Oral Biology,
Research Center for Orofacial Hard Tissue Regeneration, Brain Korea 21 Project,
Oral Science Research Center, College of Dentistry, Yonsei University, Seoul,
Korea. blueleah@yuhs.ac

Endochondral bone formation begins with the development of a cartilage
intermediate that is subsequently replaced by calcified bone. The mechanisms
occurring during early chondrogenesis that control both mesenchymal cell
differentiation into chondrocytes and cell proliferation are not clearly
understood in vertebrates. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), one of the hedgehog signaling
molecules, is known to control both the hypertrophy of chondrocytes and bone
replacement; these processes are particularly important in postnatal endochondral
bone formation rather than in early chondrogenesis. In this study, we utilized
the maternal transfer of 5E1 to E12.5 in mouse embryos, a process that leads to
an attenuation of Ihh activity. As a result, mouse limb bud chondrogenesis was
inhibited, and an exogenous recombinant IHH protein enhanced the proliferation
and differentiation of mesenchymal cells. Analysis of the genetic relationships
in the limb buds suggested a more extensive role for Ihh and Runx genes in early 
chondrogenesis. The transfer of 5E1 decreased the expression of Runx2 and Runx3, 
whereas an exogenous recombinant IHH protein increased Runx2 and Runx3
expression. Moreover, a transcription factor Gli1 in hedgehog pathway enhances
the direct induction of both Runx2 and Runx3 transcription. These findings
suggested that Ihh signaling plays an important role in chondrocyte proliferation
and differentiation via interactions with Runx2 and Runx3.

PMCID: PMC3562241
PMID: 23383321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 May 22;371(1-2):182-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.01.014. 
Epub 2013 Jan 29.

FGF signalling through Fgfr2 isoform IIIb regulates adrenal cortex development.

Guasti L(1), Candy Sze WC, McKay T, Grose R, King PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK.

Developmental signalling pathways are implicated in the formation and maintenance
of the adrenal gland, but their roles are currently not well defined. In recent
years it has emerged that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Wnt/ß catenin signalling are
crucial for the growth and development of the adrenal cortex. Here we demonstrate
that Fibroblast growth factor receptor (Fgfr) 2 isoforms IIIb and IIIc are
expressed mainly in the adrenal subcapsule during embryogenesis and that specific
deletion of the Fgfr2 IIIb isoform impairs adrenal development, causing reduced
adrenal growth and impaired expression of SF1 and steroidogenic enzymes. The
hypoplastic adrenals also have thicker, disorganised capsules which retain Gli1
expression but no longer express Dlk1. Fgfr2 ligands were detected in both the
capsule and the cortex, suggesting the importance of signalling between the
capsule and the cortex in adrenal development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3650577
PMID: 23376610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Jun;48(6):703-10. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0347OC.

Hedgehog signaling in neonatal and adult lung.

Liu L(1), Kugler MC, Loomis CA, Samdani R, Zhao Z, Chen GJ, Brandt JP, Brownell
I, Joyner AL, Rom WN, Munger JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential during embryonic lung development,
but its role in postnatal lung development and adult lung are not known. Using
Gli1(nlacZ) reporter mice to identify cells with active Hh signaling, we found
that Gli1(nlacZ)-positive mesenchymal cells are densely and diffusely present up 
to 2 weeks after birth and decline in number thereafter. In adult mice,
Gli1(nlacZ)-positive cells are present around large airways and vessels and are
sparse in alveolar septa. Hh-stimulated cells are mostly fibroblasts; only 10% of
Gli1(nlacZ)-positive cells are smooth muscle cells, and most smooth muscle cells 
do not have activation of Hh signaling. To assess its functional relevance, we
influenced Hh signaling in the developing postnatal lung and adult injured lung. 
Inhibition of Hh signaling during early postnatal lung development causes
airspace enlargement without diminished alveolar septation. After bleomycin
injury in the adult lung, there are abundant Gli1(nlacZ)-positive mesenchymal
cells in fibrotic lesions and increased numbers of Gli1(nlacZ)-positive cells in 
preserved alveolar septa. Inhibition of Hh signaling with an antibody against all
Hedgehog isoforms does not reduce bleomycin-induced fibrosis, but
adenovirus-mediated overexpression of Shh increases collagen production in this
model. Our data provide strong evidence that Hh signaling can regulate lung
stromal cell function in two critical scenarios: normal development in postnatal 
lung and lung fibrosis in adult lung.

PMCID: PMC3727871
PMID: 23371063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054556. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

FOXM1 is an oncogenic mediator in Ewing Sarcoma.

Christensen L(1), Joo J, Lee S, Wai D, Triche TJ, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Saban Research
Institute, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Ewing Family Tumors (Ewing Sarcoma and peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal
Tumor) are common bone and soft tissue malignancies of childhood, adolescence and
young adulthood. Chromosomal translocation in these tumors produces fusion
oncogenes of the EWS/ETS class, with EWS/FLI1 being by far the most common.
EWS/ETS chimera are the only well established driver mutations in these tumors
and they function as aberrant transcription factors. Understanding the downstream
genes whose expression is modified has been a central approach to the study of
these tumors. FOXM1 is a proliferation associated transcription factor which has 
increasingly been found to play a role in the pathogenesis of a wide range of
human cancers. Here we demonstrate that FOXM1 is expressed in Ewing primary
tumors and cell lines. Reduction in FOXM1 expression in Ewing cell lines results 
in diminished potential for anchorage independent growth. FOXM1 expression is
enhanced by EWS/FLI1, though, unlike other tumor systems, it is not driven by
expression of the EWS/FLI1 target GLI1. Thiostrepton is a compound known to
inhibit FOXM1 by direct binding. We show that Thiostrepton diminishes FOXM1
expression in Ewing cell lines and this reduction reduces cell viability through 
an apoptotic mechanism. FOXM1 is involved in Ewing tumor pathogenesis and may
prove to be a useful therapeutic target in Ewing tumors.

PMCID: PMC3554707
PMID: 23365673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Chin J Cancer Res. 2012 Dec;24(4):323-31. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2012.10.10.

Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway is an independent potential
prognosis predictor in human hepatocellular carcinoma patients.

Che L(1), Yuan YH, Jia J, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Medical Oncology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing 100142, China.

OBJECTIVE: The activation of hedgehog (HH) pathway is implicated in the
development of human malignancies including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
However, the clinical impact of HH activation in HCC patients is still unclear.
This study was conducted to confirm whether the expression of HH pathway
components was associated with HCC progression and clinical outcome.
METHODS: This study was a sample-expanded and prolonged follow up of one of our
previous studies. It included 46 HCC patients who underwent surgical treatment
from 2002 to 2005. The expression of sonic HH (SHH), patched-1 (PTCH1),
smoothened (SMOH) and glioma-associated oncogene-1 (GLI1) genes in tumor and
adjacent normal tissues extracted from the patients were examined by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to explore the relationship
between these genes and the clinical prognosis of HCC.
RESULTS: The expression levels of SHH, PTCH1, SMOH and GLI1 in HCC tissues were
60.87%, 50.00%, 32.61% and 54.35%, respectively. The expression levels of
SHH-related molecules were relatively intense in cancer tissue, but
insignificantly correlated with any clinicopathological factors of tumor.
Transcriptional factor GLI1 was the only molecule associated with poor prognosis 
among the HCC patients. The expression of GLI1 gene in tumor tissues was
significantly related with disease-free survival (DFS) (P=0.042) and overall
survival (OS) (P=0.030). The simultaneous expression of GLI1 in tumor and
adjacent normal liver tissues correlated with DFS (P<0.029) and OS (P<0.025).
CONCLUSIONS: HH signaling activation is an important event in the development of 
human HCC. The expression of GLI1 in SHH pathway is possibly involved in HCC
progression, which may be a useful prognostic indicator of HCC.

PMCID: PMC3551326
PMID: 23359030  [PubMed]


73. Chin J Cancer Res. 2012 Dec;24(4):257-8. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2012.09.07.

Expression of Gli1 in the hedgehog signaling pathway and breast cancer
recurrence.

Takebe N(1), Hunsberger S, Yang SX.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, USA.

PMCID: PMC3551324
PMID: 23358885  [PubMed]


74. Chin J Cancer Res. 2012 Dec;24(4):263-74. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2012.10.04.

Overexpression of Gli1 in cancer interstitial tissues predicts early relapse
after radical operation of breast cancer.

Li YH(1), Gao HF, Wang Y, Liu F, Tian XF, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116023, China;

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether Gli1 expression is important in relapse after
radical operation of breast cancer.
METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry, Gli1 expression was analyzed in human
primary breast cancer (n=284) and paracancerous tissues (n=20), and also in local
lymph nodes (n=28) and metastatic lymph nodes (n=28).
RESULTS: Initial analysis of Gli1 expression in a small cohort of 20 breast
tumors and their paracancerous tissues showed a tendency towards Gli1
overexpression in breast cancer tissues (P<0.001). Further, Gli1 expression in
284 breast cancer tissue samples was analyzed and a significant correlation was
found between increased expression of nuclear Gli1 and unfavorable
recurrence-free survival (RFS) (P<0.05). The nuclear expression of Gli1 in
metastatic lymph nodes following relapse after radical operation was much higher 
than that in the local lymph nodes of primary carcinoma (P<0.05). Most
interestingly, the expression of Gli1 was much higher in the interstitial tissues
of the relapsed group than of the non-relapsed group (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Breast cancer shows a high prevalence of Gli1 expression, which is
significantly correlated with aggressive features and unfavorable RFS. Nuclear
Gli1 overexpression, especially in the interstitial tissues, signified early
relapse after radical operation of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3551322
PMID: 23358704  [PubMed]


75. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054269. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Irradiated riboflavin diminishes the aggressiveness of melanoma in vitro and in
vivo.

Machado D(1), Shishido SM, Queiroz KC, Oliveira DN, Faria AL, Catharino RR, Spek 
CA, Ferreira CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioassays and Signal Transduction, Department of Biochemistry,
Institute of Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

Melanoma is one of the most aggressive skin cancers due to its high capacity to
metastasize. Treatment of metastatic melanomas is challenging for clinicians, as 
most therapeutic agents have failed to demonstrate improved survival. Thus, new
candidates with antimetastatic activity are much needed. Riboavin (RF) is a
component of the vitamin B complex and a potent photosensitizer. Previously, our 
group showed that the RF photoproducts (iRF) have potential as an antitumoral
agent. Hence, we investigated the capacity of iRF on modulating melanoma B16F10
cells aggressiveness in vitro and in vivo. iRF decreases B16F10 cells survival by
inhibiting mTOR as well as Src kinase. Moreover, melanoma cell migration was
disrupted after treatment with iRF, mainly by inhibition of metalloproteinase
(MMP) activity and expression, and by increasing TIMP expression. Interestingly, 
we observed that the Hedgehog (HH) pathway was inhibited by iRF. Two mediators of
HH signaling, GLI1 and PTCH, were downregulated, while SUFU expression (an
inhibitor of this cascade) was enhanced. Furthermore, inhibition of HH pathway
signaling by cyclopamine and Gant 61 potentiated the antiproliferative action of 
RF. Accordingly, when a HH ligand was applied, the effect of iRF was almost
completely abrogated. Our findings indicate that Hedgehog pathway is involved on 
the modulation of melanoma cell aggressiveness by iRF. Moreover, iRF treatment
decreased pulmonary tumor formation in a murine experimental metastasis model.
Research to clarify the molecular action of flavins, in vivo, is currently in
progress. Taken together, the present data provides evidence that riboflavin
photoproducts may provide potential candidates for improving the efficiency of
melanoma treatment.

PMCID: PMC3546980
PMID: 23342114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. FEBS Lett. 2013 Mar 18;587(6):631-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.12.028. Epub
2013 Jan 18.

A feedback regulation between Kindlin-2 and GLI1 in prostate cancer cells.

Gao J(1), Khan AA, Shimokawa T, Zhan J, Strömblad S, Fang W, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, Peking University Health Science Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing
100191, China.

Kindlin-2 is engaged in tumor progression. However, the mechanism accounting for 
Kindlin-2 regulation in tumor cells remained largely unknown. Here, we report a
regulatory loop between Kindlin-2 and GLI1, an effector of Hedgehog signaling
pathway. We show that Kindlin-2 is transcriptionally downregulated via GLI1
occupancy on the Kindlin-2 promoter. Adversely, we found that Kindlin-2 promotes 
GLI1 expression through a mechanism involving GSK3ß inactivation and is
independent of Smoothened. Functionally, knockdown of Kindlin-2 cooperates with
cyclopamine, a Smoothened antagonist, to decrease the viability of prostate
cancer cells. Taken together, targeting the Kindlin-2-GLI1 feedback loop may
facilitate the killing of prostate cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23337877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am Surg. 2013 Feb;79(2):198-204.

Expression of GLI1 correlates with expression of lymphangiogenesis proteins,
vascular endothelial growth factor C and vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 3, in colorectal cancer.

Hong KD(1), Lee Y, Kim BH, Lee SI, Moon HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

Aberrant activation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is associated with
tumorigenesis in various tissues. In colorectal cancer (CRC), evidence for Hh
activation is inconsistent, and the relationship between the Hh signaling pathway
and lymphangiogenesis has not been studied. The aim of this study was to
determine the relationship between Hh signaling and lymphangiogenesis and the
association of this relationship with lymph node metastasis in CRC. We
investigated 189 patients who underwent curative surgical resection for CRC
between 2002 and 2004 at Korea University Guro Hospital. Paraffin-embedded
specimens of colorectal adenocarcinoma and adjacent normal mucosa were evaluated.
Immunohistochemical staining for Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Gli1, vascular endothelial
growth factor C (VEGFC), and VEGF receptor 3 (VEGFR3) was performed for each
specimen. Tumor specimen showed significantly strong staining of Shh, Gli1,
VEGFC, and VEGFR3 compared with a normal specimen. Shh expression was not
associated with Gli1 expression. Gli1 expression correlated positively with VEGFC
and VEGFR3 expression (P < 0.05 in both) but not with lymph node metastasis.
Activation of the Hh signaling pathway associated with Gli1 promotes expression
of lymphangiogenesis proteins, VEGFC and VEGFR3, in CRC. Further studies are
necessary to determine the association of this relationship with lymph node
metastasis in CRC.

PMID: 23336661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. RNA Biol. 2013 Feb;10(2):321-33. doi: 10.4161/rna.23343. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

RNA editing of the GLI1 transcription factor modulates the output of Hedgehog
signaling.

Shimokawa T(1), Rahman MF, Tostar U, Sonkoly E, Ståhle M, Pivarcsi A, Palaniswamy
R, Zaphiropoulos PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden. takshi@nirs.go.jp

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway has important roles in tumorigenesis and in
embryonal patterning. The Glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) is a key molecule
in HH signaling, acting as a transcriptional effector and, moreover, is
considered to be a potential therapeutic target for several types of cancer. To
extend our previous focus on the implications of alternative splicing for HH
signal transduction, we now report on an additional post-transcriptional
mechanism with an impact on GLI1 activity, namely RNA editing. The GLI1 mRNA is
highly edited at nucleotide 2179 by adenosine deamination in normal cerebellum,
but the extent of this modification is reduced in cell lines from the cerebellar 
tumor medulloblastoma. Additionally, basal cell carcinoma tumor samples exhibit
decreased GLI1 editing compared with normal skin. Interestingly, knocking down of
either ADAR1 or ADAR2 reduces RNA editing of GLI1. This adenosine to inosine
substitution leads to a change from Arginine to Glycine at position 701 that
influences not only GLI1 transcriptional activity, but also GLI1-dependent
cellular proliferation. Specifically, the edited GLI1, GLI1-701G, has a higher
capacity to activate most of the transcriptional targets tested and is less
susceptible to inhibition by the negative regulator of HH signaling suppressor of
fused. However, the Dyrk1a kinase, implicated in cellular proliferation, is more 
effective in increasing the transcriptional activity of the non-edited GLI1.
Finally, introduction of GLI1-701G into medulloblastoma cells confers a smaller
increase in cellular growth relative to GLI1. In conclusion, our findings
indicate that RNA editing of GLI1 is a regulatory mechanism that modulates the
output of the HH signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3594290
PMID: 23324600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Am J Pathol. 2013 Mar;182(3):646-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.11.017. Epub 2013
Jan 13.

Transgenic mice overexpressing neuregulin-1 model neurofibroma-malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor progression and implicate specific chromosomal copy
number variations in tumorigenesis.

Kazmi SJ(1), Byer SJ, Eckert JM, Turk AN, Huijbregts RP, Brossier NM, Grizzle WE,
Mikhail FM, Roth KA, Carroll SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294-0017, USA.

Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) develop benign plexiform
neurofibromas that frequently progress to become malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors (MPNSTs). A genetically engineered mouse model that accurately
models plexiform neurofibroma-MPNST progression in humans would facilitate
identification of somatic mutations driving this process. We previously reported 
that transgenic mice overexpressing the growth factor neuregulin-1 in Schwann
cells (P(0)-GGFß3 mice) develop MPNSTs. To determine whether P(0)-GGFß3 mice
accurately model human neurofibroma-MPNST progression, cohorts of these animals
were monitored through death and were necropsied; 94% developed multiple
neurofibromas, with 70% carrying smaller numbers of MPNSTs. Nascent MPNSTs were
identified within neurofibromas, suggesting that these sarcomas arise from
neurofibromas. Although neurofibromin expression was maintained, P(0)-GGFß3
MPNSTs exhibited Ras hyperactivation, as in human NF1-associated MPNSTs.
P(0)-GGFß3 MPNSTs also exhibited abnormalities in the p16(INK4A)-cyclin D/CDK4-Rb
and p19(ARF)-Mdm-p53 pathways, analogous to their human counterparts. Array
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) demonstrated reproducible chromosomal
alterations in P(0)-GGFß3 MPNST cells (including universal chromosome 11 gains)
and focal gains and losses affecting 39 neoplasia-associated genes (including
Pten, Tpd52, Myc, Gli1, Xiap, and Bbc3/PUMA). Array comparative genomic
hybridization also identified recurrent focal copy number variations affecting
genes not previously linked to neurofibroma or MPNST pathogenesis. We conclude
that P(0)-GGFß3 mice represent a robust model of neurofibroma-MPNST progression
useful for identifying novel genes driving neurofibroma and MPNST pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586689
PMID: 23321323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dev Biol. 2013 Mar 15;375(2):160-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.018. Epub 2013 
Jan 8.

Sonic hedgehog signaling directly targets Hyaluronic Acid Synthase 2, an
essential regulator of phalangeal joint patterning.

Liu J(1), Li Q, Kuehn MR, Litingtung Y, Vokes SA, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal, mediated by the Gli family of transcription factors,
plays an essential role in the growth and patterning of the limb. Through
analysis of the early limb bud transcriptome, we identified a
posteriorly-enriched gene, Hyaluronic Acid Synthase 2 (Has2), which encodes a key
enzyme for the synthesis of hyaluronan (HA), as a direct target of Gli
transcriptional regulation during early mouse limb development. Has2 expression
in the limb bud is lost in Shh null and expanded anteriorly in Gli3 mutants. We
identified an ~3kb Has2 promoter fragment that contains two strong Gli-binding
consensus sequences, and mutation of either site abrogated the ability of Gli1 to
activate Has2 promoter in a cell-based assay. Additionally, this promoter
fragment is sufficient to direct expression of a reporter gene in the posterior
limb mesenchyme. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of DNA-Gli3 protein complexes from
limb buds indicated that Gli3 strongly binds to the Has2 promoter region,
suggesting that Has2 is a direct transcriptional target of the Shh signaling
pathway. We also showed that Has2 conditional mutant (Has2cko) hindlimbs display 
digit-specific patterning defects with longitudinally shifted phalangeal joints
and impaired chondrogenesis. Has2cko limbs show less capacity for mesenchymal
condensation with mislocalized distributions of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans
(CSPGs), aggrecan and link protein. Has2cko limb phenotype displays striking
resemblance to mutants with defective chondroitin sulfation suggesting tight
developmental control of HA on CSPG function. Together, our study identifies Has2
as a novel downstream target of Shh signaling required for joint patterning and
chondrogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3820152
PMID: 23313125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053675. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Analysis of the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway in normal and abnormal bladder
development.

DeSouza KR(1), Saha M, Carpenter AR, Scott M, McHugh KM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Human Genetics, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
kristin.desouza@nationwidechildrens.org

In this study, we examined the expression of Sonic Hedgehog, Patched, Gli1, Gli2,
Gli3 and Myocardin in the developing bladders of male and female normal and
megabladder (mgb-/-) mutant mice at embryonic days 12 through 16 by in situ
hybridization. This analysis indicated that each member of the Sonic Hedgehog
signaling pathway as well as Myocardin displayed distinct temporal and spatial
patterns of expression during normal bladder development. In contrast, mgb-/-
bladders showed both temporal and spatial changes in the expression of Patched,
Gli1 and Gli3 as well as a complete lack of Myocardin expression. These changes
occurred primarily in the outer mesenchyme of developing mgb-/- bladders
consistent with the development of an amuscular bladder phenotype in these
animals. These results provide the first comprehensive analysis of the Sonic
Hedgehog signaling pathway during normal bladder development and provide strong
evidence that this key signaling cascade is critical in establishing radial
patterning in the developing bladder. In addition, the lack of detrusor smooth
muscle development observed in mgb-/- mice is associated with bladder-specific
temporospatial changes in Sonic Hedgehog signaling coupled with a lack of
Myocardin expression that appears to result in altered patterning of the outer
mesenchyme and poor initiation and differentiation of smooth muscle cells within 
this region of the developing bladder.

PMCID: PMC3538723
PMID: 23308271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Drug Metab Dispos. 2013 Apr;41(4):727-34. doi: 10.1124/dmd.112.049650. Epub 2013 
Jan 8.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic modeling of hedgehog inhibitor TAK-441 for
the inhibition of Gli1 messenger RNA expression and antitumor efficacy in
xenografted tumor model mice.

Kogame A(1), Tagawa Y, Shibata S, Tojo H, Miyamoto M, Tohyama K, Kondo T, Prakash
S, Shyu WC, Asahi S.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics Research Laboratories, Pharmaceutical
Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Kanagawa, Japan.
akifumi.kogame@takeda.com

6-Ethyl-N-[1-(hydroxyacetyl)piperidin-4-yl]-1-methyl-4-oxo-5-(2-oxo-2-phenylethyl
)-3-(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)-4,5-dihydro-1H-pyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine-2-carboxamide
(TAK-441) is a potent, selective hedgehog signaling pathway inhibitor that binds 
to Smo and is being developed for the treatment of cancer. The objectives of
these studies were to explore the possibility of establishing of a link between
the pharmacokinetics of TAK-441 and the responses of Gli1 mRNA in
tumor-associated stromal or skin cells and the antitumor effect of hedgehog
inhibition. To this end, we built pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic models that
describe the relationship of the concentrations of TAK-441 plasma to the
responses of Gli1 mRNA in the tumor (target) and skin (surrogate) and to tumor
growth inhibition in mice bearing xenografts of human pancreatic tumors (PAN-04).
The responses of Gli1 mRNA and tumor growth were described by an indirect
response model and an exponential tumor growth model, respectively. The IC50
values for Gli1 mRNA inhibition in the tumor and skin by TAK-441 were estimated
to be 0.0457 and 0.113 µg/ml, respectively. The IC90 value for tumor growth
inhibition was estimated to be 0.68 µg/ml. These results suggest that a >83%
inhibition of Gli1 mRNA expression in the skin or a >94% inhibition of Gli1 mRNA 
expression in the tumor would be required to sufficiently inhibit (>90%)
hedgehog-related tumor growth in the xenografted model mice. We conclude that
Gli1 mRNA expression in the tumor and skin could be a useful biomarker for
predicting the antitumor effect of hedgehog inhibitors.

PMID: 23298863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Neurol India. 2012 Nov-Dec;60(6):589-96. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.105192.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog/Gli1 pathway on angiogenesis in gliomas.

Cui D(1), Chen X, Yin J, Wang W, Lou M, Gu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog/Gli1 (HH/Gli1) pathway plays an important role in the
patterning and development of the central nervous system during embryogenesis.
Recent data have shown its potential involvement in a subset of human gliomas and
inhibition of the pathway resulted in tumor suppression in both in vitro and in
vivo studies. The underlying mechanisms of tumor suppression, however, remain to 
be fully elucidated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gli1 expression was investigated in 60 surgically resected
glioma tissues (World Health Organization (WHO) III-IV).
RESULTS: Gli1 was expressed in 43 gliomas with high Gli1 expression in nine
cases, moderate expression in 21 cases, and low expression in 13 cases.
Additionally, microvessel counts were higher in Gli1 positive gliomas than those 
in Gli1 negative gliomas. Gli1 expression in gliomas was positively correlated
with microvessel density (MVD). To explore the molecular mechanisms of the
phenotypic changes, we performed quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and Western blot analysis to monitor the changes of a series of genes,
which play critical roles in the regulation of glioma angiogenesis. In
conclusion, HH/Gli1 pathway inhibition resulted in down-regulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2), and matrix
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) expressions, whereas this pathway activation led to
up-regulation of VEGF, MMP2, and MMP9 expressions. These molecular changes of the
HH/Gli1 pathway inhibited by indirect drug approach were consistent with Gli1
RNA-interference (RNAi) in glioma cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrated that the aberrantly active HH/Gli1 pathway 
contributed to angiogenesis in part through induction of VEGF, MMP2, and MMP9.

PMID: 23287320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52426. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052426. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

CD44+ cancer stem-like cells in EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Lun SW(1), Cheung ST, Cheung PF, To KF, Woo JK, Choy KW, Chow C, Cheung CC, Chung
GT, Cheng AS, Ko CW, Tsao SW, Busson P, Ng MH, Lo KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, State Key Laboratory in
Oncology in South China, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a unique EBV-associated epithelial malignancy, 
showing highly invasive and metastatic phenotype. Despite increasing evidence
demonstrating the critical role of cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) in the
maintenance and progression of tumors in a variety of malignancies, the existence
and properties of CSC in EBV-associated NPC are largely unknown. Our study aims
to elucidate the presence and role of CSCs in the pathogenesis of this malignant 
disease. Sphere-forming cells were isolated from an EBV-positive NPC cell line
C666-1 and its tumor-initiating properties were confirmed by in vitro and in vivo
assays. In these spheroids, up-regulation of multiple stem cell markers were
found. By flow cytometry, we demonstrated that both CD44 and SOX2 were
overexpressed in a majority of sphere-forming C666-1 cells. The CD44+SOX2+ cells 
was detected in a minor population in EBV-positive xenografts and primary tumors 
and considered as potential CSC in NPC. Notably, the isolated CD44+ NPC cells
were resistant to chemotherapeutic agents and with higher spheroid formation
efficiency, showing CSC properties. On the other hand, microarray analysis has
revealed a number of differentially expressed genes involved in transcription
regulation (e.g. FOXN4, GLI1), immune response (CCR7, IL8) and transmembrane
transport (e.g. ABCC3, ABCC11) in the spheroids. Among these genes, increased
expression of CCR7 in CD44+ CSCs was confirmed in NPC xenografts and primary
tumors. Importantly, blocking of CCR7 abolished the sphere-forming ability of
C666-1 in vitro. Expression of CCR7 was associated with recurrent disease and
distant metastasis. The current study defined the specific properties of a CSC
subpopulation in EBV-associated NPC. Our findings provided new insights into
developing effective therapies targeting on CSCs, thereby potentiating treatment 
efficacy for NPC patients.

PMCID: PMC3528656
PMID: 23285037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biol Res. 2012;45(3):223-30. doi: 10.4067/S0716-97602012000300004.

Sonic Hedgehog in cancer stem cells: a novel link with autophagy.

Milla LA(1), González-Ramírez CN, Palma V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genome Regulation, Laboratory of Stem Cells and Development,
Faculty of Sciences, University of Chile, Ñuñoa, Chile.

The Sonic Hegdehog/GLI (SHH/GLI) pathway has been extensively studied for its
role in developmental and cancer biology. During early embryonic development the 
SHH pathway is involved mainly in pattern formation, while in latter stages its
function in stem cell and progenitor proliferation becomes increasingly relevant.
During postnatal development and in adult tissues, SHH/GLI promotes cell
homeostasis by actively regulating gene transcription, recapitulating the
function observed during normal tissue growth. In this review, we will briefly
discuss the fundamental importance of SHH/GLI in tumor growth and cancer
evolution and we will then provide insights into a possible novel mechanism of
SHH action in cancer through autophagy modulation in cancer stem cells. Autophagy
is a homeostatic mechanism that when disrupted can promote and accelerate tumor
progression in both cancer cells and the stroma that harbors tumorigenesis.
Understanding possible new targets for SHH signaling and its contribution to
cancer through modulation of autophagy might provide better strategies in order
to design combined treatments and perform clinical trials.

PMID: 23283432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Cancer. 2013 Jul;133(1):225-34. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28006. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Tumor-stroma interaction in orthotopic primary pancreatic cancer xenografts
during hedgehog pathway inhibition.

Chang Q(1), Foltz WD, Chaudary N, Hill RP, Hedley DW.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, ON, Canada.

To test the effects of hedgehog (Hh) pathway inhibition on the stroma of
orthotopically grown primary pancreatic cancer xenografts, and investigate the
potential to monitor these effects non-invasively using magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), mice bearing orthotopically grown primary pancreatic cancer
xenografts were treated with the Hh neutralizing antibody 5E1. Pathway inhibition
was determined by RT-PCR using primer sets for human and mouse Hh pathway genes, 
and effects on stroma assessed by automated image analysis of tissue sections
stained for collagen and a-smooth muscle actin (aSMA). MRI provided quantitative 
biomarkers of stromal density based on magnetization transfer (MT-MRI) and
dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE-MRI). Modest growth inhibition was seen in both
models tested using 5E1, but was greater in OCIP19, which showed high expression 
of mouse Hh pathway genes and an extensive fibrous stroma. However, despite
profound inhibition of both mouse and human Hh pathway genes, in neither model
did we observe depletion of the stroma. Alignment of MT-MRI ratio images to
histological sections showed co-registration with areas of fibrosis, although
this was confounded by the presence of tumor necrosis. Due to the lack of stromal
depletion by 5E1 it was not possible to determine the utility of MT-MRI for
monitoring this effect. Cancer- and stromal cell-derived Hh signaling elements
are expressed in orthotopic primary pancreatic cancer xenografts, and selective
targeting is growth-inhibitory. In contrast to some recent reports, growth
inhibition does not involve attenuation of the tumor stroma, pointing to
additional effects of Hh signaling in pancreatic cancer.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 23280784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2012 Dec;32(12):1828-32.

[Inhibitory effect of cyclopamine on metastatic ability of EC109 cells and its
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Zuo X(1), Qin Z, Wang K, Zheng X, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, China. 492588955@qq.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of cyclopamine on metastatic ability of
human esophageal cancer EC109 cells and explore the possible mechanism.
METHODS: Transwell chamber assay and angiogenesis assay were used to examine the 
metastatic ability, invasiveness and angiogenesis of EC109 cells treated with
cyclopamine for 48 h. The expression of Gli-1 mRNA was detected using RT-PCR, and
Western blotting was used to examine the protein expressions of Gli-1, matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
RESULTS: Inhibition of the hedgehog signaling pathway by cyclopamine suppressed
the migration, invasion, and angiogenesis of EC109 cells. Cyclopamine treatment
significantly lowered the expression of Gli-1 mRNA (P<0.05) and the protein
expressions of Gli-1, MMP-9 and VEGF (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Cyclopamine can significantly inhibit the metastatic capacity of
EC109 cells possibly by down-regulating MMP-9 and VEGF expression as a result of 
Gli-1 inhibition.

PMID: 23268421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncol Lett. 2013 Jan;5(1):127-134. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

The pan-deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat modulates the expression of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers in hepatocellular carcinoma models.

DI Fazio P(1), Montalbano R, Quint K, Alinger B, Kemmerling R, Kiesslich T, Ocker
M, Neureiter D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Surgical Research, Philipps-University Marburg,
Baldingerstrasse, Marburg 35043, Germany ;

Deacetylase inhibitors (DACis) represent a novel therapeutic option for human
cancers by classically affecting proliferation or apoptosis. Since
transdifferentiation and dedifferentiation play a key role in carcinogenesis, we 
investigated the epigenetic influence on the molecular differentiation status in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) models. Markers of differentiation,
including cytokeratin (Ck) 7, Ck8, Ck18, Ck19, Ck20, vimentin, sonic hedgehog
homolog (SHH), smoothened (Smo), patched (Ptc), glioma-associated oncogene
homolog 1 (Gli1), CD133, octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (Oct4) and
ß-catenin, were examined in the human HCC cell lines HepG2 and Hep3B in vitro and
in vivo (xenograft model) using quantitative real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry following treatment with the pan-DACi panobinostat (LBH589).
Compared to untreated controls, treated HepG2 xenografts, and to a lesser extent 
cell lines, demonstrated a significant increase of differentiation markers Ck7
and Ck19 (classical cholangiocellular type) and Ck8 and Ck18 (classical HCC
type), and a decreased level of dedifferentiation markers vimentin (mesenchymal) 
and SHH/Ptc (embryonic), paralleled with a more membranous expression of
ß-catenin. These findings were dose-dependently correlated with tumor size,
necrosis rate, microvessel density and mitosis/Ki-67-associated proliferation
rate. Our results demonstrate that the differentiation status of human HCC cells 
is influenced by the pan-DACi panobinostat, indicating that this treatment may
influence the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) status related to
metastasis and aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3525501
PMID: 23255907  [PubMed]


89. Genes Dev. 2012 Dec 15;26(24):2802-16. doi: 10.1101/gad.207142.112.

Neural-specific Sox2 input and differential Gli-binding affinity provide context 
and positional information in Shh-directed neural patterning.

Peterson KA(1), Nishi Y, Ma W, Vedenko A, Shokri L, Zhang X, McFarlane M,
Baizabal JM, Junker JP, van Oudenaarden A, Mikkelsen T, Bernstein BE, Bailey TL, 
Bulyk ML, Wong WH, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

In the vertebrate neural tube, regional Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling invokes a 
time- and concentration-dependent induction of six different cell populations
mediated through Gli transcriptional regulators. Elsewhere in the embryo, Shh/Gli
responses invoke different tissue-appropriate regulatory programs. A genome-scale
analysis of DNA binding by Gli1 and Sox2, a pan-neural determinant, identified a 
set of shared regulatory regions associated with key factors central to cell fate
determination and neural tube patterning. Functional analysis in transgenic mice 
validates core enhancers for each of these factors and demonstrates the dual
requirement for Gli1 and Sox2 inputs for neural enhancer activity. Furthermore,
through an unbiased determination of Gli-binding site preferences and analysis of
binding site variants in the developing mammalian CNS, we demonstrate that
differential Gli-binding affinity underlies threshold-level activator responses
to Shh input. In summary, our results highlight Sox2 input as a context-specific 
determinant of the neural-specific Shh response and differential Gli-binding site
affinity as an important cis-regulatory property critical for interpreting Shh
morphogen action in the mammalian neural tube.

PMCID: PMC3533082
PMID: 23249739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Mar;34(3):550-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs375. Epub 2012 Dec
7.

Cathepsin B and uPAR regulate self-renewal of glioma-initiating cells through
GLI-regulated Sox2 and Bmi1 expression.

Gopinath S(1), Malla R, Alapati K, Gorantla B, Gujrati M, Dinh DH, Rao JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology & Pharmacology, University of Illinois College of
Medicine at Peoria, One Illini Drive, Peoria, IL 61656, USA.

Cancer-initiating cells comprise a heterogeneous population of undifferentiated
cells with the capacity for self-renewal and high proliferative potential. We
investigated the role of uPAR and cathepsin B in the maintenance of stem cell
nature in glioma-initiating cells (GICs). Simultaneous knockdown of uPAR and
cathepsin B significantly reduced the expression of CD133, Nestin, Sox2 and Bmi1 
at the protein level and GLI1 and GLI2 at the messenger RNA level. Also,
knockdown of uPAR and cathepsin B resulted in a reduction in the number of GICs
as well as sphere size. These changes are mediated by Sox2 and Bmi1, downstream
of hedgehog signaling. Addition of cyclopamine reduced the expression of Sox2 and
Bmi1 along with GLI1 and GLI2 expression, induced differentiation and reduced
subsphere formation of GICs thereby indicating that hedgehog signaling acts
upstream of Sox2 and Bmi1. Further confirmation was obtained from increased
luciferase expression under the control of a GLI-bound Sox2 and Bmi1 luciferase
promoter. Simultaneous knockdown of uPAR and cathepsin B also reduced the
expression of Nestin Sox2 and Bmi1 in vivo. Thus, our study highlights the
importance of uPAR and cathepsin B in the regulation of malignant stem cell
self-renewal through hedgehog components, Bmi1 and Sox2.

PMCID: PMC3581601
PMID: 23222817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 1;374(1):115-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.016. Epub 2012
Nov 29.

Duration of Shh signaling contributes to mDA neuron diversity.

Hayes L(1), Ralls S, Wang H, Ahn S.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is critical for various developmental processes
including specification of the midbrain dopamine (mDA) neurons in the ventral
mesencephalon (vMes). While the timing of Shh and its response gene Gli1
segregates mDA neurons, their overall lineage contribution to mDA neurons heavily
overlaps. Here, we demonstrate that the same set of mDA neuron progenitors
sequentially respond to Shh signaling (Gli1 expression), induce Shh expression,
and then turn off Shh responsiveness. Thus, at any given developmental stage,
cells rarely co-express Shh and Gli1. Using Shh(Cre:GFP) mice to delete the
Smoothened receptor in the Shh pathway, we demonstrate that the loss of Shh
signaling in Shh expressing cells results in a transient increase in
proliferation and subsequent depletion of mDA neuron progenitors in the posterior
vMes due to the facilitated cell cycle exit. Moreover, the change in duration of 
Shh signaling in vMes progenitors altered the timing of the contribution to the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) mDA
neurons. Taken together, our investigation on the relationship between the
Shh-secreting and -responding cells revealed an intricate regulation of induction
and cessation of Shh signaling that influences the distribution of mDA neurons in
the VTA and SNc.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3548960
PMID: 23201023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Lett. 2013 Mar 1;330(1):22-32. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.11.018. Epub
2012 Nov 28.

GANT-61 inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cell growth in vitro and in NOD/SCID/IL2R
gamma null mice xenograft.

Fu J(1), Rodova M, Roy SK, Sharma J, Singh KP, Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Multiple lines of evidence suggest that the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling
pathway is aberrantly reactivated in pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs). The
objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which
GANT-61 (Gli transcription factor inhibitor) regulates stem cell characteristics 
and tumor growth. Effects of GANT-61 on CSC's viability, spheroid formation,
apoptosis, DNA-binding and transcriptional activities, and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) were measured. Humanized NOD/SCID/IL2R gamma(null) mice were
used to examine the effects of GANT-61 on CSC's tumor growth. GANT-61 inhibited
cell viability, spheroid formation, and Gli-DNA binding and transcriptional
activities, and induced apoptosis by activation of caspase-3 and cleavage of
Poly-ADP ribose Polymerase (PARP). GANT-61 increased the expression of
TRAIL-R1/DR4, TRAIL-R2/DR5 and Fas, and decreased expression of PDGFRa and Bcl-2.
GANT-61 also suppressed EMT by up-regulating E-cadherin and inhibiting N-cadherin
and transcription factors Snail, Slug and Zeb1. In addition, GANT-61 inhibited
pluripotency maintaining factors Nanog, Oct4, Sox-2 and cMyc. Suppression of both
Gli1 plus Gli2 by shRNA mimicked the changes in cell viability, spheroid
formation, apoptosis and gene expression observed in GANT-61-treated pancreatic
CSCs. Furthermore, GANT-61 inhibited CSC tumor growth which was associated with
up-regulation of DR4 and DR5 expression, and suppression of Gli1, Gli2, Bcl-2,
CCND2 and Zeb1 expression in tumor tissues derived from NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice.
Our data highlight the importance of Shh pathway for self-renewal and metastasis 
of pancreatic CSCs, and also suggest Gli as a therapeutic target for pancreatic
cancer in eliminating CSCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4153855
PMID: 23200667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049581. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

The transcription factor GLI1 mediates TGFß1 driven EMT in hepatocellular
carcinoma via a SNAI1-dependent mechanism.

Zheng X(1), Vittar NB, Gai X, Fernandez-Barrena MG, Moser CD, Hu C, Almada LL,
McCleary-Wheeler AL, Elsawa SF, Vrabel AM, Shire AM, Comba A, Thorgeirsson SS,
Kim Y, Liu Q, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Roberts LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

The role of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) progression is well established, however the regulatory
mechanisms modulating this phenomenon remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that
transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) modulates EMT through
direct up-regulation of SNAI1 and serves as a downstream effector of the
transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGFß1) pathway, a well-known regulator of EMT in
cancer cells. Overexpression of GLI1 increased proliferation, viability,
migration, invasion, and colony formation by HCC cells. Conversely, GLI1
knockdown led to a decrease in all the above-mentioned cancer-associated
phenotypes in HCC cells. Further analysis of GLI1 regulated cellular functions
showed that this transcription factor is able to induce EMT and identified SNAI1 
as a transcriptional target of GLI1 mediating this cellular effect in HCC cells. 
Moreover, we demonstrated that an intact GLI1-SNAI1 axis is required by TGFß1 to 
induce EMT in these cells. Together, these findings define a novel cellular
mechanism regulated by GLI1, which controls the growth and EMT phenotype in HCC.

PMCID: PMC3501480
PMID: 23185371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cancer Lett. 2013 Feb 28;329(2):228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.11.005. Epub
2012 Nov 23.

MAP3K10 promotes the proliferation and decreases the sensitivity of pancreatic
cancer cells to gemcitabine by upregulating Gli-1 and Gli-2.

An Y(1), Cai B, Chen J, Lv N, Yao J, Xue X, Tu M, Tang D, Wei J, Jiang K, Wu J,
Li Q, Gao W, Miao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most lethal human
malignancies and is regulated by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Recently,
MAP3K10 has been shown to regulate Shh signaling, suggesting a role for MAP3K10
in the tumorigenesis of PDAC. We determined the expression status of MAP3K10 in
PDAC tissues and cell lines, and analyzed the viability and cell proliferation of
PDAC cells with an overexpression or knockdown of MAP3K10 in vitro. MAP3K10 was
upregulated in PDAC tissues and cell lines. Overexpression of MAP3K10 promoted
the proliferation and decreased the gemcitabine sensitivity of pancreatic cancer 
cells. In contrast, knockdown of MAP3K10 significantly decreased cell
proliferation and sensitized cells to gemcitabine. However, neither
overexpression nor knockdown of MAP3K10 affected cell migration. Moreover,
overexpression of MAP3K10 resulted in upregulation of Gli-1 and Gli-2 in PDAC
cells. Our results indicate a novel and important role for MAP3K10 in the
proliferation and chemoresistance of PDAC. Our study suggests that targeting
MAP3K10 is a potential strategy for the development of alternative therapies for 
pancreatic cancers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(9):4607-11.

Weighted gene co-expression network analysis in identification of endometrial
cancer prognosis markers.

Zhu XL(1), Ai ZH, Wang J, Xu YL, Teng YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic malignancy.
Identification of potential biomarkers of EC would be helpful for the detection
and monitoring of malignancy, improving clinical outcomes.
METHODS: The Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis method was used to
identify prognostic markers for EC in this study. Moreover, underlying molecular 
mechanisms were characterized by KEGG pathway enrichment and transcriptional
regulation analyses.
RESULTS: Seven gene co-expression modules were obtained, but only the turquoise
module was positively related with EC stage. Among the genes in the turquoise
module, COL5A2 (collagen, type V, alpha 2) could be regulated by PBX (pre-B-cell 
leukemia homeobox 1)1/2 and HOXB1(homeobox B1) transcription factors to be
involved in the focal adhesion pathway; CENP-E (centromere protein E, 312kDa) by 
E2F4 (E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding); MYCN (v-myc
myelocytomatosis viral related oncogene, neuroblastoma derived [avian]) by PAX5
(paired box 5); and BCL-2 (B-cell CLL/ lymphoma 2) and IGFBP-6 (insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 6) by GLI1. They were predicted to be associated
with EC progression via Hedgehog signaling and other cancer related-pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: These data on transcriptional regulation may provide a better
understanding of molecular mechanisms and clues to potential therapeutic targets 
in the treatment of EC.

PMID: 23167388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Exp Dermatol. 2012 Nov;21(11):847-52. doi: 10.1111/exd.12016.

Protein kinase A activation inhibits oncogenic Sonic hedgehog signalling and
suppresses basal cell carcinoma of the skin.

Makinodan E(1), Marneros AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Cutaneous Biology Research 
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Basal cell carcinoma of the skin (BCC) is caused by constitutive activation of
the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway, mainly through mutations either in the Shh
receptor Patched (PTCH) or in its co-receptor Smoothened (Smo). Inhibitors of
this pathway that are currently in clinical trials inhibit Smo. However,
mutations in Smo can result in resistance to these inhibitors. To target most
BCCs and avoid acquired resistance because of Smo mutations, inhibiting the
Shh-pathway downstream of Smo is critical. Attractive downstream targets would be
at the level of Gli proteins, the transcriptional activators of this pathway in
BCCs. Previously it has been shown that Gli1 and Gli2, when phosphorylated by
protein kinase A (PKA), are targeted for proteosomal degradation. Here we show
that PKA activation via the cAMP agonist forskolin is sufficient to completely
abolish oncogenic Smo activity in vitro. In an inducible BCC mouse model due to a
Smo mutation that confers resistance to current Smo inhibitors, topical forskolin
treatment significantly reduced Gli1 mRNA levels and resulted in strongly
suppressed BCC tumor growth. Our data show that forskolin inhibits the growth of 
even those BCCs that are resistant to Smo inhibitors and provide a
proof-of-principle framework for the development of topically applied human
skin-permeable novel pharmacologic inhibitors of oncogenic Shh-signaling through 
PKA activation.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23163650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Arh Hig Rada Toksikol. 2012 Sep;63(3):271-82. doi:
10.2478/10004-1254-63-2012-2255.

Altered canonical hedgehog-gli signalling axis in pesticide-induced bone marrow
aplasia mouse model.

Chaklader M(1), Das P, Pereira JA, Chaudhuri S, Law S.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research and Application Unit, Department of Biochemistry and
Medical Biotechnology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata, India.

The mechanistic interplay between pesticide exposure and development of marrow
aplasia is not yet well established but there are indices that chronic pesticide 
exposure in some instances causes marrow aplasia like haematopoietic degenerative
condition in human beings. Canonical Hedgehog (Hh) signalling has multiple roles 
in a wide range of developmental processes, including haematopoiesis. The present
study was designed to explore the status of four important components of the
canonical Hedgehog signalling cascade, the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), Ptch1, Smo, and 
Gli1, in a mouse model of chronic pesticide-induced bone marrow aplasia. We used 
5 % aqueous mixture of pesticides (chlorpyriphos, prophenophos, cypermethrin,
alpha-methrin, and hexaconazole) for inhalation and dermal exposure of 6 hours
per day and 5 days a week up to 90 days. Murine bone marrow aplasia related to
chronic pesticide treatment was confirmed primarily by haemogram, bone marrow
cellularity, short term bone marrow explant culture for cellular kinetics, bone
marrow smear, and fl ow cytometric Lin-Sca-1+C-kit+ extracellular receptor
expression pattern. Later, components of hedgehog signalling were analysed in the
bone marrow of both control and pesticide-treated aplastic groups of animals. The
results depicted pancytopenic feature of peripheral blood, developmental anomaly 
of neutrophils, depression of primitive stem and progenitor population along with
Shh, Ptch1, Smo and Gli1 expression in aplasia group. This investigation suggests
that pesticide-induced downregulation of two critically important proteins--Ptch1
and Gli1--inside the haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell population impairs
haematopoietic homeostasis and regeneration mechanism in vivo concurrent with
bone marrow aplasia.

PMID: 23152377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Oncogene. 2013 Oct;32(40):4737-47. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.502. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

WIP1 phosphatase modulates the Hedgehog signaling by enhancing GLI1 function.

Pandolfi S(1), Montagnani V, Penachioni JY, Vinci MC, Olivito B, Borgognoni L,
Stecca B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori (CRL-ITT), Florence, Italy.

The Hedgehog-GLI (HH-GLI) signaling plays a critical role in controlling growth
and tissue patterning during embryogenesis and is implicated in a variety of
human malignancies, including those of the skin. Phosphorylation events have been
shown to regulate the activity of the GLI transcription factors, the final
effectors of the HH-GLI signaling pathway. Here, we show that WIP1 (or PPM1D), an
oncogenic phosphatase amplified/overexpressed in several types of human cancer,
is a positive modulator of the HH signaling. Mechanistically, WIP1 enhances the
function of GLI1 by increasing its transcriptional activity, nuclear localization
and protein stability, but not of GLI2 nor GLI3. We also find that WIP1 and GLI1 
are in a complex. Modulation of the transcriptional activity of GLI1 by WIP1
depends on the latter's phosphatase activity and, remarkably, does not require
p53, a known WIP1 target. Functionally, we find that WIP1 is required for
melanoma and breast cancer cell proliferation and self-renewal in vitro and
melanoma xenograft growth induced by activation of the HH signaling.
Pharmacological blockade of the HH pathway with the SMOOTHENED antagonist
cyclopamine acts synergistically with inhibition of WIP1 in reducing growth of
melanoma and breast cancer cells in vitro. Overall, our data uncover a role for
WIP1 in modulating the activity of GLI1 and in sustaining cancer cell growth and 
cancer stem cell self-renewal induced by activation of the HH pathway. These
findings open a novel therapeutic approach for human melanomas and, possibly,
other cancer types expressing WIP1 and with activated HH pathway.

PMID: 23146903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jan;373(1-2):217-27. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1493-6. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

Sulforaphane regulates self-renewal of pancreatic cancer stem cells through the
modulation of Sonic hedgehog-GLI pathway.

Li SH(1), Fu J, Watkins DN, Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Sulforaphane (SFN), a component of dietary cruciferous vegetables has been
characterized for its anti-proliferative properties. We have recently
demonstrated that pancreatic CSCs display activation of sonic hedgehog pathway
which are fundamental drivers of stem cell renewal, and SFN inhibits the
self-renewal of pancreatic CSCs in vitro. Consistent with these observations, we 
sought to determine the chemopreventive potential of SFN in an in vivo setting.
We show here for the first time that sulforaphane treatment resulted in a
significant reduction in the tumor growth of orthotopically implanted primary
pancreatic CSCs isolated from human pancreatic tumors into the pancreas of
NOD/SCID/IL2Rgamma mice, which is mediated through the modulation of Sonic
hedgehog-GLI signaling. Hedgehog pathway blockade by SFN at a dose of 20 mg/kg
resulted in a 45 % reduction in growth of pancreatic cancer tumors and reduced
expression of Shh pathway components, Smo, Gli 1, and Gli 2 in mouse tissues.
Further, SFN inhibited the expression of pluripotency maintaining transcription
factors Nanog and Oct-4 and angiogenic markers VEGF and PDGFRa which are
downstream targets of Gli transcription. Furthermore, SFN treatment resulted in a
significant reduction in EMT markers Zeb-1, which correlated with increase in
E-Cadherin expression suggesting the blockade of signaling involved in early
metastasis. Interestingly, SFN downregulated the expression of Bcl-2 and XIAP to 
induce apoptosis. These data demonstrate that, at a tolerable dose, inhibition of
Shh pathway by SFN results in marked reduction in EMT, metastatic, angiogenic
markers with significant inhibition in tumor growth in mice. Since aberrant Shh
signaling occurs in pancreatic tumorigenesis, therapeutics that target Shh
pathway may improve the outcomes of patients with pancreatic cancer by targeting 
CSCs, thus suggesting the use of sulforaphane to further improve preventive and
therapeutic approaches in patients with this devastating disease.

PMID: 23129257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048039. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Inflammation and Gli2 suppress gastrin gene expression in a murine model of
antral hyperplasia.

Saqui-Salces M(1), Covés-Datson E, Veniaminova NA, Waghray M, Syu LJ, Dlugosz AA,
Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States of America.

Chronic inflammation in the stomach can lead to gastric cancer. We previously
reported that gastrin-deficient (Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice develop bacterial overgrowth,
inflammatory infiltrate, increased Il-1ß expression, antral hyperplasia and
eventually antral tumors. Since Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is active in gastric
cancers but its role in precursor lesions is poorly understood, we examined the
role of inflammation and Hh signaling in antral hyperplasia. LacZ reporter mice
for Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Gli1, and Gli2 expression bred onto the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B>
background revealed reduced Shh and Gli1 expression in the antra compared to wild
type controls (WT). Gli2 expression in the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> corpus was unchanged. However 
in the hyperplastic Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antra, Gli2 expression increased in both the
mesenchyme and epithelium, whereas expression in WT mice remained exclusively
mesenchymal. These observations suggested that Gli2 is differentially regulated
in the hyperplastic Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antrum versus the corpus and by a Shh
ligand-independent mechanism. Moreover, the proinflammatory cytokines Il-1ß and
Il-11, which promote gastric epithelial proliferation, were increased in the
Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> stomach along with Inf<U+03B3>. To test if inflammation could account for
elevated epithelial Gli2 expression in the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antra, the human gastric cell 
line AGS was treated with IL-1ß and was found to increase GLI2 but decrease GLI1 
levels. IL-1ß also repressed human GAST gene expression. Indeed, GLI2 but not
GLI1 or GLI3 expression repressed gastrin luciferase reporter activity by ~50
percent. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation of GLI2 in AGS cells confirmed
that GLI2 directly binds to the GAST promoter. Using a mouse model of
constitutively active epithelial GLI2 expression, we found that activated GLI2
repressed Gast expression but induced Il-1ß gene expression and proliferation in 
the gastric antrum, along with a reduction of the number of G-cells. In summary, 
epithelial Gli2 expression was sufficient to stimulate Il-1ß expression, repress 
Gast gene expression and increase proliferation, leading to antral hyperplasia.

PMCID: PMC3480483
PMID: 23110168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Mar;52(3):225-36. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22022. Epub
2012 Oct 29.

The human sulfatase 2 inhibitor 2,4-disulfonylphenyl-tert-butylnitrone (OKN-007) 
has an antitumor effect in hepatocellular carcinoma mediated via suppression of
TGFB1/SMAD2 and Hedgehog/GLI1 signaling.

Zheng X(1), Gai X, Han S, Moser CD, Hu C, Shire AM, Floyd RA, Roberts LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.

Human sulfatase 2 (SULF2) functions as an oncoprotein in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) development by promoting tumor growth and metastasis via enhancement of
fibroblast growth factor-2/extracellular signal-regulated kinase and
WNT/ß-catenin signaling. Recent results implicate that SULF2 activates the
transforming growth factor beta (TGFB) and Hedgehog/GLI1 pathways in HCC. OKN-007
is a novel phenyl-sulfonyl compound that inhibits the enzymatic activity of
SULF2. To investigate the antitumor effect of OKN-007 in HCC, we treated Huh7
cells, which express high levels of SULF2, with OKN-007 and found that it
significantly promoted tumor cell apoptosis and inhibited cell proliferation,
viability, and migration. To understand the action of OKN-007 on SULF2, we used
Huh7 cells which normally express SULF2 and Hep3B cells that do not normally
express SULF2. Utilizing Huh7 cells transfected with short hairpin RNA targeting 
SULF2 and transfection of Hep3B cells with a SULF2 plasmid to enhance SULF2
expression, we showed that the antitumor activity of OKN-007 was more pronounced 
in cells expressing SULF2. Furthermore, in vivo experiments verified that OKN-007
repressed tumor growth significantly. These results identify SULF2 as an
important target of the antitumor effect of OKN-007. To determine the molecular
mechanism of the antitumor effect of OKN-007, both TGFB1/SMAD and Hedgehog/GLI1
signaling pathway activity were measured by Western blot and SMAD- or
GLI-reporter luciferase assays. We found that both signaling pathways were
inhibited by OKN-007. Together, these results show that OKN-007 can suppress
TGFB1/SMAD and Hedgehog/GLI1 signaling via its inhibition of SULF2 enzymatic
activity. We conclude that OKN-007 or more potent derivatives may be promising
agents for the treatment of HCC.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3889201
PMID: 23109092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Chin Med J (Engl). 2012 Nov;125(21):3851-5.

Identification of Nedd4 as a novel regulator in Hedgehog signaling.

Luo QF(1), Chen W, Zhang ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100050, China.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in both embryonic
development and postnatal tissue homeostasis. Aberrant Hh activation results in a
large variety of cancers. This study was designed to discover novel modulators in
Hh signaling pathway.
METHODS: We performed yeast-two-hybrid screening and immunoprecipitation to
identify the interaction of Nedd4 and Smo. To verify whether Nedd4 is involved in
the regulation of Hh signaling, we monitored the activation of Gli-luciferase
reporter by overexpressing Nedd4 together with Gli-luciferase reporter. In order 
to examine the role of endogenous Nedd4 in regulating Hh signaling, we used a
short hairpin RNA (shRNA) interference strategy to silence the Nedd4 expression, 
and then perform dual-luciferase reporter assay. Statistical comparisons were
performed by Student's t tests.
RESULTS: We showed that Nedd4 binds to Smo in the transfected HEK293 cells.
Overexpression of Nedd4 alone did not significantly activate the Gli reporter
compared to pcDNA3 control (Nedd4 group: dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), relative
luciferase unit (RLU) 1.87 ± 0.41). However, Smo agonist (SAG)-stimulated
activation of Gli-luciferase reporter was markedly potentiated in Nedd4
transfected cells (Nedd4 group: SAG, RLU 13.49 ± 1.04, P < 0.05), indicating that
overexpression of Nedd4 increases Gli luciferase reporter activity and
Nedd4-induced activation of Hh signaling is activity dependent. In Nedd4
knockdown NIH 3T3 cells, the luciferase reporter activity was measured basally
and after SAG treatment. In scrambled cells, compared to DMSO, SAG could activate
reporter activity by (4.16 ± 0.84)-fold. In Nedd4 knockdown cells, the luciferase
reporter activation by SAG was significantly inhibited (SAG, RLU 1.72 ± 0.24, P <
0.05); knockdown of Nedd4 did not change the basal activity of luciferase
activity (DMSO, RLU 0.86 ± 0.11), suggesting that the loss of Nedd4 expression
diminishes Gli-dependent activity in the Hh pathway and the regulation of Nedd4
in the Hh signaling pathway is activity-dependent.
CONCLUSION: Nedd4 positively regulates the Hh pathway and provides a potential
target for inhibiting Hh signaling in cancer therapy.

PMID: 23106887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Yi Chuan. 2012 Oct;34(10):1291-7.

[Molecular cloning, expression profile analysis and construction of adipose
tissue specific expression vector of pig Gli1 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin JL(1), Shen LC, Pan DK, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Techonolgy, Hebei Normal University of Science &
Technolgoy, Qinhuangdao 066600, China. linjl010@163.com

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway inhibits fat accumulation, which is conserved
in a wide variety of organisms from Drosophila to vertebrates, but few reports
about its effect on pigs are available. In this study, pig Gli1 gene was cloned
for the first time by rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and RT-PCR. Pig
Gli1 expression profiles were then studied in different tissues and in different 
developmental stages of the adipose tissue of pigs using real-time PCR. Finally, 
the eukaryotic expression vector and the adipose tissue specific expression
vector were constructed. The results showed that the full pig Gli1 cDNA length
was 3 576 bp, the genomic sequence contained 10 715 bp with 12 exons, and 1 106
amino acids were encoded. Pig Gli1 was predicted as an unstable hydrophilic
protein without a tans-membrane structure or a signal peptide. The C2H2 zinc
finger domain and a nuclear localization sequence were found in pig Gli1. A
homology analysis of the Gli1 amino acids and the genomic sequences among seven
species showed that the identities were all greater than 80%, which indicates
that Gli1 is highly conserved among different species. Tissue expression profile 
analysis showed that pig Gli1 was only expressed in the tone tissue of adult
pigs. Analysis of the pig adipose tissue developmental process showed that Gli1
was detected in the adipose tissue of one-week-old pigs, but not in one-month-old
and three-month-old pigs. Finally, a pig Gli1 eukaryotic expression vector was
constructed and properly expressed with cell transfection. An adipose tissue
specific expression vector was constructed for transgenic animal studies.

PMID: 23099785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncotarget. 2012 Aug;3(8):854-68. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Regulation of DNA damage following termination of Hedgehog (HH) survival
signaling at the level of the GLI genes in human colon cancer.

Agyeman A(1), Mazumdar T, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of the Hedgehog (HH) signaling response is mediated by
GLI genes (GLI1, GLI2) downstream of SMO, that are also activated by oncogenic
signaling pathways. We have demonstrated the importance of targeting GLI
downstream of SMO in the induction of cell death in human colon carcinoma cells. 
In HT29 cells inhibition of GLI1/GLI2 by the small molecule inhibitor GANT61
induced DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and activation of ATM, MDC1 and NBS1;
<U+03B3>H2AX and MDC1, NBS1 and MDC1 co-localized in nuclear foci. Early activation of
ATM was decreased by 24 hr, when p-NBS1(Ser343), activated by ATM, was
significantly reduced in cell extracts. Bound <U+03B3>H2AX was detected in isolated
chromatin fractions or nuclei during DNA damage but not during DNA repair. MDC1
was tightly bound to chromatin at 32 hr as cells accumulated in early S-phase
prior to becoming subG1, and during DNA repair. Limited binding of NBS1 was
detected at all times during DNA damage but was strongly bound during DNA repair.
Transient overexpression of NBS1 protected HT29 cells from GANT61-induced cell
death, while knockdown of H2AX by H2AXshRNA delayed DNA damage signaling. Data
demonstrate following GLI1/GLI2 inhibition: 1) induction of DNA damage in cells
that are also resistant to SMO inhibitors, 2) dynamic interactions between <U+03B3>H2AX,
MDC1 and NBS1 in single cell nuclei and in isolated chromatin fractions, 3)
expression and chromatin binding properties of key mediator proteins that mark
DNA damage or DNA repair, and 4) the importance of NBS1 in the DNA damage
response mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3478462
PMID: 23097684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2012 Oct 11;3(10):808-813. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Macrocyclic Hedgehog Pathway Inhibitors: Optimization of Cellular Activity and
Mode of Action Studies.

Dockendorff C(1), Nagiec MM, Weïwer M, Buhrlage S, Ting A, Nag PP, Germain A, Kim
HJ, Youngsaye W, Scherer C, Bennion M, Xue L, Stanton BZ, Lewis TA, Macpherson L,
Palmer M, Foley MA, Perez JR, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Platform and Probe Development Center and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT , 7 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United States.

Macrocyclic Hedgehog (Hh) pathway inhibitors have been discovered with improved
potency and maximal inhibition relative to the previously reported macrocycle
robotnikinin. Analogues were prepared using a modular and efficient
build-couple-pair (BCP) approach, with a ring-closing metathesis step to form the
macrocyclic ring. Varying the position of the macrocycle nitrogen and oxygen
atoms provided inhibitors with improved activity in cellular assays; the most
potent analogue was 29 (BRD-6851), with an IC(50) of 0.4 µM against C3H10T1/2
cells undergoing Hh-induced activation, as measured by Gli1 transcription and
alkaline phosphatase induction. Studies with Patched knockout (Ptch(-/-)) cells
and competition studies with the Smoothened (Smo) agonists SAG and purmorphamine 
demonstrate that in contrast to robotnikinin, select analogues are Smo
antagonists.

PMCID: PMC3469069
PMID: 23074541  [PubMed]


106. J Cell Biol. 2012 Oct 15;199(2):193-7. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201207140.

Hedgehog pathway inhibition and the race against tumor evolution.

Atwood SX(1), Chang AL, Oro AE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Dependence of basal cell carcinomas and medulloblastomas on the Hedgehog pathway 
provides an opportunity for targeted or "personalized" therapy. The recent
effectiveness and FDA approval of the first Smoothened inhibitors validates this 
class of agents, but has revealed drug-resistant tumor variants that bypass
Smoothened inhibition. Here, we summarize the effectiveness of Hedgehog pathway
inhibitors and highlight promising areas for the development of next generation
drug antagonists for Hedgehog-dependent cancers.

PMCID: PMC3471227
PMID: 23071148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Feb;137(2):183-99. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.10.002.
Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Overlapping activities of TGF-ß and Hedgehog signaling in cancer: therapeutic
targets for cancer treatment.

Perrot CY(1), Javelaud D, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Team TGF-ß and Oncogenesis, 91400, Orsay, France; INSERM
U1021, 91400, Orsay, France.

Recent advances in the field of cancer therapeutics come from the development of 
drugs that specifically recognize validated oncogenic or pro-metastatic targets. 
The latter may be mutated proteins with altered function, such as kinases that
become constitutively active, or critical components of growth factor signaling
pathways, whose deregulation leads to aberrant malignant cell proliferation and
dissemination to metastatic sites. We herein focus on the description of the
overlapping activities of two important developmental pathways often exacerbated 
in cancer, namely Transforming Growth Factor-ß (TGF-ß) and Hedgehog (HH)
signaling, with a special emphasis on the unifying oncogenic role played by
GLI1/2 transcription factors. The latter are the main effectors of the canonical 
HH pathway, yet are direct target genes of TGF-ß/SMAD signal transduction. While 
tumor-suppressor in healthy and pre-malignant tissues, TGF-ß is often expressed
at high levels in tumors and contributes to tumor growth, escape from immune
surveillance, invasion and metastasis. HH signaling regulates cell proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis, and aberrant HH signaling is found in a variety of
cancers. We discuss the current knowledge on HH and TGF-ß implication in cancer
including cancer stem cell biology, as well as the current state, both successes 
and failures, of targeted therapeutics aimed at blocking either of these pathways
in the pre-clinical and clinical settings.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 28;3(10):828-33. doi: 10.1021/ml300192k. eCollection 
2012.

Structure-activity relationships for side chain oxysterol agonists of the
hedgehog signaling pathway.

Corman A(1), DeBerardinis AM(1), Hadden MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Connecticut , 69 North
Eagleville Road, Unit 3092, Storrs, Connecticut 06269-3092, United States.

Erratum in
    ACS Med Chem Lett. 2013 Mar 14;4(3):363.

Oxysterols (OHCs) are byproducts of cholesterol oxidation that are known to
activate the Hedeghog (Hh) signaling pathway. While OHCs that incorporate
hydroxyl groups throughout the scaffold are known, those that act as agonists of 
Hh signaling primarily contain a single hydroxyl on the alkyl side chain. We
sought to further explore how side chain hydroxylation patterns affect
oxysterol-mediated Hh activation, by performing a structure-activity relationship
study on a series of synthetic OHCs. The most active analogue, 23(R)-OHC (35),
demonstrated potent activation of Hh signaling in two Hh-dependent cell lines
(EC50 values 0.54-0.65 µM). In addition, OHC 35 was approximately 3-fold
selective for the Hh pathway as compared to the liver X receptor, a nuclear
receptor that is also activated by endogenous OHCs. Finally, 35 induced
osteogenic differentiation and osteoblast formation in cultured cells, indicating
functional agonism of the Hh pathway.

PMCID: PMC4025875
PMID: 24900386  [PubMed]


109. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046083. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Sonic hedgehog signaling inhibition provides opportunities for targeted therapy
by sulforaphane in regulating pancreatic cancer stem cell self-renewal.

Rodova M(1), Fu J, Watkins DN, Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, Kansas City, United States of America.

Dysregulation of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway has been associated
with cancer stem cells (CSC) and implicated in the initiation of pancreatic
cancer. Pancreatic CSCs are rare tumor cells characterized by their ability to
self-renew, and are responsible for tumor recurrence accompanied by resistance to
current therapies. The lethality of these incurable, aggressive and invasive
pancreatic tumors remains a daunting clinical challenge. Thus, the objective of
this study was to investigate the role of Shh pathway in pancreatic cancer and to
examine the molecular mechanisms by which sulforaphane (SFN), an active compound 
in cruciferous vegetables, inhibits self-renewal capacity of human pancreatic
CSCs. Interestingly, we demonstrate here that Shh pathway is highly activated in 
pancreatic CSCs and plays important role in maintaining stemness by regulating
the expression of stemness genes. Given the requirement for Hedgehog in
pancreatic cancer, we investigated whether hedgehog blockade by SFN could target 
the stem cell population in pancreatic cancer. In an in vitro model, human
pancreatic CSCs derived spheres were significantly inhibited on treatment with
SFN, suggesting the clonogenic depletion of the CSCs. Interestingly, SFN
inhibited the components of Shh pathway and Gli transcriptional activity.
Interference of Shh-Gli signaling significantly blocked SFN-induced inhibitory
effects demonstrating the requirement of an active pathway for the growth of
pancreatic CSCs. SFN also inhibited downstream targets of Gli transcription by
suppressing the expression of pluripotency maintaining factors (Nanog and Oct-4) 
as well as PDGFRa and Cyclin D1. Furthermore, SFN induced apoptosis by inhibition
of BCL-2 and activation of caspases. Our data reveal the essential role of
Shh-Gli signaling in controlling the characteristics of pancreatic CSCs. We
propose that pancreatic cancer preventative effects of SFN may result from
inhibition of the Shh pathway. Thus Sulforaphane potentially represents an
inexpensive, safe and effective alternative for the management of pancreatic
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3461003
PMID: 23029396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;136:229-32. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.09.024. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

1a,25(OH)2-dihydroxyvitamin D3/VDR protects the skin from UVB-induced tumor
formation by interacting with the ß-catenin pathway.

Jiang YJ(1), Teichert AE, Fong F, Oda Y, Bikle DD.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine and Dermatology, VA Medical Center and 
University of California at San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. yanjennyjiang@yahoo.com

Ultra violet (UV) irradiation, in particular UVB, is the single most important
carcinogen for skin tumor formation. UVB induces genetic mutations and immune
suppression, which lead to abnormal cell proliferation and eventually tumor
formation. Previously studies from our group and others demonstrated that both
global and epidermal specific VDR knock out mice are predisposed to either
chemical (DMBA)- or long-term UVB-induced skin tumor formation, paralleled by an 
increase in ß-catenin signaling. Using primary cultured human keratinocytes, we
further demonstrated that 1,25(OH)2-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) suppresses 
cyclin D1 and Gli1 which are regulated by ß-catenin/TCF signaling and have a
critical role in epidermal carcinogenesis. Blockage of VDR by siRNA resulted in
hyperproliferation of keratinocytes, and increased expression of cyclin D1 and
Gli1. In addition, we also showed that 1,25(OH)2D3/VDR directly regulates
transcriptional activity of ß-catenin/TCF signaling using the -catenin reporter
TopGlow. Using K14 driven tamoxifen-induced cre recombinase to delete both VDR
and ß-catenin in keratinocytes of mice following the first hair follicle cycle,
we found that ablation of epidermal specific ß-catenin cannot rescue VDR null
mice from UVB-induced skin tumor formation. Further study using VDR or ß-catenin 
single null mice is necessary to compare with the data from double null mice.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Vitamin D Workshop'.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4102608
PMID: 23026511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Dec 1;303(11):L978-90. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00184.2012. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Role of Sonic Hedgehog in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Bolaños AL(1), Milla CM, Lira JC, Ramírez R, Checa M, Barrera L, García-Alvarez
J, Carbajal V, Becerril C, Gaxiola M, Pardo A, Selman M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, Mexico
City, Mexico.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Mar 15;304(6):L391-3.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive and lethal disease of
unknown etiology and uncertain pathogenic mechanisms. Recent studies indicate
that the pathogenesis of the disease may involve the abnormal expression of
certain developmental pathways. Here we evaluated the expression of Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH), Patched-1, Smoothened, and transcription factors
glioma-associated oncogene homolog (GLI)1 and GLI2 by RT-PCR, as well as their
localization in IPF and normal lungs by immunohistochemistry. The effects of SHH 
on fibroblast proliferation, migration, collagen and fibronectin production, and 
apoptosis were analyzed by WST-1, Boyden chamber chemotaxis, RT-PCR, Sircol, and 
annexin V-propidium iodide binding assays, respectively. Our results showed that 
all the main components of the Sonic signaling pathway were overexpressed in IPF 
lungs. With the exception of Smoothened, they were also upregulated in IPF
fibroblasts. SHH and GLI2 localized to epithelial cells, whereas Patched-1,
Smoothened, and GLI1 were observed mainly in fibroblasts and inflammatory cells. 
No staining was detected in normal lungs. Recombinant SHH increased fibroblast
proliferation (P < 0.05), collagen synthesis, (2.5 ± 0.2 vs. 4.5 ± 1.0 µg of
collagen/ml; P < 0.05), fibronectin expression (2-3-fold over control), and
migration (190.3 ± 12.4% over control, P < 0.05). No effect was observed on
a-smooth muscle actin expression. SHH protected lung fibroblasts from
TNF-a/IFN-<U+03B3>/Fas-induced apoptosis (14.5 ± 3.2% vs. 37.3 ± 7.2%, P < 0.0001). This
protection was accompanied by modifications in several apoptosis-related
proteins, including increased expression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis.
These findings indicate that the SHH pathway is activated in IPF lungs and that
SHH may contribute to IPF pathogenesis by increasing the proliferation,
migration, extracellular matrix production, and survival of fibroblasts.

PMID: 23023967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 25;109(39):15817-22. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Hedgehog-responsive mesenchymal clusters direct patterning and emergence of
intestinal villi.

Walton KD(1), Kolterud A, Czerwinski MJ, Bell MJ, Prakash A, Kushwaha J, Grosse
AS, Schnell S, Gumucio DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

In the adult intestine, an organized array of finger-like projections, called
villi, provide an enormous epithelial surface area for absorptive function. Villi
first emerge at embryonic day (E) 14.5 from a previously flat luminal surface.
Here, we analyze the cell biology of villus formation and examine the role of
paracrine epithelial Hedgehog (Hh) signals in this process. We find that, before 
villus emergence, tight clusters of Hh-responsive mesenchymal cells form just
beneath the epithelium. Cluster formation is dynamic; clusters first form
dorsally and anteriorly and spread circumferentially and posteriorly. Statistical
analysis of cluster distribution reveals a patterned array; with time, new
clusters form in spaces between existing clusters, promoting approximately four
rounds of villus emergence by E18.5. Cells within mesenchymal clusters express
Patched1 and Gli1, as well as Pdgfra, a receptor previously shown to participate 
in villus development. BrdU-labeling experiments show that clusters form by
migration and aggregation of Hh-responsive cells. Inhibition of Hh signaling
prevents cluster formation and villus development, but does not prevent emergence
of villi in areas where clusters have already formed. Conversely, increasing Hh
signaling increases the size of villus clusters and results in exceptionally wide
villi. We conclude that Hh signals dictate the initial aspects of the formation
of each villus by controlling mesenchymal cluster aggregation and regulating
cluster size.

PMCID: PMC3465418
PMID: 23019366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Dec;6(6):1276-80. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1094. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

Sublocalization of Rab23, a mediator of Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway, in
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.

Sun HJ(1), Liu YJ, Li N, Sun ZY, Zhao HW, Wang C, Li H, Ma FM, Shi SM, Xu XQ,
Chen ZY, Huang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental
Disorders, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, P.R. China.

The novel member of the Rab family of GTPases, Rab23, is an essential negative
regulator of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway. Loss of function
mutation of the Rab23 gene causes abnormal development of the neural tube in mice
and in certain human congenital diseases. The aberrant overexpression of Rab23
has been associated with various diseases, such as gastric, hepatocellular and
lung cancer. The exact function of Rab23 in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs),
however, remains unknown. Previously, we reported the abnormal sublocalization of
Rab23 in lung cancers. In the current study, we investigated the role of Rab23 in
HCCs. We report the distinct sublocalization pattern of Rab23 in HCC cell lines. 
This difference depends on the GDP/GTP-binding form, and inhibition of the Rab23 
cycle decreases the expression and nuclear localization of Gli1.

PMID: 23007279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Exp Med. 2013 Nov;13(4):315-22. doi: 10.1007/s10238-012-0198-1. Epub 2012
Jul 20.

Aberrant activation of hedgehog pathway in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Yue Y(1), Zhong W, Pei G, Xiao B, Zhang G, Jiang F, Zhang J, Chen C, Yang P, Dang
H, Chang H.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science College, Sun Yat-sen University, No. 135 Xingang xi Road,
Guangzhou, 510275, China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a very common head and neck cancer in southern 
china. Despite advances in surgical and chemotherapeutic approaches, its
prognosis is still not promising. Hedgehog signaling pathway was reported to be
involved in a number of cancers including head and neck. However, it remains
unclear regarding the role of this pathway in NPC. By real-time PCR, we found
Ptch1, Smo, and Gli-1 were expressed in all human nasopharyngeal epithelial
tissues and cell lines. Compared with nasopharyngeal normal epithelial tissues,
the mRNA expression level of Gli-1 was higher in carcinoma and nasopharyngitis
(NPI) epithelial tissues. While compared with nasopharyngitis epithelia, the mRNA
expression level of Ptch1 was lower in carcinoma epithelia and normal epithelia. 
The expressions of Smo mRNA were not significantly different among these
epithelial tissues. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that the expression
level of Gli-1 was higher in NPC than NPI. Thus, our data indicated that aberrant
activation of hedgehog pathway in NPC. Furthermore, blocking the pathway with
cyclopamine inhibited the proliferation of NPC epithelia cell lines. In addition,
blockade of the pathway in three NPC cell lines with cyclopamine-induced tumor
cell apoptosis. The transcription of hedgehog target genes also is inhibited by
cyclopamine. These data suggested that hedgehog pathway may sustain
nasopharyngeal tumor growth. Our data demonstrated that hedgehog signaling
pathway was involved in NPC pathogenesis and might be a novel therapeutic target 
for NPC.

PMID: 23001130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 9;287(46):39171-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.404293. Epub 2012
Sep 20.

Stromal adipocyte enhancer-binding protein (AEBP1) promotes mammary epithelial
cell hyperplasia via proinflammatory and hedgehog signaling.

Holloway RW(1), Bogachev O, Bharadwaj AG, McCluskey GD, Majdalawieh AF, Zhang L, 
Ro HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 1X5, Canada.

Disruption of mammary stromal-epithelial communication leads to aberrant mammary 
gland development and induces mammary tumorigenesis. Macrophages have been
implicated in carcinogenesis primarily by creating an inflammatory
microenvironment, which promotes growth of the adjacent epithelial cells.
Adipocyte enhancer-binding protein 1 (AEBP1), a novel proinflammatory mediator,
promotes macrophage inflammatory responsiveness by inducing NF-<U+03BA>B activity, which
has been implicated in tumor cell growth and survival by aberrant sonic hedgehog 
(Shh) expression. Here, we show that stromal macrophage AEBP1 overexpression
results in precocious alveologenesis in the virgin AEBP1 transgenic (AEBP1(TG))
mice, and the onset of ductal hyperplasia was accelerated in AEBP1(TG) mice fed a
high fat diet, which induces endogenous AEBP1 expression. Transplantation of
AEBP1(TG) bone marrow cells into non-transgenic (AEBP1(NT)) mice resulted in
alveolar hyperplasia with up-regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B activity and TNFa expression as 
displayed in the AEBP1(TG) mammary macrophages and epithelium. Shh expression was
induced in AEBP1(TG) macrophages and RAW264.7 macrophages overexpressing AEBP1.
The Shh target genes Gli1 and Bmi1 expression was induced in the AEBP1(TG)
mammary epithelium and HC11 mammary epithelial cells co-cultured with AEBP1(TG)
peritoneal macrophages. The conditioned AEBP1(TG) macrophage culture media
promoted NF-<U+03BA>B activity and survival signal, Akt activation, in HC11 cells,
whereas such effects were abolished by TNFa neutralizing antibody treatment.
Furthermore, HC11 cells displayed enhanced proliferation in response to AEBP1(TG)
macrophages and their conditioned media. Our findings highlight the role of AEBP1
in the signaling pathways regulating the cross-talk between mammary epithelium
and stroma that could predispose the mammary tissue to tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3493957
PMID: 22995915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012 Dec;16(12):1227-38. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2012.720975. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

The sonic hedgehog-GLI1 signaling pathway in brain tumor development.

Shahi MH(1), Rey JA, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Department of Pharmacology, Davis, CA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is a regulatory network involved
in development and cancer. Proteins like Ptch, SMO, and Gli are central to the
Shh pathway. Other proteins like HHIP, SUFU, Bmi-1, Cyclin D2, Plakoglobin, PAX6,
Nkx2.2, and SFRP1 are not so well understood in Shh regulation as Gli-1
downstream target genes.
AREAS COVERED: In this review we try to explain the Shh pathway components and
their role in development and cancer, mainly of the brain. A summary of each of
the proteins is presented together with an overview of their involvement in
cancer.
EXPERT OPINION: Genetic alterations of the Shh pathway have been detected in
cancer stem cells, a subgroup of tumor cells implicated in the origin and
maintenance of tumors, being responsible for cancer recurrence and chemotherapy
resistance. Cancer stem cells constitute a novel target for biomedical
researchers. Specifically, the Shh pathway is being explored as a new opportunity
for targeted therapies against tumors. Therefore, a better knowledge of every of 
the regulators of the Shh pathway is needed.

PMID: 22992192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Bioorg Med Chem. 2012 Nov 1;20(21):6465-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.08.026. Epub 
2012 Aug 28.

Potent small molecule Hedgehog agonists induce VEGF expression in vitro.

Seifert K(1), Büttner A, Rigol S, Eilert N, Wandel E, Giannis A.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Leipzig, Fakultät für Chemie und Mineralogie, Institut für
Organische Chemie, Johannisallee 29, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Here, we describe the synthesis, SAR studies as well as biological investigations
of the known Hedgehog signaling agonist SAG and a small library of its analogues.
The SAG and its derivatives were analyzed for their potency to activate the
expression of the Hh target gene Gli1 in a reporter gene assay. By analyzing SAR 
important molecular descriptors for Gli1 activation have been identified. SAG as 
well as compound 10c proven to be potent activators of VEGF expression in
cultivated dermal fibroblasts. Importantly and in contrast to SAG, derivative 10c
displayed no toxicity in concentrations up to 250 µm.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22985958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Virology. 2012 Nov 25;433(2):337-45. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2012.08.024. Epub 2012 
Sep 11.

Differential gene expression between skin and cervix induced by the E7
oncoprotein in a transgenic mouse model.

Ibarra Sierra E(1), Díaz Chávez J, Cortés-Malagón EM, Uribe-Figueroa L,
Hidalgo-Miranda A, Lambert PF, Gariglio P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados, México DF, Mexico.

HPV16 E7 oncoprotein expression in K14E7 transgenic mice induces cervical cancer 
after 6 months of treatment with the co-carcinogen 17ß-estradiol. In untreated
mice, E7 also induces skin tumors late in life albeit at low penetrance. These
findings indicate that E7 alters cellular functions in cervix and skin so as to
predispose these organs to tumorigenesis. Using microarrays, we determined the
global genes expression profile in cervical and skin tissue of young adult K14E7 
transgenic mice without estrogen treatment. In these tissues, the E7 oncoprotein 
altered the transcriptional pattern of genes involved in several biological
processes including signal transduction, transport, metabolic process, cell
adhesion, apoptosis, cell differentiation, immune response and inflammatory
response. Among the E7-dysregulated genes were ones not previously known to be
involved in cervical neoplasia including DMBT1, GLI1 and 17ßHSD2 in cervix, as
well as MMP2, 12, 14, 19 and 27 in skin.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3628553
PMID: 22980503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 15;370(2):187-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.027. Epub 2012 
Aug 9.

Mammary epithelial-restricted expression of activated c-src rescues the block to 
mammary gland morphogenesis due to the deletion of the C-terminus of Patched-1.

Chang H(1), Balenci L, Okolowsky N, Muller WJ, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Canada.

Mesenchymal dysplasia (mes) mice expressing a C-terminally truncated version of
the Hedgehog (Hh)-ligand receptor, Patched-1 (Ptch1), exhibit a limited spectrum 
of developmental defects including blocked ductal morphogenesis of the mammary
gland during puberty. Given that the Hh-ligands can stimulate signalling cascades
distinct from the canonical pathway involving Smo and the Gli-family proteins and
that Ptch1 binds to factors harbouring SH3-domains, we determined whether the mes
mammary gland defect could be rescued by activating non-canonical signalling
pathways downstream of Ptch1. We demonstrate here that expression of
constitutively active c-src (c-src(Act)) in mammary epithelial cells overcomes
the block to mammary epithelial morphogenesis in mes mice. Specifically,
MMTV-directed expression of c-src(Act) rescued blocked ductal morphogenesis in
mes mice, albeit only after animals were more than 15 weeks of age. The overall
morphology resembled wild type mice expressing c-src(Act) although 40% of
mes/MMTV-c-src(Act) mice exhibited terminal end buds at 24 weeks of age.
C-src(Act) restored the proliferative capacity of mes epithelial cells,
self-renewal capacity of mammary progenitor cells and increased the expression of
Esr1, Ptch1 and Gli1. These data reveal the cooperative interactions between
signalling cascades involving c-src and Ptch1 and suggest that Hh-signalling may 
be permissive for c-src/Esr1-dependent mammary gland morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22968113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jul;33(7):570-3.

[Effect of Gli1 gene silencing on proliferation of K562 cells and its
mechanisms].

[Article in Chinese]

Su WX(1), Chen YH, Zeng W, Liu WL, Sun HY.

Author information: 
(1)Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of Gli1 gene silencing by RNA interference
(RNAi) on proliferation of K562 cells and its mechanisms.
METHODS: The small interference RNA (siRNA) was synthesized in vitro. K562 cells 
were transfected with Gli1 siRNA by the way of lipofection (lipofectamine 2000). 
Non-specific siRNA transfected cells were used as control. Transfection
efficiencies of different siRNA concentrations were detected by flow cytometry
and the best siRNA concentration was selected. The silencing effect of siRNA was 
demonstrated by real time PCR and Westem blot analysis. Cell proliferation was
measured by MTT method, cell cycle by PI assay, c-myc and p21 mRNA level was
detected by real time PCR analysis.
RESULTS: Transfection efficiency of siRNA was increased in a dose-dependent
manner when siRNA concentration was below 200 pmol, and the highest transfection 
efficiency reached (80.11 ± 5.63)%. Both the mRNA and protein level of Gli1 was
down-regulated in Gli1 specific siRNA group, the mRNA level was (52.60 ± 3.57)%
of that of control group after 24 h (t = 20.33, P < 0.01) and the protein level
was (79.31 ± 5.58)% of that of control group after 48 h (t = 6.54, P < 0.01). The
cell proliferation rate in Gli1 siRNA group was (94.41 ± 3.58)% (t = 2.40, P =
0.05) and (90.22 ± 3.34)% (t = 4.37, P < 0.01) of that of control group after 24 
h and 48 h, respectively. G(2)/M cell cycle arrest was observed, the mRNA level
of c-myc was down-regulated while p21 was up-regulated in Gli1 siRNA group after 
24 h and 48 h (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Targeted silencing of Gli1 gene by RNAi inhibits the proliferation
of K562 cells, which acts through the down-regulation of c-myc and up-regulation 
of p21 expression.

PMID: 22967421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Dec 1;84(11):1409-18. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.08.019.
Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Gli family transcription factors are drivers of patupilone resistance in ovarian 
cancer.

Mozzetti S(1), Martinelli E, Raspaglio G, Prislei S, De Donato M, Filippetti F,
Shahabi S, Scambia G, Ferlini C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Antineoplastic Pharmacology, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.

Epothilones constitute a novel class of antitubulin agents that are active in
patients who relapse after treatment with other chemotherapeutics. This study
investigated the molecular mechanisms leading to the onset of epothilone-B
(patupilone) resistance in ovarian cancer. Results demonstrated that the Gli
family of transcription factors was overexpressed in resistant cells and that
treatment with a specific Gli1 inhibitor (GANT58) made cells more susceptible to 
treatment, partially reversing drug resistance. We also demonstrated that Gli1
knockdown halted growth in resistant cells that were exposed to patupilone,
confirming that Gli1 is capable of directly mediating epothilone-B resistance.
Another observation from our research was that patupilone-resistant cells
produced HGF and acquired characteristics of a mesenchymal phenotype. However,
HGF silencing alone was not capable of converting the drug-resistant phenotype to
a susceptible one, and in this case we demonstrated that Gli1 overexpression led 
to an increase in HGF, establishing a functional link between Gli1 and HGF. These
results demonstrated that Gli1 played a key role in driving resistance to
patupilone, suggesting that the combination of epothilones and Gli1-targeted
agents could be exploited to improve outcomes in ovarian cancer patients
resistant to standard treatments.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22964220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Nov 1;303(9):L778-87. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00280.2011. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

LPS-induced chorioamnionitis and antenatal corticosteroids modulate Shh signaling
in the ovine fetal lung.

Collins JJ(1), Kuypers E, Nitsos I, Jane Pillow J, Polglase GR, Kemp MW, Newnham 
JP, Cleutjens JP, Frints SG, Kallapur SG, Jobe AH, Kramer BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Maastricht University Medical Center, 
The Netherlands.

Chorioamnionitis and antenatal corticosteroids mature the fetal lung functionally
but disrupt late-gestation lung development. Because Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)
signaling is a major pathway directing lung development, we hypothesized that
chorioamnionitis and antenatal corticosteroids modulated Shh signaling, resulting
in an altered fetal lung structure. Time-mated ewes with singleton ovine fetuses 
received an intra-amniotic injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and/or maternal 
intramuscular betamethasone 7 and/or 14 days before delivery at 120 days
gestational age (GA) (term = 150 days GA). Intra-amniotic LPS exposure decreased 
Shh mRNA levels and Gli1 protein expression, which was counteracted by both
betamethasone pre- or posttreatment. mRNA and protein levels of fibroblast growth
factor 10 and bone morphogenetic protein 4, which are important mediators of lung
development, increased 2-fold and 3.5-fold, respectively, 14 days after LPS
exposure. Both 7-day and 14-day exposure to LPS changed the mRNA levels of
elastin (ELN) and collagen type I alpha 1 (Col1A1) and 2 (Col1A2), which resulted
in fewer elastin foci and increased collagen type I deposition in the alveolar
septa. Corticosteroid posttreatment prevented the decrease in ELN mRNA and
increased elastin foci and decreased collagen type I deposition in the fetal
lung. In conclusion, fetal lung exposure to LPS was accompanied by changes in key
modulators of lung development resulting in abnormal lung structure.
Betamethasone treatment partially prevented the changes in developmental
processes and lung structure. This study provides new insights into clinically
relevant prenatal exposures and fetal lung development.

PMCID: PMC3517680
PMID: 22962010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2012 Sep 7;10:75. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-10-75.

Endometrial stromal beta-catenin is required for steroid-dependent
mesenchymal-epithelial cross talk and decidualization.

Zhang L(1), Patterson AL, Zhang L, Teixeira JM, Pru JK.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Vincent Obstetrics and Gynecology
Service, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: Beta-catenin is part of a protein complex associated with adherens
junctions. When allowed to accumulate to sufficient levels in its
dephosphorylated form, beta-catenin serves as a transcriptional co-activator
associated with a number of signaling pathways, including steroid hormone
signaling pathways.
METHODS: To investigate the role of beta-catenin in progesterone (P4) signaling
and female reproductive physiology, conditional ablation of Ctnnb1 from the
endometrial mesenchymal (i.e. stromal and myometrial), but not epithelial,
compartment was accomplished using the Amhr2-Cre mice. Experiments were conducted
to assess the ability of mutant female mice to undergo pregnancy and
pseudopregnancy by or through oil-induced decidualization. The ability of uteri
from mutant female mice to respond to estrogen (E2) and P4 was also determined.
RESULTS: Conditional deletion of Ctnnb1 from the mesenchymal compartment of the
uterus resulted in infertility stemming, in part, from complete failure of the
uterus to decidualize. E2-stimulated epithelial cell mitosis and edematization
were not altered in mutant uteri indicating that the mesenchyme is capable of
responding to E2. However, exposure of ovariectomized mutant female mice to a
combined E2 and P4 hormone regimen consistent with early pregnancy revealed that 
mesenchymal beta-catenin is essential for indirectly opposing E2-induced
epithelial proliferation by P4 and in some mice resulted in development of
endometrial metaplasia. Lastly, beta-catenin is also required for the induced
expression of genes that are known to play a fundamental role in decidualization 
such as Ihh, Ptch1, Gli1 and Muc1
CONCLUSIONS: Three salient points derive from these studies. First, the findings 
demonstrate a mechanistic linkage between the P4 and beta-catenin signaling
pathways. Second, they highlight an under appreciated role for the mesenchymal
compartment in indirectly mediating P4 signaling to the epithelium, a process
that intimately involves mesenchymal beta-catenin. Third, the technical
feasibility of deleting genes in the mesenchymal compartment of the uterus in an 
effort to understand decidualization and post-natal interactions with the
overlying epithelium has been demonstrated. It is concluded that beta-catenin
plays an integral role in selective P4-directed epithelial-mesenchymal
communication in both the estrous cycling and gravid uterus.

PMCID: PMC3462133
PMID: 22958837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e44121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044121. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Autocrine Sonic hedgehog attenuates inflammation in cerulein-induced acute
pancreatitis in mice via upregulation of IL-10.

Zhou X(1), Liu Z, Jang F, Xiang C, Li Y, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Luzhou Medical College 
Luzhou, Sichuan, China.

Hedgehog signaling plays critical roles in pancreatic oncogenesis and chronic
pancreatitis, but its roles in acute pancreatitis (AP) are largely ambiguous. In 
this study, we provide evidence that Sonic hedgehog (Shh), but neither Desert
hedgehog (Dhh) nor Indian hedgehog (Ihh), is the main protein whose expression is
activated during the development of cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis in mice, 
and the Shh serves as an anti-inflammation factor in an autocrine manner.
Blocking autocrine Shh signaling with anti-Shh neutralizing antibody aggravates
the progression of acute pancreatitis. Mechanistic insight into Shh signaling
activation in acute pancreatitis indicates that inflammatory stimulation
activates Shh expression and secretion, and subsequently upregulates the
expression and secretion of interleukin-10 (IL-10). Moreover, inhibition of Shh
signaling with neutralizing antibody abolishes IL-10 production in vivo and in
vitro. Molecular biological studies show that autocrine Shh signaling activates
the key transcriptional factor Gli1 so that the target gene IL-10 is upregulated,
leading to the protective and anti-inflammatory functions in the mouse model of
acute pancreatitis. Thus, this study suggests autocrine Shh signaling functions
as a protective signaling in the progression of acute pancreatitis.

PMCID: PMC3431299
PMID: 22956998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e44171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044171. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Analysis of the role of Igf2 in adrenal tumour development in transgenic mouse
models.

Drelon C(1), Berthon A, Ragazzon B, Tissier F, Bandiera R, Sahut-Barnola I, de
Joussineau C, Batisse-Lignier M, Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Bertherat J, Martinez A,
Val P.

Author information: 
(1)Clermont Université, Université Blaise Pascal, GReD, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

Adrenal cortical carcinomas (ACC) are rare but aggressive tumours associated with
poor prognosis. The two most frequent alterations in ACC in patients are
overexpression of the growth factor IGF2 and constitutive activation of
Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. Using a transgenic mouse model, we have previously
shown that constitutive active ß-catenin is a bona fide adrenal oncogene.
However, although all these mice developed benign adrenal hyperplasia, malignant 
progression was infrequent, suggesting that secondary genetic events were
required for aggressive tumour development. In the present paper, we have tested 
IGF2 oncogenic properties by developing two distinct transgenic mouse models of
Igf2 overexpression in the adrenal cortex. Our analysis shows that despite
overexpression levels ranging from 7 (basal) to 87 (ACTH-induced) fold, Igf2 has 
no tumour initiating potential in the adrenal cortex. However, it induces
aberrant accumulation of Gli1 and Pod1-positive progenitor cells, in a
hedgehog-independent manner. We have also tested the hypothesis that Igf2 may
cooperate with Wnt signalling by mating Igf2 overexpressing lines with mice that 
express constitutive active ß-catenin in the adrenal cortex. We show that the
combination of both alterations has no effect on tumour phenotype at stages when 
ß-catenin-induced tumours are benign. However, there is a mild promoting effect
at later stages, characterised by increased Weiss score and proliferation.
Formation of malignant tumours is nonetheless a rare event, even when Igf2
expression is further increased by ACTH treatment. Altogether these experiments
suggest that the growth factor IGF2 is a mild contributor to malignant
adrenocortical tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3429465
PMID: 22952916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Cancer. 2013 Apr 1;132(7):1516-24. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27820. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Targeting the hedgehog signal transduction pathway at the level of GLI inhibits
neuroblastoma cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

Wickström M(1), Dyberg C, Shimokawa T, Milosevic J, Baryawno N, Fuskevåg OM,
Larsson R, Kogner P, Zaphiropoulos PG, Johnsen JI.

Author information: 
(1)Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Malin.Wickstrom@ki.se

Hedgehog (HH) signaling is an important regulator of embryogenesis that has been 
associated with the development of several types of cancer. HH signaling is
characterized by Smoothened (SMO)-dependent activation of the GLI transcription
factors, which regulate the expression of critical developmental genes.
Neuroblastoma, an embryonal tumor of the sympathetic nervous system, was recently
shown to express high levels of key molecules in this signaling cascade. Using
compounds blocking SMO (cyclopamine and SANT1) or GLI1/GLI2 (GANT61) activity
revealed that inhibition of HH signaling at the level of GLI was most effective
in reducing neuroblastoma growth. GANT61 sensitivity positively correlated to
GLI1 and negatively to MYCN expression in the neuroblastoma cell lines tested.
GANT61 downregulated GLI1, c-MYC, MYCN and Cyclin D1 expression and induced
apoptosis of neuroblastoma cells. The effects produced by GANT61 were mimicked by
GLI knockdown but not by SMO knockdown. Furthermore, GANT61 enhanced the effects 
of chemotherapeutic drugs used in the treatment of neuroblastoma in an additive
or synergistic manner and reduced the growth of established neuroblastoma
xenografts in nude mice. Taken together this study suggests that inhibition of HH
signaling is a highly relevant therapeutic target for high-risk neuroblastoma
lacking MYCN amplification and should be considered for clinical testing.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22949014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Cancer. 2013 Jan 15;132(2):E18-25. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27812. Epub 2012 Sep
21.

Aberrant methylation of the PTCH1 gene promoter region in aberrant crypt foci.

Peng L(1), Hu J, Li S, Wang Z, Xia B, Jiang B, Li B, Zhang Y, Wang J, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China.

Patched homolog 1 (PTCH1) is a known tumor suppressor that regulates the Hedgehog
(Hh) pathway and has been implicated in tumorigenesis. The role of PTCH1 in colon
carcinogenesis, however, is controversial. The aim of the present study was to
investigate epigenetic modifications of PTCH1 in aberrant crypt foci (ACF), the
earliest precursor lesion of colorectal cancer (CRC). Using laser-capture
microdissection (LCM), a pure population of ACF epithelial cells was isolated and
studied. The inherent protein expression levels of SHH, PTCH1, SMO and GLI1 were 
assessed by immunohistochemistry for 405 ACF, including 54 dysplastic ACF (d-ACF)
and 351 non-dysplastic ACF (n-ACF). The mRNA levels and methylation status of
PTCH1 were also determined in 54 d-ACF and 96 n-ACF. Our data showed that the
expression of SHH, SMO and GLI1 was significantly up-regulated in d-ACF, compared
to n-ACF. Also, the mRNA and protein levels of PTCH1 were lower in d-ACF than
n-ACF. Using MSP or MS-HRM, PTCH1 methylation was present in 64.8% (35/54) or
63.3% (34/54), respectively, of d-ACF and 19.8% (19/96) or 22.9% (11/48),
respectively, of n-ACF. PTCH1 methylation was more frequent in d-ACF than n-ACF
(p < 0.001) and was associated with PTCH1 mRNA levels (r = 0.358, p < 0.01).
There was a statistically significant correlation between PTCH1 methylation
status and the prevalence of colorectal neoplasms. In conclusion, this study
suggests that aberrant methylation of the PTCH1 promoter may be an early,
initiating event of colon carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22945423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jul 10;92(26):1849-53.

[Effects and mechanisms of combined suppression of epidermal growth factor
receptor and hedgehog signaling on proliferation in pancreatic cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Qin CF(1), Tian XD, Hao K, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the synergistic effects on proliferation and apoptosis by
targeted suppression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in combination
with blockade of Hedgehog signaling pathways in pancreatic cancer cells and
examine the synergistic mechanism of Hedgehog and EGFR signaling pathways.
METHODS: The sequences of RNA interference targeting EGFR gene were designed,
synthesized and cloned into the pFU-GW-RNAi vector. And a stable transfection
cell line was obtained by transfecting the human Panc-1 cells with lentivirus.
The expressions of Shh and Gli1 were tested by real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The antiproliferative effect was examined by the assays of colony
formation and methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT). Fluorescence activated cell
sorter (FACS) was applied to assay the apoptotic rate in all experimental groups.
Western blot was applied to detect the phosphorylation levels of ERK and AKT.In
vivo nude mice tumorigenicity model was used to test the effect of growth
inhibition.
RESULTS: The RNAi technology with lentivirus could restrain the expression of
EGFR gene. After the blocking of EGFR and Hedgehog signaling pathways by RNAi
silencing, the chemosensitivity to cyclopamine significantly increased in human
pancreatic cancer cells. The half-inhibitory concentration (IC 50) of cyclopamine
declined from (2.978 ± 0.336) to (1.698 ± 0.057) µmol/L (P < 0.05). The prophase 
apoptotic rate of co-treated group was as high as 38.75% and it was significantly
higher than the RNAi silencing EGFR (17.65%) and control groups (3.02%) (P <
0.05). The results of tumor xenografts assay showed that the tumor volume of
co-treated group (394.8 ± 87.5 mm(3)) was significantly lower than that of simple
EGFR RNAi (594.7 ± 86.1 mm(3)) and single cyclopamine treated group (771.3 ± 82.9
mm(3)); the combination treatment could also produce obviously synergistic
antiproliferative effect in colony formation assays. After RNAi silencing EGFR,
the phosphorylation levels of ERK and AKT decreased significantly versus the
control group. Further reduction was obtained with the combined use of
cyclopamine in the co-treated group.
CONCLUSION: The blocking of EGFR and Hedgehog signaling pathways by RNAi
silencing may further inhibit cell proliferation and increase apoptosis in vivo
and in vitro in human pancreatic cancer cells. The synergism of Hh and EGFR
signaling pathways may be correlated with the phosphorylation levels of ERK and
AKT.

PMID: 22944238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int J Oncol. 2012 Nov;41(5):1751-61. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1599. Epub 2012 Aug
22.

Response to inhibition of smoothened in diverse epithelial cancer cells that lack
smoothened or patched 1 mutations.

Galimberti F(1), Busch AM, Chinyengetere F, Ma T, Sekula D, Memoli VA, Dragnev
KH, Liu F, Johnson KC, Guo Y, Freemantle SJ, Andrew AS, Greninger P, Robbins DJ, 
Settleman J, Benes C, Dmitrovsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Hedgehog (HH) pathway Smoothened (Smo) inhibitors are active against Gorlin
syndrome-associated basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and medulloblastoma where Patched 
(Ptch) mutations occur. We interrogated 705 epithelial cancer cell lines for
growth response to the Smo inhibitor cyclopamine and for expressed HH
pathway-regulated species in a linked genetic database. Ptch and Smo mutations
that respectively conferred Smo inhibitor response or resistance were undetected.
Previous studies revealed HH pathway activation in lung cancers. Therefore,
findings were validated using lung cancer cell lines, transgenic and
transplantable murine lung cancer models, and human normal-malignant lung tissue 
arrays in addition to testing other Smo inhibitors. Cyclopamine sensitivity most 
significantly correlated with high cyclin E (P=0.000009) and low insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 6 (IGFBP6) (P=0.000004) levels. Gli family members 
were associated with response. Cyclopamine resistance occurred with high GILZ
(P=0.002) expression. Newer Smo inhibitors exhibited a pattern of sensitivity
similar to cyclopamine. Gain of cyclin E or loss of IGFBP6 in lung cancer cells
significantly increased Smo inhibitor response. Cyclin E-driven transgenic lung
cancers expressed a gene profile implicating HH pathway activation. Cyclopamine
treatment significantly reduced proliferation of murine and human lung cancers.
Smo inhibition reduced lung cancer formation in a syngeneic mouse model. In human
normal-malignant lung tissue arrays cyclin E, IGFBP6, Gli1 and GILZ were each
differentially expressed. Together, these findings indicate that Smo inhibitors
should be considered in cancers beyond those with activating HH pathway
mutations. This includes tumors that express genes indicating basal HH pathway
activation.

PMCID: PMC3583816
PMID: 22923130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Feb;20(2):464-73. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2593-y. Epub 2012 
Aug 22.

High expression of patched homolog-1 messenger RNA and glioma-associated
oncogene-1 messenger RNA of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway indicates a risk of 
postresection recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Jeng KS(1), Sheen IS, Jeng WJ, Lin CC, Lin CK, Su JC, Yu MC, Fang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a high recurrence rate after
resection. Abnormal activation of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway
contributing to the carcinogenesis of some organs had been reported. We
hypothesize that activation of SHH pathway contributes to the recurrence of HCC
after surgical resection.
METHODS: In a prospective study, from January 2006 to June 2010, a total of 50
consecutive patients with HCC after curative resection were enrolled. The ratio
of the expression of messenger RNA (mRNA) of SHH, patched homolog-1 (PTCH-1) and 
glioma-associated oncogene-1 (GLI-1) between HCC tissues and the paired
noncancerous liver tissues were measured. Both the clinicopathologic
characteristics and these ratios were compared between those with recurrence and 
those without recurrence. They were also compared between those with and without 
survival.
RESULTS: There was a statistically significant correlation among the ratios of
PTCH-1 mRNA and serum AFP level (p = 0.045), tumor size (p = 0.001), vascular
permeation (p = 0.043) and tumor, node, metastasis staging system (TNM) stage (p 
= 0.003). A borderline significant correlation was found among ratios of GLI-1
mRNA and tumor size (p = 0.062) and TNM stage (p = 0.051). There was no such
significant correlation between SHH mRNA and any parameter. Both the ratios of
PTCH-1 mRNA and GLI-1 mRNA significantly adversely affected recurrence (p = 0.003
and 0.005, respectively) and survival (p < 0.001 and <0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of PTCH-1 mRNA and GLI-1 mRNA in HCC tissues is a
potential biomarker to predict postresection disease recurrence.

PMID: 22911366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Bioorg Med Chem. 2012 Sep 15;20(18):5496-506. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.07.039.
Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Discovery of pyrrolo[3,2-c]quinoline-4-one derivatives as novel hedgehog
signaling inhibitors.

Ohashi T(1), Oguro Y, Tanaka T, Shiokawa Z, Shibata S, Sato Y, Yamakawa H,
Hattori H, Yamamoto Y, Kondo S, Miyamoto M, Tojo H, Baba A, Sasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, 26-1,
Muraoka-higashi 2-chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, Japan.
tomohiro.oohashi@takeda.com

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays a significant role in the regulation of
cell growth and differentiation during embryonic development. Since activation of
the Hh signaling pathway is implicated in several types of human cancers,
inhibitors of this pathway could be promising anticancer agents. Using high
throughput screening, thieno[3,2-c]quinoline-4-one derivative 9a was identified
as a compound of interest with potent in vitro activity but poor metabolic
stability. Our efforts focused on enhancement of in vitro inhibitory activity and
metabolic stability, including core ring conversion and side chain optimization. 
This led to the discovery of pyrrolo[3,2-c]quinoline-4-one derivative 12b, which 
has a structure distinct from previously reported Hh signaling inhibitors.
Compound 12b suppressed stromal Gli1 mRNA expression in a murine model and
demonstrated antitumor activity in a murine medulloblastoma allograft model.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22910224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Nov;136(2):153-68. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.08.004.
Epub 2012 Aug 11.

Prevailing importance of the hedgehog signaling pathway and the potential for
treatment advancement in sarcoma.

Kelleher FC(1), Cain JE, Healy JM, Watkins DN, Thomas DM.

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Service, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 12 St. Andrew's Place,
A'Beckitt Street, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. fergalkelleher@hotmail.com

The hedgehog signaling pathway is important in embryogenesis and post natal
development. Constitutive activation of the pathway due to mutation of pathway
components occurs in ~25% of medulloblastomas and also in basal cell carcinomas. 
In many other malignancies the therapeutic role for hedgehog inhibition though
intriguing, based on preclinical data, is far from assured. Hedgehog inhibition
is not an established part of the treatment paradigm of sarcoma but the
scientific rationale for a possible benefit is compelling. In chondrosarcoma
there is evidence of hedgehog pathway activation and an ontologic comparison
between growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and different chondrosarcoma
subtypes. Immunostaining epiphyseal growth plate for Indian hedgehog is
particularly positive in the zone of pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes which
correlates ontologically with conventional chondrosarcoma. In Ewing sarcoma/PNET 
tumors the Gli1 transcription factor is a direct target of the EWS-FLI1
oncoprotein present in 85% of cases. In many cases of rhabdomyosarcomas there is 
increased expression of Gli1 (Ragazzini et al., 2004). Additionally, a third of
embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas have loss of Chr.9q22 that encompasses the patched
locus (Bridge et al., 2000). The potential to treat osteosarcoma by inhibition of
Gli2 and the role of the pathway in ovarian fibromas and other connective tissue 
tumors is also discussed (Nagao et al., 2011; Hirotsu et al., 2010). Emergence of
acquired secondary resistance to targeted therapeutics is an important issue that
is also relevant to hedgehog inhibition. In this context secondary resistance of 
medulloblastomas to treatment with a smoothened antagonist in two tumor mouse
models is examined.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(5):2319-24.

Expression and clinical significance of hedgehog signaling pathway related
components in colorectal cancer.

Wang H(1), Li YY, Wu YY, Nie YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou First Municipal People's Hospital
Affiliated to Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou China.

AIM: To investigate the expression of three components of the Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway (SHH, SMO and GLI1) in human colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues
and evaluate their association with clinicopathologic characteristics of the
patients.
METHODS: Fresh tumor tissues and matched tissues adjacent to the tumor were
collected from 43 CRC patients undergoing surgery. Normal colorectal tissues from
20 non-CRC cases were also sampled as normal controls. The expression of SHH,
SMO, GLI1 mRNAs was assessed by RT-PCR and proteins were detected by
immunohistochemical staining. Associations with clinicopathological
characteristics of patients were analyzed.
RESULTS: SHH mRNA was expressed more frequently in tumor tissues than in normal
tissues, but the difference did not reach significance in comparison to that in
the adjacent tissues. SMO and GLI1 mRNAs were expressed more frequently in tumor 
tissues than in both adjacent andnormal tissues. The expression intensities of
SHH, SMO, GLI1 mRNA in tumor tissues were significantly higher than those in
adjacent tissues and normal tissues. Proteins were also detected more frequently 
in tumors than other tissues. No significant links were apparent with gender,
age, location, degree of infiltration or Dukes stage.
CONCLUSION: Positive rates and intensities of mRNA and protein expression of Hh
signaling pathway related genes SHH, SMO, GLI1 were found to be significantly
increased in CRC tissues. However, over-expression did not appear to be
associated with particular clinicopathological characteristics.

PMID: 22901214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043119. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Genome-wide screening reveals an EMT molecular network mediated by Sonic
hedgehog-Gli1 signaling in pancreatic cancer cells.

Xu X(1), Zhou Y, Xie C, Wei SM, Gan H, He S, Wang F, Xu L, Lu J, Dai W, He L,
Chen P, Wang X, Guo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Tenth People's Hospital of Shanghai,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

AIMS: The role of sonic hedgehog (SHH) in epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)
of pancreatic cancer (PC) is known, however, its mechanism is unclear. Because
SHH promotes tumor development predominantly through Gli1, we sought to
understand its mechanism by identifying Gli1 targets in pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: First, we investigated invasion, migration, and EMT in PC cells
transfected with lentiviral Gli1 interference vectors or SHH over-expression
vectors in vitro and in vivo. Next, we determined the target gene profiles of
Gli1 in PC cells using cDNA microarray assays. Finally, the primary regulatory
networks downstream of SHH-Gli1 signaling in PC cells were studied through
functional analyses of these targets.
RESULTS: Our results indicate there is decreased E-cadherin expression upon
increased expression of SHH/Gli1. Migration of PC cells increased significantly
in a dose-dependent manner within 24 hours of Gli1 expression (P<0.05). The ratio
of liver metastasis and intrasplenic miniature metastasis increased markedly upon
activation of SHH-Gli1 signals in nude mice. Using cDNA microarray, we identified
278 upregulated and 59 downregulated genes upon Gli1 expression in AsPC-1 cells. 
The data indicate that SHH-Gli1 signals promote EMT by mediating a complex
signaling network including TGFß, Ras, Wnt, growth factors, PI3K/AKT, integrins, 
transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF), and S100A4.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that targeting the molecular connections
established between SHH-Gli1 signaling and EMT could provide effective therapies 
for PC.

PMCID: PMC3416762
PMID: 22900095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Bioorg Med Chem. 2012 Sep 15;20(18):5507-17. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.07.034. Epub
2012 Jul 27.

Discovery of the investigational drug TAK-441, a pyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine
derivative, as a highly potent and orally active hedgehog signaling inhibitor:
modification of the core skeleton for improved solubility.

Ohashi T(1), Oguro Y, Tanaka T, Shiokawa Z, Tanaka Y, Shibata S, Sato Y, Yamakawa
H, Hattori H, Yamamoto Y, Kondo S, Miyamoto M, Nishihara M, Ishimura Y, Tojo H,
Baba A, Sasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, 26-1,
Muraoka-higashi 2-chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 251-8555, Japan.

We recently reported the discovery of the novel pyrrolo[3,2-c]quinoline-4-one
derivative 1 as a potent inhibitor of Hedgehog (Hh) pathway signaling. However,
the PK evaluation of 1 at high dosage (100 mg/kg) revealed the C(max) value 3.63 
µg/mL, likely due to poor solubility of this compound. Efforts to improve
solubility by reducing the aromatic ring count of the core system led to
N-methylpyrrolo[3,2-c]pyridine derivative 11. Further optimization of the
3-alkoxy group led to compound 11d with acceptable solubility and potent Hh
inhibitory activity. Compound 11d suppressed transcription factor Gli1 mRNA
expression in tumor-associated stromal tissue and inhibited tumor growth
(treatment/control ratio, 3%) in a mouse medulloblastoma allograft model owing to
the improved PK profile based on increased solubility. Compound 11d (TAK-441) is 
currently in clinical trials for the treatment of advanced solid tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22898254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 1;72(19):5048-59. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1248. Epub
2012 Aug 8.

Hedgehog signaling is a novel therapeutic target in tamoxifen-resistant breast
cancer aberrantly activated by PI3K/AKT pathway.

Ramaswamy B(1), Lu Y, Teng KY, Nuovo G, Li X, Shapiro CL, Majumder S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biochemistry, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, USA.

Endocrine resistance is a major challenge in the management of estrogen receptor 
(ER)-positive breast cancers. Although multiple mechanisms leading to endocrine
resistance have been proposed, the poor outcome of patients developing resistance
to endocrine therapy warrants additional studies. Here we show that noncanonical 
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is an alternative growth promoting mechanism that is
activated in tamoxifen-resistant tumors. Importantly, phosphoinositide 3-kinase
inhibitor/protein kinase B (PI3K/AKT) pathway plays a key role in regulating Hh
signaling by protecting key components of this pathway from proteasomal
degradation. The levels of Hh-signaling molecules SMO and GLI1 and the targets
were significantly elevated in tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 cells and T47D cells.
Serial passage of the resistant cells in mice resulted in aggressive tumors that 
metastasized to distant organs with concurrent increases in Hh marker expression 
and epithelial mesenchymal transition. RNAi-mediated depletion of SMO or GLI1 in 
the resistant cells resulted in reduced proliferation, clonogenic survival and
delayed G(1)-S transition. Notably, treatment of resistant cells with PI3K
inhibitors decreased SMO and GLI1 protein levels and activity that was rescued
upon blocking GSK3ß and proteasomal degradation. Furthermore, treatment of
tamoxifen-resistant xenografts with anti-Hh compound GDC-0449 blocked tumor
growth in mice. Importantly, high GLI1 expression correlated inversely with
disease-free and overall survival in a cohort of 315 patients with breast cancer.
In summary, our results describe a signaling event linking PI3K/AKT pathway with 
Hh signaling that promotes tamoxifen resistance. Targeting Hh pathway alone or in
combination with PI3K/AKT pathway could therefore be a novel therapeutic option
in treating endocrine-resistant breast cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3837449
PMID: 22875023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Eur J Cancer. 2012 Dec;48(18):3429-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2012.06.018. Epub 2012
Aug 4.

The activities of Smad and Gli mediated signalling pathways in high-grade
conventional osteosarcoma.

Mohseny AB(1), Cai Y, Kuijjer M, Xiao W, van den Akker B, de Andrea CE, Jacobs R,
ten Dijke P, Hogendoorn PC, Cleton-Jansen AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

High-grade conventional osteosarcoma is a malignant tumour predominantly
affecting adolescents and, despite multimodal intensive therapy, lethal for one
third of the patients. Although there is currently detailed knowledge of normal
skeletal development, this has not been integrated into research on the genesis
of osteosarcoma. Recently we showed that the canonical Wnt pathway is not active 
in osteosarcoma and that its reactivation is disadvantageous to osteosarcoma
cells. Since Wnt is regulating normal skeletogenesis together with other
pathways, here we report on the activities of the bone morphogenic protein (BMP),
the transforming growth factor beta (TGFß) and the hedgehog (Hh) pathways in
osteosarcoma. Human osteosarcoma samples (n=210), benign bone tumours of
osteoblastic lineage called osteoblastoma (n=25) and osteosarcoma cell lines
(n=19) were examined. For pathway activity luciferase transcriptional reporter
assays and gene and protein expression analyses were performed.
Immunohistochemical analysis of phosphorylated Smad1 and Smad2, the intracellular
effectors of BMP and TGFß, respectively, showed nuclear expression of both
proteins in 70% of the osteosarcoma samples at levels comparable to
osteoblastoma. Interestingly cases with lower expression showed significantly
worse disease free survival. This may imply that drugs restoring impaired
signalling pathways in osteosarcoma might change the tumour's aggressive clinical
course, however targeted pathway modulation in vitro did not affect cell
proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22868198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncol Lett. 2011 Sep 1;2(5):995-1001. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

Overexpression of Hedgehog signaling molecules and its involvement in
triple-negative breast cancer.

Tao Y(1), Mao J, Zhang Q, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical College of Dalian University, Dalian,
Liaoning 116622, P.R. China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the activation of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling molecules and its involvement in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). 
A total of 123 cases of paraffin blocks, including 83 cases of primary breast
carcinoma, 30 cases of mammary hyperplasia and 10 cases of normal breast tissue, 
were immunohistochemically analyzed for Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), Patched-1 (PTCH1), 
Smoothened (SMO) and glioma-associated oncogene homoglog 1 (GLI1) expression. The
expression of SMO and GLI1 in TNBC was significantly increased in comparison to
non-triple-negative breast cancer (nTNBC). GLI1 expression manifested an inverse 
association with the estrogen receptor. The levels of GLI1 expression were
increased in lymph node-positive cases. The expression of SHH and SMO was
increased in high histological grades. Furthermore, the expression of SMO and
GLI1 was correlated with superior tumor stage. The expression of SHH, SMO and
GLI1 was significantly increased in breast cancer and mammary hyperplasia. PTCH1 
expression was significantly decreased in breast cancer compared to mammary
hyperplasia and normal breast tissue. For the first time, clinical evidence has
been provided in support of significant roles of Hh signaling in TNBC. Hh
signaling is involved in breast ductal changes and malignant transformation.
Measures to inhibit Hh activity may improve the prognosis of TNBC patients.

PMCID: PMC3408022
PMID: 22866163  [PubMed]


139. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35(8):1328-35.

Targeting of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway by atractylenolides promotes chondrogenic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Li X(1), Wei G, Wang X, Liu DH, Deng RD, Li H, Zhou JH, Li YW, Zeng HP, Chen DF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chinese Herbal Medicine, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou, China.

Molecules that enhance chondrogenic differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) were identified and isolated using an in vitro Gli reporter gene assay in 
MSCs incorporating a Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) target. Atractylenolide III, which
promoted Gli1-mediated transcriptional activity, was isolated from an ethyl
acetate extract of the Rhizoma, Atractylodis macrocephalae. After dehydration,
atractylenolide III was transformed to atractylenolide I. Both atractylenolides
were confirmed by MS, UV, IR, 1H- and 13C-NMR spectra. Atractylenolide III (which
contains -OH at the 8-position) and atractylenolide I (which lacks -OH at the
8-position) were found to effectively promote the activity of the Gli promoter.
While the hydroxyl group of atractylenolide III was not essential for the effect 
of atractylenolide, its effect was dependent on Shh signaling. Phenotypic
cellular analysis indicated that atractylenolides induced MSCs to differentiate
into chondrocytes, as shown by increased expression of specific chondrogenic
markers including collagen II, aggrecan and the cartilage related transcription
factor, Sox9. Atractylenolides significantly increased the expression of Shh and 
its target gene Gli-1, indicating that Shh signaling was activated by
atractylenolides. Moreover, inhibition of Shh signaling reduced the effect of
atractylenolides on the chondrogenic phenotype. The discovery that
atractylenolides induce chondrocytes from MSCs is promising for bony disease
therapy.

PMID: 22863933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Neural Regen Res. 2012 Aug 5;7(22):1703-8. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2012.22.004.

Sonic hedgehog elevates N-myc gene expression in neural stem cells.

Liu D(1), Wang S(1), Cui Y(1), Shen L(1), Du Y(1), Li G(2), Zhang B(1), Wang
R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116011, Liaoning Province, China. (2)Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Department of Neurosurgery, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Beijing 100730, China.

Proliferation of neural stem cells is regulated by the secreted signaling
molecule sonic hedgehog. In this study, neural stem cells were infected with
recombinant adeno-associated virus expressing sonic hedgehog-N-enhanced green
fluorescent protein. The results showed that overexpression of sonic hedgehog in 
neural stem cells induced the increased expression of Gli1 and N-myc, a target
gene of sonic hedgehog. These findings suggest that N-myc is a direct downstream 
target of the sonic hedgehog signal pathway in neural stem cells. Sonic hedgehog 
and N-myc are important mediators of sonic hedgehog-induced proliferation of
neural stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4302450
PMID: 25624791  [PubMed]


141. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Sep;10(9):1147-57. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Inhibition of the hedgehog pathway targets the tumor-associated stroma in
pancreatic cancer.

Hwang RF(1), Moore TT, Hattersley MM, Scarpitti M, Yang B, Devereaux E,
Ramachandran V, Arumugam T, Ji B, Logsdon CD, Brown JL, Godin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77230, USA. rhwang@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has emerged as an important pathway in
multiple tumor types and is thought to be dependent on a paracrine signaling
mechanism. The purpose of this study was to determine the role of pancreatic
cancer-associated fibroblasts (human pancreatic stellate cells, HPSCs) in Hh
signaling. In addition, we evaluated the efficacy of a novel Hh antagonist,
AZD8542, on tumor progression with an emphasis on the role of the stroma
compartment.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression of Hh pathway members and activation of the Hh
pathway were analyzed in both HPSCs and pancreatic cancer cells. We tested the
effects of Smoothened (SMO) inhibition with AZD8542 on tumor growth in vivo using
an orthotopic model of pancreatic cancer containing varying amounts of stroma.
RESULTS: HPSCs expressed high levels of SMO receptor and low levels of Hh
ligands, whereas cancer cells showed the converse expression pattern. HPSC
proliferation was stimulated by Sonic Hedgehog with upregulation of downstream
GLI1 mRNA. These effects were abrogated by AZD8542 treatment. In an orthotopic
model of pancreatic cancer, AZD8542 inhibited tumor growth only when HPSCs were
present, implicating a paracrine signaling mechanism dependent on stroma. Further
evidence of paracrine signaling of the Hh pathway in prostate and colon cancer
models is provided, demonstrating the broader applicability of our findings.
CONCLUSION: Based on the use of our novel human-derived pancreatic cancer
stellate cells, our results suggest that Hh-targeted therapies primarily affect
the tumor-associated stroma, rather than the epithelial compartment.

PMCID: PMC3685283
PMID: 22859707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Oncol Lett. 2011 Nov;2(6):1291-1295. Epub 2011 Sep 2.

HSulf-1 suppresses cell growth and down-regulates Hedgehog signaling in human
gastric cancer cells.

Ma HY(1), Zhang F, Li J, Mo ML, Chen Z, Liu L, Zhou HM, Sheng Q.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018.

Gastric cancer is the second most lethal cancer worldwide. Despite the current
surgical and adjuvant therapies, 5-year survival remains less than 20-25% in the 
US, Europe and China. Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify new
therapeutic targets for treating this malignant disease. Accumulating evidence
has supported that aberrant activation of the Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a 
crucial role in tumorigenesis and progression of gastric cancer. Human
sulfatase-1 (HSulf-1) is a recently identified enzyme that desulfates cell
surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), which is critical for Hedgehog
signal transduction under a highly sulfated state. HSulf-1 has recently emerged
as a tumor suppressor gene in certain types of cancer, including ovarian, breast,
myeloma and hepatocellular carcinoma; however, its role in gastric cancer remains
to be elucidated. Therefore, we established HSulf-1-expressing monoclonal MKN28
gastric cancer cells to investigate its function in gastric cancer. Expression of
HSulf-1 significantly suppressed cellular proliferation and growth in MKN28
gastric cancer cells. Notably, HSulf-1 inhibits Gli-mediated transcription and
down-regulates the expression of Hedgehog target genes, including GLI1, PTCH1/2, 
HHIP, CCND1, C-MYC and BCL-2. Collectively, the study provides evidence that
HSulf-1 may function as a tumor suppressor in gastric cancer. It suppresses
gastric cancer cell proliferation, possibly through abrogating the Hedgehog
signaling pathway. The study provides new mechanistic insight into HSulf-1-
mediated tumor suppression, and supports the use of HSulf-1 as a potential new
therapeutic target in treating gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3406501
PMID: 22848304  [PubMed]


143. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Nov;33(11):2084-93. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs255. Epub 2012
Jul 28.

Vitamin D3 triggers antitumor activity through targeting hedgehog signaling in
human renal cell carcinoma.

Dormoy V(1), Béraud C, Lindner V, Coquard C, Barthelmebs M, Brasse D, Jacqmin D, 
Lang H, Massfelder T.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U682, Section of Kidney Cancer and Renal Physiopathology, University of
Strasbourg, School of Medicine, Strasbourg 67085, France.
valerian.dormoy@medecine.u-strasbg.fr

Human clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCC) remains resistant to treatments
despite the progress in targeted therapies. Several signaling pathways acting
during renal development are reactivated during kidney tumorigenesis; this is the
case of the sonic hedgehog (SHH)-Gli. Interestingly, the precursor of active
vitamin D3 (VD3), cholecalciferol, has been demonstrated to be a strong inhibitor
of SHH-Gli signaling. Here, we show the preclinical efficacy of cholecalciferol
in CCC both in vitro and in vivo. A panel of CCC cell lines, tumors and normal
corresponding tissues from CCC patients were used to evaluate the expression of
the VD3 receptor and metabolizing enzymes and the effects of cholecalciferol
treatment. Subsequently, xenografted mice were treated with cholecalciferol in a 
prophylactic or therapeutic manner; their response and the adverse effects were
evaluated on the basis of weekly monitoring, followed by blood collection
procedures and X-ray micro-computed tomography. VD3 receptor and metabolizing
enzymes are dramatically decreased in human cell lines and tumors.
Cholecalciferol decreases cell proliferation and increases cell death by
inhibition of the SHH-Gli pathway. Xenografted mice treated with cholecalciferol 
exhibit absence of tumor development or substantial growth inhibition. The
treatment was shown to be safe; it did not induce calcification or calcium
reabsorption. These findings establish that, although VD3 receptors and
metabolizing enzymes are absent in CCC, cholecalciferol supplementation is a
strong tool to block the reactivation of SHH-Gli pathway in this pathology,
leading ultimately to tumor regression. Cholecalciferol may have highly
therapeutic potential in CCC.

PMID: 22843547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 1;370(1):110-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.017. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Limb anterior-posterior polarity integrates activator and repressor functions of 
GLI2 as well as GLI3.

Bowers M(1), Eng L, Lao Z, Turnbull RK, Bao X, Riedel E, Mackem S, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Anterior-posterior (AP) limb patterning is directed by sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signaling from the posteriorly located zone of polarizing activity (ZPA). GLI3
and GLI2 are the transcriptional mediators generally utilized in SHH signaling,
and each can function as an activator (A) and repressor (R). Although GLI3R has
been suggested to be the primary effector of SHH signaling during limb AP
patterning, a role for GLI3A or GLI2 has not been fully ruled out, nor has it
been determined whether Gli3 plays distinct roles in limb development at
different stages. By conditionally removing Gli3 in the limb at multiple
different time points, we uncovered four Gli3-mediated functions in limb
development that occur at distinct but partially over-lapping time windows: AP
patterning of the proximal limb, AP patterning of the distal limb, regulation of 
digit number and bone differentiation. Furthermore, by removing Gli2 in Gli3
temporal conditional knock-outs, we uncovered an essential role for Gli2 in
providing the remaining posterior limb patterning seen in Gli3 single mutants. To
test whether GLIAs or GLIRs regulate different aspects of AP limb patterning
and/or digit number, we utilized a knock-in allele in which GLI1, which functions
solely as an activator, is expressed in place of the bifunctional GLI2 protein.
Interestingly, we found that GLIAs contribute to AP patterning specifically in
the posterior limb, whereas GLIRs predominantly regulate anterior patterning and 
digit number. Since GLI3 is a more effective repressor, our results explain why
GLI3 is required only for anterior limb patterning and why GLI2 can compensate
for GLI3A in posterior limb patterning. Taken together, our data suggest that
establishment of a complete range of AP positional identities in the limb
requires integration of the spatial distribution, timing, and dosage of GLI2 and 
GLI3 activators and repressors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432687
PMID: 22841643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Front Genet. 2012 Jul 6;3:119. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00119. eCollection 2012.

Genetic variations and alternative splicing: the Glioma associated oncogene 1,
GLI1.

Zaphiropoulos PG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden.

Alternative splicing is a post-transcriptional regulatory process that is
attaining stronger recognition as a modulator of gene expression. Alternative
splicing occurs when the primary RNA transcript is differentially processed into 
more than one mature RNAs. This is the result of a variable definition/inclusion 
of the exons, the sequences that are excised from the primary RNA to form the
mature RNAs. Consequently, RNA expression can generate a collection of
differentially spliced RNAs, which may distinctly influence subsequent biological
events, such as protein synthesis or other biomolecular interactions. Still the
mechanisms that control exon definition and exon inclusion are not fully
clarified. This mini-review highlights advances in this field as well as the
impact of single nucleotide polymorphisms in affecting splicing decisions. The
Glioma-associated oncogene 1, GLI1, is taken as an example in addressing the role
of nucleotide substitutions for splicing regulation.

PMCID: PMC3400943
PMID: 22833753  [PubMed]


146. Blood. 2012 Dec 13;120(25):5002-13. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-368142. Epub 2012 
Jul 20.

Canonical and noncanonical Hedgehog pathway in the pathogenesis of multiple
myeloma.

Blotta S(1), Jakubikova J, Calimeri T, Roccaro AM, Amodio N, Azab AK, Foresta U, 
Mitsiades CS, Rossi M, Todoerti K, Molica S, Morabito F, Neri A, Tagliaferri P,
Tassone P, Anderson KC, Munshi NC.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is required for cell-fate determination during the
embryonic life, as well as cell growth and differentiation in the adult organism,
where the inappropriate activation has been implicated in several cancers. Here
we demonstrate that Hh signaling plays a significant role in growth and survival 
of multiple myeloma (MM) cells. We observed that CD138(+) MM cells express Hh
genes and confirmed Smoothened (Smo)-dependent Hh signaling in MM using a novel
synthetic Smo inhibitor, NVP-LDE225 (Novartis), which decreased MM cell viability
by inducing specific down-regulation of Gli1 and Ptch1, hallmarks of Hh activity.
In addition, we detected a nuclear localization of Gli1 in MM cells, which is
completely abrogated by Forskolin, a Gli1-modulating compound, confirming
Smo-independent mechanisms leading to Hh activation in MM. Finally, we identified
that bone marrow stromal cells are a source of the Shh ligand, although they are 
resistant to the Hh inhibitor because of defective Smo expression and Ptch1
up-regulation. Further in vitro as well as in vivo studies showed antitumor
efficacy of NVP-LDE225 in combination with bortezomib. Altogether, our data
demonstrate activation of both canonical and noncanonical Hh pathway in MM, thus 
providing the rationale for testing Hh inhibitors in clinical trials to improve
MM patient outcome.

PMCID: PMC3525024
PMID: 22821765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Comp Pathol. 2013 Feb;148(2-3):197-205. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2012.06.004. Epub
2012 Jul 19.

Canine cutaneous peripheral nerve sheath tumours versus fibrosarcomas can be
differentiated by neuroectodermal marker genes in their transcriptome.

Klopfleisch R(1), Meyer A, Lenze D, Hummel M, Gruber AD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin,
Robert-von-Ostertag-Straße 15, Berlin, Germany. robert.klopfleisch.@fu-berlin.de

The diagnostic differentiation between canine fibrosarcomas and peripheral nerve 
sheath tumours (PNSTs) is based on histopathological phenotype. Histological
differentiation of these tumours can, however, be challenging and there is a lack
of immunohistochemical markers to prove their histogenic origin. To identify
possible PNST markers and to further characterize their histogenic origin we
compared histologically well-defined canine fibrosarcomas and PNSTs by cDNA
microarray analysis. Forty-five annotated gene products were significantly
differentially expressed between both tumour types. Seven of these gene products,
known to be specifically expressed in neuroectodermal tissues, had higher
expression levels in PNSTs: FMN2, KIF1B, GLI1, ROBO1, NMUR2, DOK4 and HMG20B.
Conversely, eight genes associated with carcinogenesis had higher expression in
fibrosarcomas: FHL2, PLAGL1, FNBP1L, BAG2, HK1, CSK and Cox5A. Comparison of the 
fibrosarcoma and PNST transcriptome therefore identified PNST
phenotype-associated genes involved in neuroectodermal differentiation, which may
be useful as diagnostic markers. Furthermore, the genes associated with the
fibrosarcoma phenotype may serve as markers to differentiate fibrosarcomas from
other tumour types.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22818216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;72(17):4449-58. Epub 2012 Jul 19.

Hedgehog signaling regulates bladder cancer growth and tumorigenicity.

Fei DL(1), Sanchez-Mejias A, Wang Z, Flaveny C, Long J, Singh S, Rodriguez-Blanco
J, Tokhunts R, Giambelli C, Briegel KJ, Schulz WA, Gandolfi AJ, Karagas M,
Zimmers TA, Jorda M, Bejarano P, Capobianco AJ, Robbins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, DeWitt Daughtry Family Department of Surgery,
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 1600 NW 10th Avenue, Miami, FL
33136, USA.

The role of Hedgehog (HH) signaling in bladder cancer remains controversial. The 
gene encoding the HH receptor and negative regulator PATCHED1 (PTCH1) resides on 
a region of chromosome 9q, one copy of which is frequently lost in bladder
cancer. Inconsistent with PTCH1 functioning as a classic tumor suppressor gene,
loss-of-function mutations in the remaining copy of PTCH1 are not commonly found.
Here, we provide direct evidence for a critical role of HH signaling in bladder
carcinogenesis. We show that transformed human urothelial cells and many
urothelial carcinoma cell lines exhibit constitutive HH signaling, which is
required for their growth and tumorigenic properties. Surprisingly, rather than
originating from loss of PTCH1, the constitutive HH activity observed in
urothelial carcinoma cell lines was HH ligand dependent. Consistent with this
finding, increased levels of HH and the HH target gene product GLI1 were found in
resected human primary bladder tumors. Furthermore, on the basis of the
difference in intrinsic HH dependence of urothelial carcinoma cell lines, a gene 
expression signature was identified that correlated with bladder cancer
progression. Our findings therefore indicate that therapeutic targeting of the HH
signaling pathway may be beneficial in the clinical management of bladder cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3809830
PMID: 22815529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Leuk Res. 2012 Oct;36(10):1267-73. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.06.014. Epub 2012 
Jul 17.

Defining causative factors contributing in the activation of hedgehog signaling
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Ramirez E(1), Singh RR, Kunkalla K, Liu Y, Qu C, Cain C, Multani AS, Lennon PA,
Jackacky J, Ho M, Dawud S, Gu J, Yang S, Hu PC, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetic Technology Program, School of Health Sciences, The
University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is activated in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL). Genetic abnormalities that explain activation of Hh signaling in DLBCL
are unknown. We investigate the presence of amplifications of Hh genes that might
result in activation of this pathway in DLBCL. Our data showed few extra copies
of GLI1 and SMO due to chromosomal aneuploidies in a subset of DLBCL cell lines. 
We also showed that pharmacologic inhibition of PI3K/AKT and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways
resulted in decreased expression of GLI1 and Hh ligands. In conclusion, our data 
support the hypothesis that aberrant activation of Hh signaling in DLBCL mainly
results from integration of deregulated oncogenic signaling inputs converging
into Hh signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3422406
PMID: 22809693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Tumour Biol. 2012 Dec;33(6):1943-50. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0455-7. Epub 2012
Jul 14.

Study on the skip metastasis of axillary lymph nodes in breast cancer and their
relation with Gli1 expression.

Wang H(1), Mao XY, Zhao TT, Zheng XY, Jin F, Li JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Department of Surgical Oncology, Research Unit
of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China.

The skip metastasis (SM) of axillary lymph nodes (ALN) in breast cancer is an
important phenomenon which is crucial to determine the correct choice of surgical
resection. The mechanism of SM of ALN is unclear. Gli1 protein is a core
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulatory factor that plays essential
roles in both development and disease processes and has been associated with
metastasis in carcinomas. The aim of this study was to investigate the
clinicopathological characteristics of SM and evaluate the significance of Gli1
expression in breast cancer patients with metastasis of ALN. Clinicopathological 
data from 1,037 female breast cancer patients who underwent radical mastectomy
were retrospectively reviewed. In this study, an SM was defined as level I
absence but level II and/or level III involvement. The expression of Gli1 was
evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 102 non-SM cases with positive nodes and 33 
SM cases. In univariate analysis, we found that pN category, TNM stage, intrinsic
subtypes and Gli1 expression was significant risk factor of SM. Further logistic 
regression analysis revealed that luminal A cases had a lower risk of SM relative
to luminal B 1 (HER2 negative) cases. Further multivariate analysis revealed that
Gli1 expression and numbers of positive lymph nodes were the independent factors 
which associated with SM. Collectively, Breast cancer with SM of ALN associated
with the intrinsic subtype of the luminal B1. Gli1 expression related with the
procession of breast cancer with SM, which can be used as a predictor of SM of
ALN in breast cancer.

PMID: 22797820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Oncol. 2012 Oct;41(4):1411-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1554. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway in ovarian teratoma is stimulated by Sonic
Hedgehog which induces internalization of Patched.

Sabol M(1), Car D, Musani V, Ozretic P, Oreskovic S, Weber I, Levanat S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10002 Zagreb,
Croatia.

The Hedgehog-Gli (Hh-Gli) signaling pathway was examined in ovarian dermoids,
which show characteristics of both tumors and developmental malformations.
Dermoids are classified as mature teratomas that present differentiation into
various tissues, mostly epidermal elements such as glands, multilayered
epithelium, hair follicles and occasionally bone and cartilage. Their development
is attributed to aberrant meiosis of germinal cells within the ovary. We showed
activation of the Hh-Gli signaling in ovarian dermoid primary cultures.
Cyclopamine treatment slows down cell proliferation, while the Sonic Hedgehog
(Shh) protein stimulates cell proliferation and induces internalization of the
Patched (Ptch) protein, which accumulates in the form of granules in the
cytoplasm, colocalized with the Shh protein. Cyclopamine treatment decreases Gli1
localization in the nucleus compared to non-treated cells. Based on our
observations, the mechanism of Hedgehog activation in the ovarian dermoids could 
be the ligand-dependent autocrine pathway, which can also be stimulated by
paracrine signals.

PMID: 22797776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Development. 2012 Aug;139(15):2711-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.074930.

Zebrafish Cxcr4a determines the proliferative response to Hedgehog signalling.

Stückemann T(1), Wegleiter T, Stefan E, Nägele O, Tarbashevich K, Böck G, Raz E, 
Aanstad P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 25, 
Innsbruck, Austria.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway plays dual roles in proliferation and patterning during
embryonic development, but the mechanism(s) that distinguish the mitogenic and
patterning activities of Hh signalling are not fully understood. An additional
level of complexity is provided by the observation that Hh signalling can both
promote and inhibit cell proliferation. One model to account for this apparent
paradox is that Hh signalling primarily regulates cell cycle kinetics, such that 
activation of Hh signalling promotes fast cycling and an earlier cell cycle exit.
Here we report that activation of Hh signalling promotes endodermal cell
proliferation but inhibits proliferation in neighbouring non-endodermal cells,
suggesting that the cell cycle kinetics model is insufficient to account for the 
opposing proliferative responses to Hh signalling. We show that expression of the
chemokine receptor Cxcr4a is a critical parameter that determines the
proliferative response to Hh signalling, and that loss of Cxcr4a function
attenuates the transcription of cell cycle regulator targets of Hh signalling
without affecting general transcriptional targets. We show that Cxcr4a inhibits
PKA activity independently of Hh signalling, and propose that Cxcr4a enhances
Hh-dependent proliferation by promoting the activity of Gli1. Our results
indicate that Cxcr4a is required for Hh-dependent cell proliferation but not for 
Hh-dependent patterning, and suggest that the parallel activation of Cxcr4a is
required to modulate the Hh pathway to distinguish between patterning and
proliferation.

PMID: 22782722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 17;287(34):28745-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.351379. Epub
2012 Jul 6.

Diindolylmethane-mediated Gli1 protein suppression induces anoikis in ovarian
cancer cells in vitro and blocks tumor formation ability in vivo.

Kandala PK(1), Srivastava SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center, Amarillo, Texas 79106, USA.

Anoikis is a cell death that occurs due to detachment of a cell from the
extracellular matrix (ECM). Resistance to anoikis is a primary feature of a cell 
that undergoes metastasis. In this study for the first time, we demonstrated the 
potential role of Gli1 in anoikis resistance. Treatment of various ovarian cancer
cells by different concentrations of diindolylmethane (DIM), an active ingredient
of cruciferous vegetables, reduced the anoikis resistance in a
concentration-dependent manner. Reduction in anoikis resistance was associated
with a decrease in the expression of Gli1 and an increase in the cleavage of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) treatment not only
increased the expression of Gli1, but also blocked anoikis induced by DIM and
abrogated the change in the expression of Gli1 and cleaved PARP by DIM. To
confirm the role of Gli1, hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine, Gli1 siRNA and
Gli1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were used. Cyclopamine treatment
alone significantly reduced anoikis resistance in A2780 and OVCAR-429 cells.
Cyclopamine-mediated reduction in anoikis resistance was associated with reduced 
expression of Gli1 and induction of cleaved PARP. Shh treatment blocked
cyclopamine-induced anoikis. Silencing Gli1 expression induced anoikis and
cleavage of PARP in A2780 and OVCAR-429 cells. Furthermore, Gli1(-/-) MEFs were
more sensitive to anoikis compared with Gli1(+/+) MEFs. Our in vivo studies
established that DIM- or cyclopamine-treated ovarian cancer cells under
suspension culture conditions drastically lost their ability of tumor formation
in vivo in mice. Taken together, our results establish that Gli1 is a critical
player in anoikis resistance in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3436512
PMID: 22773833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 3;424(3):391-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.118. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

In vitro expanded bone marrow-derived murine (C57Bl/KaLwRij) mesenchymal stem
cells can acquire CD34 expression and induce sarcoma formation in vivo.

Xu S(1), De Becker A, De Raeve H, Van Camp B, Vanderkerken K, Van Riet I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, 300052 Tianjin, China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have currently generated numerous interests in
pre-clinical and clinical applications due to their multiple lineages
differentiation potential and immunomodulary effects. However, accumulating
evidence indicates that MSCs, especially murine MSCs (mMSCs), can undergo
spontaneous transformation after long-term in vitro culturing, which might reduce
the therapeutic application possibilities of these stem cells. In the present
study, we observed that in vitro expanded bone marrow (BM) derived mMSCs from the
C57Bl/KaLwRij mouse strain can lose their specific stem cells markers (CD90 and
CD105) and acquire CD34 expression, accompanied with an altered morphology and an
impaired tri-lineages differentiation capacity. Compared to normal mMSCs, these
transformed mMSCs exhibited an increased proliferation rate, an enhanced colony
formation and migration ability as well as a higher sensitivity to anti-tumor
drugs. Transformed mMSCs were highly tumorigenic in vivo, resulting in aggressive
sarcoma formation when transplanted in non-immunocompromised mice. Furthermore,
we found that Notch signaling downstream genes (hey1, hey2 and heyL) were
significantly upregulated in transformed mMSCs, while Hedgehog signaling
downstream genes Gli1 and Ptch1 and the Wnt signaling downstream gene
beta-catenin were all decreased. Taken together, we observed that murine in vitro
expanded BM-MSCs can transform into CD34 expressing cells that induce sarcoma
formation in vivo. We assume that dysregulation of the Notch(+)/Hh(-)/Wnt(-)
signaling pathway is associated with the malignant phenotype of the transformed
mMSCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38996. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038996. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Inhibition of CK2a down-regulates Hedgehog/Gli signaling leading to a reduction
of a stem-like side population in human lung cancer cells.

Zhang S(1), Wang Y, Mao JH, Hsieh D, Kim IJ, Hu LM, Xu Z, Long H, Jablons DM, You
L.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States of America.

Protein kinase CK2 is frequently elevated in a variety of human cancers. The
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been implicated in stem cell maintenance, and
its aberrant activation has been indicated in several types of cancer, including 
lung cancer. In this study, we show that CK2 is positively involved in Hh/Gli
signaling in lung cancer cell lines A549 and H1299. First, we found a correlation
between CK2a and Gli1 mRNA levels in 100 primary lung cancer tissues.
Down-regulation of Gli1 expression and transcriptional activity were demonstrated
after the silencing of CK2a in lung cancer cells. In addition, CK2a siRNA
down-regulated the expression of Hh target genes. Furthermore, two small-molecule
CK2a inhibitors led to a dose-dependent inhibition of Gli1 expression and
transcriptional activity in lung cancer cells. Reversely, forced over-expression 
of CK2a resulted in an increase both in Gli1 expression and transcriptional
activity in A549 cells. Finally, the inhibition of Hh/Gli by CK2a siRNA led to a 
reduction of a cancer stem cell-like side population that shows higher ABCG2
expression level. Thus, we report that the inhibition of CK2a down-regulates
Hh/Gli signaling and subsequently reduces stem-like side population in human lung
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3387212
PMID: 22768056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 15;72(14):3702-3; author reply 3704-5. doi:
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0379. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

GLI1 modulates EMT in pancreatic cancer--letter.

Inaguma S, Kasai K, Hashimoto M, Ikeda H.

Comment on
    Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):88-99.

PMID: 22761339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Int J Med Sci. 2012;9(5):334-8. doi: 10.7150/ijms.4553. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Expression of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 is associated with invasion
and postoperative liver metastasis in colon cancer.

Ding YL(1), Zhou Y, Xiang L, Ji ZP, Luo ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the Second Hospital of Shandong University, and
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong
250033, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of glioma-associated oncogene homolog
1(Gli-1) in colon cancer and its association with clinicopathological parameters 
and postoperative liver metastasis.
METHODS: Expression of Gli-1 was detected by immunohistochemistry in
paraffin-embedded specimens of 96 cases of colon cancer. Relationship between
Gli-1 expression and clinicopathological parameters, postoperative liver
metastasis were analyzed.
RESULTS: Gli-1 protein expression was significantly increased in colon cancer
tissues compared to normal colon tissues (P=0.037). Gli-1 expression in colon
tissues was increased in patients with lymph node metastases (P=0.022) and higher
T stages (P=0.030). Postoperative live metastasis-free survival period was
significantly longer in low Gli-1 expression group than that of high Gli-1
expression group (48.22±10.03 months vs 20.46±6.32 months, P=0.001). Multivariate
analysis showed that Gli-1 expression level is an independent prognostic factor
for postoperative live metastasis-free survival.
CONCLUSION: Colon cancer is associated with an upregulation of Gli-1 protein
expression in colon tissues. In patients with colon cancer, Gli-1 expression
level is closely related to lymph node metastases, T stages and postoperative
live metastasis-free survival periods, indicative of a possible role of Gli-1
expression in colon cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3384915
PMID: 22745574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Sep 1;95(4):507-16. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvs216. Epub 2012 Jun
28.

Impaired sonic hedgehog pathway contributes to cardiac dysfunction in type 1
diabetic mice with myocardial infarction.

Xiao Q(1), Hou N, Wang YP, He LS, He YH, Zhang GP, Yi Q, Liu SM, Chen MS, Luo JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510182, PR
China.

AIMS: The incidence and mortality of myocardial infarction (MI) in diabetic
patients are higher than in non-diabetic patients; however, the mechanisms by
which diabetes results in cardiac dysfunction are poorly understood. The present 
study tested the hypothesis that an impaired sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway
contributes to cardiac dysfunction in type 1 diabetic mice with MI.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Adult male C57/B6 mice and streptozotocin-induced type 1
diabetic mice were used. Myocardial proteins of Shh, Patched-1 (Ptc1), and
glioma-associated oncogene-1 (Gli1) were significantly decreased in type 1
diabetic mice at 10 weeks, and this was accompanied by cardiac dysfunction.
Although myocardial proteins of Shh, Ptc1, and Gli1 were significantly increased 
7 days after MI compared with the sham group in control mice, these proteins were
markedly decreased in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Treatment with Shh
pathway agonist for 21 days significantly increased Ptc1 and Gli1 proteins,
enhanced capillary density, reduced the percentage myocardial infarct, and then
improved cardiac function in diabetic mice with MI compared with those with no
drug treatment. This treatment had no effects in control mice with MI.
Conversely, treatment with Shh pathway antagonist for 21 days significantly
decreased Ptc1 and Gli1 proteins, reduced capillary density, enlarged the
percentage myocardial infarct, and then exacerbated cardiac dysfunction in
control mice with MI compared with those with no drug treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that in type 1 diabetic mice the myocardial 
Shh pathway is impaired and that the impaired Shh pathway contributes to cardiac 
dysfunction. Strategies that are aimed at augmenting the Shh pathway may offer
useful means for improving diabetic cardiac dysfunction.

PMID: 22745384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;18(17):4646-56. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0599.
Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Role of hedgehog signaling in malignant pleural mesothelioma.

Shi Y(1), Moura U, Opitz I, Soltermann A, Rehrauer H, Thies S, Weder W, Stahel
RA, Felley-Bosco E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Clinic and Policlinic of Oncology, Division 
of Thoracic Surgery, Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zürich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to assess the activity of hedgehog signaling
pathway in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of hedgehog signaling components was assessed
by quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization in 45 clinical samples. Primary MPM
cultures were developed in serum-free condition in 3% oxygen and were used to
investigate the effects of smoothened (SMO) inhibitors or GLI1 silencing on cell 
growth and hedgehog signaling. In vivo effects of SMO antagonists were determined
in an MPM xenograft growing in nude mice.
RESULTS: A significant increase in GLI1, sonic hedgehog, and human hedgehog
interacting protein gene expression was observed in MPM tumors compared with
nontumoral pleural tissue. SMO antagonists inhibited GLI1 expression and cell
growth in sensitive primary cultures. This effect was mimicked by GLI1 silencing.
Reduced survivin and YAP protein levels were also observed. Survivin protein
levels were rescued by overexpression of GLI1 or constitutively active YAP1.
Treatment of tumor-bearing mice with the SMO inhibitor HhAntag led to a
significant inhibition of tumor growth in vivo accompanied by decreased Ki-67 and
nuclear YAP immunostaining and a significant difference in selected gene
expression profile in tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: An aberrant hedgehog signaling is present in MPM, and inhibition of 
hedgehog signaling decreases tumor growth indicating potential new therapeutic
approach.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22733539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Stem Cells. 2012 Sep;30(9):1808-18. doi: 10.1002/stem.1160.

Hedgehog-GLI signaling drives self-renewal and tumorigenicity of human
melanoma-initiating cells.

Santini R(1), Vinci MC, Pandolfi S, Penachioni JY, Montagnani V, Olivito B,
Gattai R, Pimpinelli N, Gerlini G, Borgognoni L, Stecca B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori, Florence, Italy.

The question of whether cancer stem/tumor-initiating cells (CSC/TIC) exist in
human melanomas has arisen in the last few years. Here, we have used nonadherent 
spheres and the aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) enzymatic activity to enrich for
CSC/TIC in a collection of human melanomas obtained from a broad spectrum of
sites and stages. We find that melanomaspheres display extensive in vitro
self-renewal ability and sustain tumor growth in vivo, generating human melanoma 
xenografts that recapitulate the phenotypic composition of the parental tumor.
Melanomaspheres express high levels of Hedgehog (HH) pathway components and of
embryonic pluripotent stem cell factors SOX2, NANOG, OCT4, and KLF4. We show that
human melanomas contain a subset of cells expressing high ALDH activity
(ALDH(high)), which is endowed with higher self-renewal and tumorigenic abilities
than the ALDH(low) population. A good correlation between the number of
ALDH(high) cells and sphere formation efficiency was observed. Notably, both
pharmacological inhibition of HH signaling by the SMOOTHENED (SMO) antagonist
cyclopamine and GLI antagonist GANT61 and stable expression of shRNA targeting
either SMO or GLI1 result in a significant decrease in melanoma stem cell
self-renewal in vitro and a reduction in the number of ALDH(high) melanoma stem
cells. Finally, we show that interference with the HH-GLI pathway through
lentiviral-mediated silencing of SMO and GLI1 drastically diminishes tumor
initiation of ALDH(high) melanoma stem cells. In conclusion, our data indicate an
essential role of the HH-GLI1 signaling in controlling self-renewal and tumor
initiation of melanoma CSC/TIC. Targeting HH-GLI1 is thus predicted to reduce the
melanoma stem cell compartment.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22730244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Development. 2012 Jul;139(14):2625-34. doi: 10.1242/dev.081034. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Genome-wide characterization of Foxa2 targets reveals upregulation of floor plate
genes and repression of ventrolateral genes in midbrain dopaminergic progenitors.

Metzakopian E(1), Lin W, Salmon-Divon M, Dvinge H, Andersson E, Ericson J,
Perlmann T, Whitsett JA, Bertone P, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, NIMR, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA,
UK.

The transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 promote the specification of midbrain
dopaminergic (mDA) neurons and the floor plate. Whether their role is direct has 
remained unclear as they also regulate the expression of Shh, which has similar
roles. We characterized the Foxa2 cis-regulatory network by chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing of mDA progenitors.
This identified 9160 high-quality Foxa2 binding sites associated with 5409 genes,
providing mechanistic insights into Foxa2-mediated positive and negative
regulatory events. Foxa2 regulates directly and positively key determinants of
mDA neurons, including Lmx1a, Lmx1b, Msx1 and Ferd3l, while negatively inhibiting
transcription factors expressed in ventrolateral midbrain such as Helt, Tle4,
Otx1, Sox1 and Tal2. Furthermore, Foxa2 negatively regulates extrinsic and
intrinsic components of the Shh signaling pathway, possibly by binding to the
same enhancer regions of co-regulated genes as Gli1. Foxa2 also regulates the
expression of floor plate factors that control axon trajectories around the
midline of the embryo, thereby contributing to the axon guidance function of the 
floor plate. Finally, this study identified multiple Foxa2-regulated enhancers
that are active in the floor plate of the midbrain or along the length of the
embryo in mouse and chick. This work represents the first comprehensive
characterization of Foxa2 targets in mDA progenitors and provides a framework for
elaborating gene regulatory networks in a functionally important progenitor
population.

PMCID: PMC3383233
PMID: 22696295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Aug;56(8):1292-303. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200035. Epub
2012 Jun 13.

Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) promotes neural progenitor cell
proliferation and sonic hedgehog pathway activation during adult hippocampal
neurogenesis.

Wang Y(1), Li M, Xu X, Song M, Tao H, Bai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
P. R. China.

SCOPE: Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is a lifelong feature of brain plasticity
that appears to be critically involved in adult brain function and neurological
disease. Recent studies suggest that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), which
is the main polyphenolic constituent of green tea, may be used for the prevention
and treatment of various neurodegenerative diseases. We hypothesized that EGCG
promotes adult neurogenesis, which may be beneficial to hippocampus-dependent
learning and memory.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We show that EGCG treatment significantly increased the
number of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)-labeled cells in adult hippocampal
neural progenitor cell (NPC) cultures and in the dentate gyrus of adult mice.
Meanwhile, EGCG markedly improved spatial cognition in mice. These events are
associated with the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway. We observed that EGCG
triggered a robust upregulation of Shh receptor (Patched) mRNA and protein
expression in cultured NPCs as well as an upregulation of the downstream Shh
transcriptional target Gli1. These changes were further confirmed in the
hippocampus of mice administered EGCG. The blockage of the Shh signal with the
pharmacological inhibitor cyclopamine attenuated EGCG-induced hippocampal
neurogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide strong evidence that EGCG enhances adult
hippocampal neurogenesis.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22692966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cancer Epidemiol. 2012 Oct;36(5):e288-93. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2012.05.001. Epub 
2012 Jun 5.

A population-based study of hedgehog pathway gene variants in relation to the
dual risk of basal cell carcinoma plus another cancer.

Jorgensen TJ(1), Ruczinski I, Yao Shugart Y, Wheless L, Berthier Schaad Y,
Kessing B, Hoffman-Bolton J, Helzlsouer KJ, Kao WH, Francis L, Alani RM,
Strickland PT, Smith MW, Alberg AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Georgetown University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC, USA.

INTRODUCTION: A personal history of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is associated with
increased risk of other malignancies, but the reason is unknown. The hedgehog
pathway is critical to the etiology of BCC, and is also believed to contribute to
susceptibility to other cancers. This study tested the hypothesis that hedgehog
pathway and pathway-related gene variants contribute to the increased risk of
subsequent cancers among those with a history of BCC.
METHODS: The study was nested within the ongoing CLUE II cohort study,
established in 1989 in Washington County, Maryland, USA. The study consisted of a
cancer-free control group (n=2296) compared to three different groups of cancer
cases ascertained through 2007, those diagnosed with: (1) Other (non-BCC) cancer 
only (n=2349); (2) BCC only (n=534); and (3) BCC plus other cancer (n=446). The
frequencies of variant alleles were compared among these four groups for 20
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 6 hedgehog pathway genes (SHH, IHH,
PTCH2, SMO, GLI1, SUFU), and also 22 SNPs in VDR and 8 SNPs in FAS, which have
cross-talk with the hedgehog pathway.
RESULTS: Comparing those with both BCC and other cancer versus those with no
cancer, no significant associations were observed for any of the hedgehog pathway
SNPs, or for the FAS SNPs. One VDR SNP was nominally significantly associated
with the BCC cancer-prone phenotype, rs11574085 [per minor allele odds ratio (OR)
1.38, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.05-1.82; p-value=0.02].
CONCLUSION: The hedgehog pathway gene SNPs studied, along with the VDR and FAS
SNPs studied, are not strongly associated with the BCC cancer-prone phenotype.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3438291
PMID: 22677152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jun 7;366(23):2180-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1113538.

Inhibiting the hedgehog pathway in patients with the basal-cell nevus syndrome.

Tang JY(1), Mackay-Wiggan JM, Aszterbaum M, Yauch RL, Lindgren J, Chang K,
Coppola C, Chanana AM, Marji J, Bickers DR, Epstein EH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, California 94609,
USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Jun 7;366(23):2225-6.
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Sep 6;367(10):970; author reply 970-1.

BACKGROUND: Dysregulated hedgehog signaling is the pivotal molecular abnormality 
underlying basal-cell carcinomas. Vismodegib is a new orally administered
hedgehog-pathway inhibitor that produces objective responses in locally advanced 
and metastatic basal-cell carcinomas.
METHODS: We tested the anti-basal-cell carcinoma efficacy of vismodegib in a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in patients with the
basal-cell nevus syndrome at three clinical centers from September 2009 through
January 2011. The primary end point was reduction in the incidence of new
basal-cell carcinomas that were eligible for surgical resection (surgically
eligible) with vismodegib versus placebo after 3 months; secondary end points
included reduction in the size of existing basal-cell carcinomas.
RESULTS: In 41 patients followed for a mean of 8 months (range, 1 to 15) after
enrollment, the per-patient rate of new surgically eligible basal-cell carcinomas
was lower with vismodegib than with placebo (2 vs. 29 cases per group per year,
P<0.001), as was the size (percent change from baseline in the sum of the longest
diameter) of existing clinically significant basal-cell carcinomas (-65% vs.
-11%, P=0.003). In some patients, all basal-cell carcinomas clinically regressed.
No tumors progressed during treatment with vismodegib. Patients receiving
vismodegib routinely had grade 1 or 2 adverse events of loss of taste, muscle
cramps, hair loss, and weight loss. Overall, 54% of patients (14 of 26) receiving
vismodegib discontinued drug treatment owing to adverse events. At 1 month,
vismodegib use had reduced the hedgehog target-gene expression by basal-cell
carcinoma by 90% (P<0.001) and diminished tumor-cell proliferation, but apoptosis
was not affected. No residual basal-cell carcinoma was detectable in 83% of
biopsy samples taken from sites of clinically regressed basal-cell carcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Vismodegib reduces the basal-cell carcinoma tumor burden and blocks 
growth of new basal-cell carcinomas in patients with the basal-cell nevus
syndrome. The adverse events associated with treatment led to discontinuation in 
over half of treated patients. (Funded by Genentech and others;
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00957229.).

PMCID: PMC4362529
PMID: 22670904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 1;21(16):2939-48. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0016. Epub 2012 
Jul 16.

Effects of the hedgehog inhibitor GDC-0449, alone or in combination with
dasatinib, on BCR-ABL-positive leukemia cells.

Okabe S(1), Tauchi T, Tanaka Y, Katagiri S, Ohyashiki K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
okabe@tokyo-med.ac.jp

Hedgehog (Hh)-glioma-associated oncogene homolog (Gli) signaling is implicated in
a large number of human cancers such as leukemia. In this study, we investigated 
the effects of the potent Hh antagonist GDC-0449 on the BCR-ABL-positive cell
line OM9;22 and primary samples when leukemia cells were protected by a feeder
cell line (S9 cells). The numbers of OM9;22 cells significantly increased with S9
cells. Treatment of OM9;22 cells with GDC-0449 caused cell growth inhibition and 
induced apoptosis. Moreover, GDC-0449 inhibited the colony growth of Philadelphia
chromosome (Ph)-positive primary samples. We next investigated the effects of a
combination of GDC-0449 and dasatinib on these cell lines. The growth inhibition 
typically promoted by dasatinib was significantly reduced in the presence of S9
cells. Treatment of Ph-positive leukemia cells with GDC-0449 and dasatinib in the
presence of S9 caused significantly more cytotoxicity than that caused by each
drug alone. Inhibition of Gli1 or Gli2 by siRNA transfection reduced the growth
of the Ph-positive cell line K562 and increased cytotoxicity of dasatinib.
Moreover, colony formations of Gli1 or Gli2 knockdown cells were also reduced.
Data from this study suggest that administration of the Hh inhibitor GDC-0449
inhibits BCR-ABL-positive cell growth and enhances the cytotoxic effects of
dasatinib in the presence of feeder cells.

PMID: 22642671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cancer Sci. 2012 Aug;103(8):1474-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02341.x. Epub 
2012 Jul 11.

Intermedin is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma and regulates cell
proliferation and survival.

Guo X(1), Schmitz JC, Kenney BC, Uchio EM, Kulkarni S, Cha CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Angiogenesis is one of the hallmarks of tumor growth and metastasis.
Identification of tumor angiogenic factors has been a critical component in
understanding cancer biology and treatment. Intermedin (IMD) has been reported to
promote angiogenesis in a rat ischemic model and human umbilical vascular
endothelial cells. Our study sought to determine the role of IMD in human
hepatocellular carcinoma tumor progression. High IMD mRNA expression levels were 
observed in human hepatocellular carcinoma tumors, even in early stage disease,
by real-time RT-PCR. Immunohistochemical analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma
clinical samples demonstrated that the tumor regions were significantly more
immunoreactive for IMD than adjacent benign liver. Inhibition of IMD expression
using RNA interference reduced cell proliferation in SK-Hep-1 and SNU-398 cells. 
Blockage of IMD signaling using either an antagonist peptide or a neutralizing
antibody inhibited growth in a dose-dependent manner with concomitant induction
of apoptosis, causing cleavage of caspase-8 and downregulation of Gli1 and Bcl2. 
Conversely, addition of IMD active peptide increased the phosphorylation level of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase. Thus, IMD might play an important role in 
cell proliferation and survival of hepatocellular carcinoma. Our data suggests
that IMD is a potential biomarker and therapeutic target for hepatocellular
carcinoma.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22625651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Hum Pathol. 2012 Sep;43(9):1524-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.01.019. Epub 2012 
May 9.

Pericytoma with t(7;12) and ACTB-GLI1 fusion arising in bone.

Bridge JA(1), Sanders K, Huang D, Nelson M, Neff JR, Muirhead D, Walker C,
Seemayer TA, Sumegi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA. jbridge@unmc.edu

Cytogenetic analysis of a primary bone neoplasm with pericytic features in a
67-year-old man revealed a t(7;12)(p22;q13) among other karyotypic abnormalities.
Subsequent molecular studies confirmed the presence of an associated ACTB-GLI1
fusion transcript. An identical 7;12 translocation is known to characterize a
discrete group of soft tissue tumors belonging to the myopericytic category
termed pericytoma with t(7;12). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
case of pericytoma with t(7;12) arising in bone. Cytogenetic and molecular
analyses were useful, if not essential, in classifying this rare diagnostic
entity.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3407293
PMID: 22575261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biomed Pharmacother. 2012 Jun;66(4):312-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2011.11.004.
Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Itraconazole inhibits HMEC-1 angiogenesis.

Del Carratore R(1), Carpi A, Beffy P, Lubrano V, Giorgetti L, Maserti BE,
Carluccio MA, Simili M, Iervasi G, Balzan S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Physiology, National Research Council-CNR, Via Moruzzi
1, Pisa 56124, Italy. rdc@ifc.cnr.it

Abnormal angiogenesis is implicated in a number of human diseases and endothelial
growth inhibition represents a common approach in tumor therapy. Recently
itraconazole, frequently used in humans as antifungal drug, which blocks the
biosynthesis of cholesterol, has been found to be antiangiogenic in primary
umbilical vein endothelial cells. However, the exact antiangiogenic mechanisms
remain largely unknown. In this paper, we studied the effect of itraconazole in
human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1), an immortalized cell line 
to study adult angiogenesis. A 50% reduction of microtubule formation was
observed after itraconazole treatment which was partially rescued by cholesterol 
addition. We found that itraconazole inhibits angiogenesis markers such as VEGF, 
AAMP and e-NOS. mTOR and ERK1/2 phosphorylation as well as the expression of
Gli1, one of the main controllers of the Shh pathway, were also inhibited by
itraconazole. Cholesterol addition did not completely rescue inhibition of these 
pathways, suggesting that the itraconazole antiangiogenic activity could be due
to multiple mechanisms. Our results may contribute to novel approaches to block
angiogenesis with therapeutic application.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22564244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Cancer. 2012 Jul 13;11:30. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-11-30.

Osteoblast-secreted collagen upregulates paracrine Sonic hedgehog signaling by
prostate cancer cells and enhances osteoblast differentiation.

Zunich SM(1), Valdovinos M, Douglas T, Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P, Lamm ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Children's Memorial Research Center, 2300 Children's Plaza #204, Chicago, IL
60614, USA.

BACKGROUND: Induction of osteoblast differentiation by paracrine Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) signaling may be a mechanism through which Shh-expressing prostate cancer
cells initiate changes in the bone microenvironment and promote metastases. A
hallmark of osteoblast differentiation is the formation of matrix whose
predominant protein is type 1 collagen. We investigated the formation of a
collagen matrix by osteoblasts cultured with prostate cancer cells, and its
effects on interactions between prostate cancer cells and osteoblasts.
RESULTS: In the presence of exogenous ascorbic acid (AA), a co-factor in collagen
synthesis, mouse MC3T3 pre-osteoblasts in mixed cultures with human LNCaP
prostate cancer cells or LNCaP cells modified to overexpress Shh (LNShh cells)
formed collagen matrix with distinct fibril ultrastructural characteristics. AA
increased the activity of alkaline phosphatase and the expression of the alkaline
phosphatase gene Akp2, markers of osteoblast differentiation, in MC3T3
pre-osteoblasts cultured with LNCaP or LNShh cells. However, the AA-stimulated
increase in Akp2 expression in MC3T3 pre-osteoblasts cultured with LNShh cells
far exceeded the levels observed in MC3T3 cells cultured with either LNCaP cells 
with AA or LNShh cells without AA. Therefore, AA and Shh exert a synergistic
effect on osteoblast differentiation. We determined whether the effect of AA on
LNShh cell-induced osteoblast differentiation was mediated by Shh signaling. AA
increased the expression of Gli1 and Ptc1, target genes of the Shh pathway, in
MC3T3 pre-osteoblasts cultured with LNShh cells to at least twice their levels
without AA. The ability of AA to upregulate Shh signaling and enhance alkaline
phosphatase activity was blocked in MC3T3 cells that expressed a dominant
negative form of the transcription factor GLI1. The AA-stimulated increase in Shh
signaling and Shh-induced osteoblast differentiation was also inhibited by the
specific collagen synthesis inhibitor 3,4-dehydro-L-proline.
CONCLUSIONS: Matrix collagen, formed by osteoblasts in the presence of AA,
potentiates Shh signaling between Shh-expressing prostate cancer cells and
osteoblasts. Collagen and Shh signaling exert a synergistic effect on osteoblast 
differentiation, a defining event in prostate carcinoma bone metastasis.
Investigations into paracrine interactions among prostate cancer cells,
osteoblasts, and osteoblast-synthesized matrix proteins advance our understanding
of mechanisms contributing to prostate cancer bone metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3398858
PMID: 22559324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 May;28(5):536-9.

[Gli1 expression and its relationship with the expression of Shh, Vimentin and
E-cadherin in human hepatocellular carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu QR(1), Zheng X, Zan XF, Yao YM, Yang W, Liu QG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

AIM: To investigate the expression and clinical features of glima-associated
oncogene 1(Gli1) and its correlation with the expression of sonic hedgehog(Shh), 
one of the ligands of hedgehog (Hh) signaling, and two epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) markers, Vimentin and E-cadherin in human hepatocellular
carcinoma(HCC).
METHODS: Paired HCC and normal tumor-adjacent tissues were collected from 63 HCC 
patients. Gli1 expression at both the protein and mRNA level were examined by
immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. The protein expression of Shh, Vimentin and
E-cadherin were evaluated by immunohistochemistry to identify correlations with
Gli1.
RESULTS: The protein and mRNA expression of Gli1 were significantly up-regulated 
in the HCC tumor tissues compared to the normal tumor-adjacent tissues. Gli1
protein expression in HCC was closely correlated with intrahepatic metastases
(x(2);=6.205, P<0.05), portal vein invasion (x(2);=4.014, P<0.05), high
Edmonson-Steiner classification (x(2);=19.668, P<0.05) and advanced TNM stage
(x(2);=7.091, P<0.05). Gli1 protein expression was positively correlated with Shh
(r=0.574, P<0.05) and Vimentin(r=0.467, P<0.05), and negatively correlated with
E-cadherin (r=-0.439, P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Gli1 is up-regulated in HCC tissues and closely correlated with
clinicopathological characteristics, the increased expression of Gli1 in HCC
tissues may be attributed to Shh, and Gli1 may play an important role in HCC
progression and metastasis by inducing EMT.

PMID: 22558994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Oct;93(2):227-36. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.04.009. Epub
2012 Apr 25.

STAT3 activation and aberrant ligand-dependent sonic hedgehog signaling in human 
pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

Yang Q(1), Shen SS, Zhou S, Ni J, Chen D, Wang G, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

The Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling and STAT3 pathways play important roles during
carcinogenesis with possible interaction. To determine the association of the
activation of SHH signaling pathway and STAT3 pathway in carcinogenesis of human 
non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC), firstly we examined the expression of SHH
signaling molecules including SHH, Gli1(glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1) and
HHIP (Hh interacting protein), as well as p-STAT3 (phosphorylation at Tyr705) by 
immunohistochemistry in 87 cases of NSCLC, 12 atypical adenomatous hyperplasia
(AAH) and 20 adjacent normal lung tissues. The expression of SHH, Gli1, HHIP and 
p-STAT3 was detected respectively in 87/87(100%), 74/87(85.1%), 75/87(86.2%) and 
54/87(62.1%) of the NSCLC cases, but not in the adjacent normal lung parenchyma. 
Ligand-dependent SHH pathway activation and STAT3 signaling activation were
observed in most cases of NSCLC, and the high SHH pathway activation rate and
STAT3 activation rate were significantly higher in adenocarcinoma compared with
squamous cell carcinomas and large cell carcinomas (P<0.05). Both SHH and STAT3
pathway activation level correlated with histological grade in adenocarcinoma,
being higher in well-differentiated types (P<0.05). Furthermore, high SHH pathway
activation and p-STAT3 expression were also detected in 10/12(83.3%) of AAH cases
as well as in most cases of early-stage adenocarcinoma - adenocarcinoma in situ
(AIS) and minimally invasive adenocarcinomas (MIA). Correlation analysis showed
that p-STAT3 protein expression level was correlated positively with
ligand-dependent activation level of SHH signaling in adenocarcinoma (r(s)=0.585,
P=0.000) and AAH (r(s)=0.996, P=0.000). We speculated that activation of STAT3
could up-regulate SHH gene expression directly or indirectly, and thereby
activated SHH signaling resulting in lung tumor cell ontogeny. To explore the
interactional mechanism, we then performed serial transient co-transfection assay
in human pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell line H441 cells, and the results confirmed
STAT3 activation can up-regulate SHH gene expression indirectly. In conclusion,
aberrant ligand-dependent SHH signaling activation occurs frequently in NSCLC.
The signaling plays a more active role in adenocarcinoma, and is an early event
in carcinogenesis of lung adenocarcinoma. The involvement of STAT3 pathway
activation might function in inducing the process.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22554932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Jul;11(7):1587-97. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-1058. Epub
2012 May 2.

Smoothened antagonists reverse taxane resistance in ovarian cancer.

Steg AD(1), Katre AA, Bevis KS, Ziebarth A, Dobbin ZC, Shah MM, Alvarez RD,
Landen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

The hedgehog pathway has been implicated in the formation and maintenance of a
variety of malignancies, including ovarian cancer; however, it is unknown whether
hedgehog signaling is involved in ovarian cancer chemoresistance. The goal of
this study was to determine the effects of antagonizing the hedgehog receptor,
Smoothened (Smo), on chemotherapy response in ovarian cancer. Expression of
hedgehog pathway members was assessed in three pairs of parental and
chemotherapy-resistant ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780ip2/A2780cp20,
SKOV3ip1/SKOV3TRip2, HeyA8/HeyA8MDR) using quantitative PCR and Western blot
analysis. Cell lines were exposed to increasing concentrations of two different
Smo antagonists (cyclopamine, LDE225) alone and in combination with carboplatin
or paclitaxel. Selective knockdown of Smo, Gli1, or Gli2 was achieved using siRNA
constructs. Cell viability was assessed by MTT assay. A2780cp20 and SKOV3TRip2
orthotopic xenografts were treated with vehicle, LDE225, paclitaxel, or
combination therapy. Chemoresistant cell lines showed higher expression (>2-fold,
P < 0.05) of hedgehog signaling components compared with their respective
parental lines. Smo antagonists sensitized chemotherapy-resistant cell lines to
paclitaxel, but not to carboplatin. LDE225 treatment also increased sensitivity
of ALDH-positive cells to paclitaxel. A2780cp20 and SKOV3TRip2 xenografts treated
with combined LDE225 and paclitaxel had significantly less tumor burden than
those treated with vehicle or either agent alone. Increased taxane sensitivity
seems to be mediated by a decrease in P-glycoprotein (MDR1) expression. Selective
knockdown of Smo, Gli1, or Gli2 all increased taxane sensitivity. Smo antagonists
reverse taxane resistance in chemoresistant ovarian cancer models, suggesting
combined anti-hedgehog and chemotherapies could provide a useful therapeutic
strategy for ovarian cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3392529
PMID: 22553355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2012 May;33(5):691-700. doi: 10.1038/aps.2012.24. Epub 2012
Apr 30.

Hedgehog signaling pathway mediates invasion and metastasis of hepatocellular
carcinoma via ERK pathway.

Lu JT(1), Zhao WD, He W, Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Anhui Medical University, Key Laboratory
of Anti-inflammatory and Immunopharmacology of Education Ministry, Anhui
Engineering Technology Research Center of Anti-inflammatory and Immunodrugs,
Hefei, China.

AIM: To investigate the role of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway in the invasion
and metastasis of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Eighty six HCC tissues samples and HCC cell line Bel-7402 were examined.
The protein expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh), nuclear glioma-associated
oncogene-1 (Gli1), MMP-9 and p-ERK1/2 in HCC was analyzed using
immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. Boyden chamber assay and
wound-healing assay were used to quantify the invasion and metastasis of Bel-7402
cells.
RESULTS: In 86 HCC tissue samples, the positive ratio of Shh and nucleus Gli1 was
67.44% (58/86) and 60.47% (52/86), respectively; the expression of nucleus Gli1
was correlated with the tumor pathological grade (P=0.034), and with the ability 
of the tumor to invade and metastasize (P=0.001); the expression of nucleus Gli1 
was also correlated with p-ERK1/2 (P=0.031) and with MMP-9 (P=0.034). Neither
Shh, nor nucleus Gli1 was observed in normal liver tissue. KAAD-cyclopamine
(KAAD-cyc), a specific inhibitor of the Hh pathway, at the concentrations of 1
and 4 µmol/L inhibited the invasion and migration of Bel-7402 cells and decreased
the expression of Gli1 in nucleus and MMP-9, p-ERK1/2 proteins in Bel-7402 cells.
On the other hand, Shh, a ligand of the Hh pathway, at the concentration of 0.5
µg/mL produced opposite effects. The MAPK pathway inhibitors U0126 and PD98059 at
the concentrations of 5 and 10 µmol/L inhibited invasion and metastasis of
Bel-7402 cells induced by Shh, and decreased the expression of p-ERK1/2 and
MMP-9. However, U0126 and PD98059 had no effect on the expression of Gli1.
CONCLUSION: Hh signaling pathway mediates invasion and metastasis of human HCC by
up-regulating the protein expression of MMP-9 via ERK pathway.

PMCID: PMC4010360
PMID: 22543708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Jun 10;30(17):2154-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.41.1181. Epub 2012
Apr 16.

Hedgehog-GLI pathway in medulloblastoma.

Archer TC(1), Weeraratne SD, Pomeroy SL.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

PMID: 22508821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Gut. 2013 Mar;62(3):348-57. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301141. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Hedgehog signalling stimulates precursor cell accumulation and impairs epithelial
maturation in the murine oesophagus.

van Dop WA(1), Rosekrans SL, Uhmann A, Jaks V, Offerhaus GJ, van den Bergh
Weerman MA, Kasper M, Heijmans J, Hardwick JC, Verspaget HW, Hommes DW, Toftgård 
R, Hahn H, van den Brink GR.

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: In the intestine Hedgehog (Hh) signalling is directed from epithelium 
to mesenchyme and negatively regulates epithelial precursor cell fate. The role
of Hh signalling in the oesophagus has not been studied in vivo. Here the authors
examined the role of Hh signalling in epithelial homeostasis of oesophagus.
DESIGN: The authors used transgenic mice in which the Hh receptor Patched1
(Ptch1) could be conditionally inactivated in a body-wide manner and mice in
which Gli1 could be induced specifically in the epithelium of the skin and
oesophagus. Effects on epithelial homeostasis of the oesophagus were examined
using immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridisation, transmission electron
microscopy and real-time PCR. Hh signalling was examined in patients with
oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Sonic Hh is signalled in an autocrine manner in the basal layer of the
oesophagus. Activation of Hh signalling resulted in an expansion of the
epithelial precursor cell compartment and failure of epithelial maturation and
migration. Levels of Hh targets GLI1, HHIP and PTCH1 were increased in SCC
compared with normal tissue from the same patients.
CONCLUSION: Here the authors find that Hh signalling positively regulates the
precursor cell compartment in the oesophageal epithelium in an autocrine manner. 
Since Hh signalling targets precursor cells in the oesophageal epithelium and
signalling is increased in SCCs, Hh signalling may be involved in oesophageal SCC
formation.

PMID: 22504664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Onco Targets Ther. 2012;5:47-58. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S21957. Epub 2012 Mar 9.

Hedgehog pathway as a drug target: Smoothened inhibitors in development.

Lin TL(1), Matsui W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Kansas, Kansas City, MO, USA.

Emerging laboratory and clinical investigations demonstrate that Hedgehog
signaling (Hh) represents a novel therapeutic target in various human cancers.
This conserved signaling pathway precisely regulates self-renewal and terminal
differentiation in embryonic development, but is typically silenced in adult
tissues, with reactivation usually only during tissue repair. Aberrant Hh pathway
signaling has been implicated in the pathogenesis, self-renewal, and chemotherapy
resistance of a growing number of solid and hematologic malignancies. Major
components of the Hh pathway include the Hh ligands (Sonic, Desert, and Indian), 
the transmembrane receptor Patched, the signal transducer Smoothened (Smo), and
transcription factors Gli1-3 which regulate the transcription of Hh target genes.
Mutations in Hh pathway genes, increased Hh signaling in tumor stroma, and Hh
overexpression in self-renewing cells (cancer stem cells) have been described,
and these different modes of Hh signaling have implications for the design of Hh 
pathway inhibitors and their integration into conventional treatment regimens.
Discovery of a naturally-occurring Smo inhibitor, cyclopamine, and the
identification of Hh pathway mutations and over expression in cancer cells
prompted the development of several cyclopamine derivatives. Encouraging
laboratory and in vivo data has resulted in Phase I and II clinical trials of Smo
inhibitors. In this review, we will discuss the current understanding of Hh
pathway signaling in malignancy and Smo antagonists in development. Recent data
with these agents shows that they are well-tolerated and may be effective for
subsets of patients. Challenges remain for appropriate patient selection and the 
optimal combination and sequence of these targeted therapies into current
treatment paradigms.

PMCID: PMC3325001
PMID: 22500124  [PubMed]


177. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17860-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.347716. Epub 2012
Apr 9.

Gli1 protein participates in Hedgehog-mediated specification of osteoblast
lineage during endochondral ossification.

Hojo H(1), Ohba S, Yano F, Saito T, Ikeda T, Nakajima K, Komiyama Y, Nakagata N, 
Suzuki K, Takato T, Kawaguchi H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. hojo@bmw.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

With regard to Hedgehog signaling in mammalian development, the majority of
research has focused on Gli2 and Gli3 rather than Gli1. This is because Gli1(-/-)
mice do not show any gross abnormalities in adulthood, and no detailed analyses
of fetal Gli1(-/-) mice are available. In this study, we investigated the
physiological role of Gli1 in osteogenesis. Histological analyses revealed that
bone formation was impaired in Gli1(-/-) fetuses compared with WT fetuses.
Gli1(-/-) perichondrial cells expressed neither runt-related transcription factor
2 (Runx2) nor osterix, master regulators of osteogenesis, in contrast to WT
cells. In vitro analyses showed that overexpression of Gli1 up-regulated early
osteogenesis-related genes in both WT and Runx2(-/-) perichondrial cells, and
Gli1 activated transcription of those genes via its association with their
5'-regulatory regions, underlying the function of Gli1 in the perichondrium.
Moreover, Gli1(-/-);Gli2(-/-) mice showed more severe phenotypes of impaired bone
formation than either Gli1(-/-) or Gli2(-/-) mice, and osteoblast differentiation
was impaired in Gli1(-/-);Gli3(-/-) perichondrial cells compared with Gli3(-/-)
cells in vitro. These data suggest that Gli1 itself can induce early osteoblast
differentiation, at least to some extent, in a Runx2-independent manner. It also 
plays a redundant role with Gli2 and is involved in the repressor function of
Gli3 in osteogenesis. On the basis of these findings, we propose that upon
Hedgehog input, Gli1 functions collectively with Gli2 and Gli3 in osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3366782
PMID: 22493482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 24;109(17):E1038-47. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1114168109. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

The activity of Gli transcription factors is essential for Kras-induced
pancreatic tumorigenesis.

Rajurkar M(1), De Jesus-Monge WE, Driscoll DR, Appleman VA, Huang H, Cotton JL,
Klimstra DS, Zhu LJ, Simin K, Xu L, McMahon AP, Lewis BC, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), one of the most aggressive human
malignancies, is thought to be initiated by KRAS activation. Here we find that
transcriptional activation mediated by the Gli family of transcription factors,
although dispensable for pancreatic development, is required for Kras-induced
proliferation and survival in primary pancreatic epithelial cells in culture and 
for Kras-driven pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and PDAC formation in vivo. 
Further, ectopic Gli1 activation in the mouse pancreas accelerates Kras-driven
tumor formation, underscoring the importance of Gli transcription factors in
pancreatic tumorigenesis. Interestingly, we demonstrate Gli-regulated I-kappa-B
kinase epsilon (IKBKE) and NF-<U+03BA>B activity in pancreatic cancer cells and show
that this activity is a critical downstream mediator for Gli-dependent PDAC cell 
transformation and survival. Together, these studies demonstrate the requirement 
for Gli in Kras-dependent pancreatic epithelial transformation, suggest a
mechanism of Gli-NF-<U+03BA>B oncogenic activation, and provide genetic evidence
supporting the therapeutic targeting of Gli activity in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3340052
PMID: 22493246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hepatology. 2012 Sep;56(3):1108-16. doi: 10.1002/hep.25758.

Osteopontin is a novel downstream target of SOX9 with diagnostic implications for
progression of liver fibrosis in humans.

Pritchett J(1), Harvey E, Athwal V, Berry A, Rowe C, Oakley F, Moles A, Mann DA, 
Bobola N, Sharrocks AD, Thomson BJ, Zaitoun AM, Irving WL, Guha IN, Hanley NA,
Hanley KP.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Group, School of Biomedicine, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Osteopontin (OPN) is an important component of the extracellular matrix (ECM),
which promotes liver fibrosis and has been described as a biomarker for its
severity. Previously, we have demonstrated that Sex-determining region Y-box 9
(SOX9) is ectopically expressed during activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC)
when it is responsible for the production of type 1 collagen, which causes scar
formation in liver fibrosis. Here, we demonstrate that SOX9 regulates OPN. During
normal development and in the mature liver, SOX9 and OPN are coexpressed in the
biliary duct. In rodent and human models of fibrosis, both proteins were
increased and colocalized to fibrotic regions in vivo and in culture-activated
HSCs. SOX9 bound a conserved upstream region of the OPN gene, and abrogation of
Sox9 in HSCs significantly decreased OPN production. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has 
previously been shown to regulate OPN expression directly by glioblastoma (GLI)
1. Our data indicate that in models of liver fibrosis, Hh signaling more likely
acts through SOX9 to modulate OPN. In contrast to Gli2 and Gli3, Gli1 is sparse
in HSCs and is not increased upon activation. Furthermore, reduction of GLI2, but
not GLI3, decreased the expression of both SOX9 and OPN, whereas overexpressing
SOX9 or constitutively active GLI2 could rescue the antagonistic effects of
cyclopamine on OPN expression.CONCLUSION: These data reinforce SOX9, downstream
of Hh signaling, as a core factor mediating the expression of ECM components
involved in liver fibrosis. Understanding the role and regulation of SOX9 during 
liver fibrosis will provide insight into its potential modulation as an
antifibrotic therapy or as a means of identifying potential ECM targets, similar 
to OPN, as biomarkers of fibrosis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3638324
PMID: 22488688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cancer Sci. 2012 Jul;103(7):1272-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02297.x. Epub
2012 May 17.

Hedgehog inhibitor decreases chemosensitivity to 5-fluorouracil and gemcitabine
under hypoxic conditions in pancreatic cancer.

Onishi H(1), Morifuji Y, Kai M, Suyama K, Iwasaki H, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. ohnishi@surg1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest types of cancer. Previously, we showed 
that hypoxia increases invasiveness through upregulation of Smoothened (Smo)
transcription in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells. Here, we first
evaluated whether hypoxia-induced increase in Smo contributes to the
proliferation of PDAC cells. We showed that Smo, but not Gli1, inhibition
decreases proliferation significantly under hypoxic conditions. To further
investigate the effects of Smo on PDAC growth, cell cycle analysis was carried
out. Inhibition of Smo under hypoxia led to G(0) /G(1) arrest and decreased S
phase. As 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and gemcitabine, which are first-line drugs for
pancreatic cancer, are sensitive to S phase, we then evaluated whether
cyclopamine-induced decreased S phase under hypoxia affected the chemosensitivity
of 5-FU and gemcitabine in PDAC cells. Cyclopamine treatment under hypoxia
significantly decreased chemosensitivity to 5-FU and gemcitabine under hypoxia in
both in vitro and in vivo models. In contrast, cis-diamminedichloroplatinum,
which is cell cycle-independent, showed significant synergistic effects. These
results suggest that hypoxia-induced increase of Smo directly contributes to the 
proliferation of PDAC cells through a hedgehog/Gli1-independent pathway, and that
decreased S phase due to the use of Smo inhibitor under hypoxia leads to
chemoresistance in S phase-sensitive anticancer drugs. Our results could be very 
important clinically because a clinical trial using Smo inhibitors and
chemotherapy drugs will begin in the near future.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22486854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cancer Lett. 2012 Oct 1;323(1):48-57. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.03.037. Epub
2012 Apr 3.

Genistein inhibits the stemness properties of prostate cancer cells through
targeting Hedgehog-Gli1 pathway.

Zhang L(1), Li L, Jiao M, Wu D, Wu K, Li X, Zhu G, Yang L, Wang X, Hsieh JT, He
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, China.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are involved in tumorigenesis and progression of
prostate cancer (PCa). Conventional anticancer therapeutics failed to eradicate
CSCs, which may eventually lead to the disease relapse and metastasis. Therefore,
targeting prostate CSCs may be an ideal strategy to cure PCa. Genistein is a
major isoflavone constituent of soybeans and soy products, which has been shown
to exhibit potent anticancer effect on many cancers. We have previously reported 
that genistein can inhibit PCa cell invasion by reversing epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, suggesting that genistein may be effective against
metastatic PCa. In addition, we have recently demonstrated that PCa tumorsphere
cells (TCs) possess CSC properties. Here, we found that tumorsphere formation and
colony formation of Pca cells were noticeably suppressed in the presence of
genistein. Pretreatment of PCa TCs with genistein also suppressed tumorigenicity 
in vivo. Additionally, genistein treatment inhibited tumor growth of PCa TCs.
Further studies showed that genistein treatment not only led to the
down-regulation of PCa CSC markers CD44 in vitro and in vivo, but also inhibited 
Hedgehog-Gli1 pathway, which may contribute to the anti-CSC effect of genistein
in PCa TCs. Therefore, our findings demonstrated that genistein may be a dietary 
phytochemical with potential to target prostate CSCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22484470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034374. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Hedgehog signaling in tumor cells facilitates osteoblast-enhanced osteolytic
metastases.

Das S(1), Tucker JA, Khullar S, Samant RS, Shevde LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, USA-Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of
South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, United States of America.

The remodeling process in bone yields numerous cytokines and chemokines that
mediate crosstalk between osteoblasts and osteoclasts and also serve to attract
and support metastatic tumor cells. The metastatic tumor cells disturb the
equilibrium in bone that manifests as skeletal complications. The Hedgehog (Hh)
pathway plays an important role in skeletogenesis. We hypothesized that the Hh
pathway mediates an interaction between tumor cells and osteoblasts and
influences osteoblast differentiation in response to tumor cells. We have
determined that breast tumor cells have an activated Hh pathway characterized by 
upregulation of the ligand, IHH and transcription factor GLI1. Breast cancer
cells interact with osteoblasts and cause an enhanced differentiation of
pre-osteoblasts to osteoblasts that express increased levels of the
osteoclastogenesis factors, RANKL and PTHrP. There is sustained expression of
osteoclast-promoting factors, RANKL and PTHrP, even after the osteoblast
differentiation ceases and apoptosis sets in. Moreover, tumor cells that are
deficient in Hh signaling are compromised in their ability to induce osteoblast
differentiation and consequently are inefficient in causing osteolysis. The
stimulation of osteoblast differentiation sets the stage for osteoclast
differentiation and overall promotes osteolysis. Thus, in the process of
developing newer therapeutic strategies against breast cancer metastasis to bone 
it would worthwhile to keep in mind the role of the Hh pathway in osteoblast
differentiation in an otherwise predominant osteolytic phenomenon.

PMCID: PMC3315536
PMID: 22479615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Jun;33(6):1158-68. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs138. Epub 2012 Mar
29.

Folate deprivation enhances invasiveness of human colon cancer cells mediated by 
activation of sonic hedgehog signaling through promoter hypomethylation and cross
action with transcription nuclear factor-kappa B pathway.

Wang TP(1), Hsu SH, Feng HC, Huang RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, Xinzhuang,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

Low folate status is well recognized as one of the metabolic stressors for
colorectal cancer carcinogenesis, but its role in colon cancer invasion remains
unknown. Activation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal in interaction with the
transcription nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathway is crucial for cancer
aggressiveness. The aims of this study were to investigate whether and how folate
deprivation promotes invasion by colon cancer cells in relation to Shh signaling 
and NF-<U+03BA>B pathway activation. Cultivation of epithelial colon carcinoma-derived
cells (HCT116) in folate-deficient (FD) medium enhanced cellular migration and
invasion, in correlation with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) associated 
with Snail expression and E-cadherin suppression, increased production of ß1
integrin and increased proteolysis by matrix metalloproteinase 2. Blockade of Shh
signaling by cyclopamine (CYC) or of NF-<U+03BA>B activation by BAY abolished
FD-enhanced EMT and invasion by HCT116 cells. FD cells had 50-80% less
intracellular folate, associated with aberrant hypomethylation of the Shh
promoter, than control cells, and increased binding of nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B subunit p65 
to the Shh promoter region, which coincided with increased Shh expression and
protein production of Shh ligand; in addition, the FD-induced Shh signaling
targeted Gli1 transcription activator as well as Ptch receptor. The FD-induced
Shh induction and activated signaling were blocked by NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor BAY.
Blockade of Shh signaling abrogated FD-promoted NF-<U+03BA>B activation measured by I<U+03BA>Ba
degradation and by target gene TNFa expression. Taken together, these findings
demonstrate that folate deprivation enhanced invasiveness of colon cancer cells
mediated by activation of Shh signaling through promoter hypomethylation and
cross actions with the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

PMID: 22461522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Prostate. 2012 Nov;72(15):1638-47. doi: 10.1002/pros.22517. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Hedgehog signaling inhibition by the small molecule smoothened inhibitor GDC-0449
in the bone forming prostate cancer xenograft MDA PCa 118b.

Karlou M(1), Lu JF, Wu G, Maity S, Tzelepi V, Navone NM, Hoang A, Logothetis CJ, 
Efstathiou E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The David Koch Center for
Applied Research of Genitourinary Cancers, The Stanford Alexander Tissue
Derivatives Laboratory, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog signaling is a stromal-mesenchymal pathway central to the
development and homeostasis of both the prostate and the bone. Aberrant Hedgehog 
signaling activation has been associated with prostate cancer aggressiveness. We 
hypothesize that Hedgehog pathway is a candidate therapeutic target in advanced
prostate cancer. We confirm increased Hedgehog signaling in advanced and bone
metastatic castrate resistant prostate cancer and examine the pharmacodynamic
effect of Smoothened inhibition by the novel reagent GDC-0449 in an experimental 
prostate cancer model.
METHODS: Hedgehog signaling component expression was assessed in tissue
microarrays of high grade locally advanced and bone metastatic disease. Male SCID
mice subcutaneously injected with the bone forming xenograft MDA PCa 118b were
treated with GDC-0449. Hedgehog signaling in the tumor microenvironment was
assessed by proteomic and species specific RNA expression and compared between
GDC-0449 treated and untreated animals.
RESULTS: We observe Hedgehog signaling in high grade locally advanced and bone
marrow infiltrating disease. Evidence of paracrine activation of Hedgehog
signaling in the tumor xenograft, was provided by increased Sonic Hedgehog
expression in human tumor epithelial cells, coupled with increased Gli1 and
Patched1 expression in the murine stromal compartment, while normal murine stroma
did not exhibit Hh signaling expression. GDC-0449 treatment attenuated Hh
signaling as evidenced by reduced expression of Gli1 and Ptch1. Reduction in
proliferation (Ki67) was observed with no change in tumor volume.
CONCLUSIONS: GDC-0449 treatment is pharmacodynamically effective as evidenced by 
paracrine Hedgehog signaling inhibition and results in tumor cell proliferation
reduction. Understanding these observations will inform the clinical development 
of therapy based on Hedgehog signaling inhibition.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22457212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Dig Surg. 2012;29(2):115-23. doi: 10.1159/000336949. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Activation of the sonic hedgehog pathway and its prognostic impact in patients
with gastric cancer.

Saze Z(1), Terashima M, Kogure M, Ohsuka F, Suzuki H, Gotoh M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is critical in fetal
organogenesis. Activation of the SHH pathway has been associated with several
types of human cancer; however, the clinical impact of SHH activation in patients
with gastric cancer is still unknown.
METHODS: The present study included 41 patients with gastric cancer who underwent
gastrectomy between 2000 and 2004. SHH, Patched-1 (PTCH1), Smoothened (SMO) and
Glioma-associated oncogene-1 (GLI1) were examined immunohistochemically, and
these of mRNAs from the cancer lesions were evaluated using real-time
quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Immunohistological expressions of SHH-related molecules were relatively 
intense in cancer tissue, but no significant correlation was found with any
clinicopathological factors of tumor. PTCH1 was only the molecule associated with
poor prognosis of patients with differentiated type of tumor. For mRNA analysis, 
a significant correlation was demonstrated between certain clinicopathological
factors and PTCH1, SMO or/and GLI1 mRNA levels. High levels of SHH and PTCH1 mRNA
were associated with poor prognosis. Multivariate analysis demonstrated the PTCH1
mRNA level and liver metastasis as significant independent prognostic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: PTCH1 expression in the SHH pathway was possibly involved in gastric
cancer tumor progression, and could be a useful indicator for the prognosis of
gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22456124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 May;11(5):1092-102. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0705.
Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Off-target function of the Sonic hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine in mediating
apoptosis via nitric oxide-dependent neutral sphingomyelinase 2/ceramide
induction.

Meyers-Needham M(1), Lewis JA, Gencer S, Sentelle RD, Saddoughi SA, Clarke CJ,
Hannun YA, Norell H, da Palma TM, Nishimura M, Kraveka JM, Khavandgar Z, Murshed 
M, Cevik MO, Ogretmen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (SHh) signaling is important in the pathogenesis of various human 
cancers, such as medulloblastomas, and it has been identified as a valid target
for anticancer therapeutics. The SHh inhibitor cyclopamine induces apoptosis. The
bioactive sphingolipid ceramide mediates cell death in response to various
chemotherapeutic agents; however, ceramide's roles/mechanisms in
cyclopamine-induced apoptosis are unknown. Here, we report that cyclopamine
mediates ceramide generation selectively via induction of neutral sphingomyelin
phosphodiesterase 3, SMPD3 (nSMase2) in Daoy human medulloblastoma cells.
Importantly, short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of nSMase2 prevented
cyclopamine-induced ceramide generation and protected Daoy cells from
drug-induced apoptosis. Accordingly, ectopic wild-type N-SMase2 caused cell
death, compared with controls, which express the catalytically inactive N-SMase2 
mutant. Interestingly, knockdown of smoothened (Smo), a target protein for
cyclopamine, or Gli1, a downstream signaling transcription factor of Smo, did not
affect nSMase2. Mechanistically, our data showed that cyclopamine induced nSMase2
and cell death selectively via increased nitric oxide (NO) generation by
neuronal-nitric oxide synthase (n-NOS) induction, in Daoy medulloblastoma, and
multiple other human cancer cell lines. Knockdown of n-NOS prevented nSMase2
induction and cell death in response to cyclopamine. Accordingly, N-SMase2
activity-deficient skin fibroblasts isolated from homozygous fro/fro (fragilitas 
ossium) mice exhibited resistance to NO-induced cell death. Thus, our data
suggest a novel off-target function of cyclopamine in inducing apoptosis, at
least in part, by n-NOS/NO-dependent induction of N-SMase2/ceramide axis,
independent of Smo/Gli inhibition.

©2012 AACR

PMCID: PMC3709261
PMID: 22452947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Cell. 2012 Mar 20;21(3):374-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.12.028.

The crosstalk of mTOR/S6K1 and Hedgehog pathways.

Wang Y(1), Ding Q, Yen CJ, Xia W, Izzo JG, Lang JY, Li CW, Hsu JL, Miller SA,
Wang X, Lee DF, Hsu JM, Huo L, Labaff AM, Liu D, Huang TH, Lai CC, Tsai FJ, Chang
WC, Chen CH, Wu TT, Buttar NS, Wang KK, Wu Y, Wang H, Ajani J, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is the most prevalent esophageal cancer type in
the United States. The TNF-a/mTOR pathway is known to mediate the development of 
EAC. Additionally, aberrant activation of Gli1, downstream effector of the
Hedgehog (HH) pathway, has been observed in EAC. In this study, we found that an 
activated mTOR/S6K1 pathway promotes Gli1 transcriptional activity and oncogenic 
function through S6K1-mediated Gli1 phosphorylation at Ser84, which releases Gli1
from its endogenous inhibitor, SuFu. Moreover, elimination of S6K1 activation by 
an mTOR pathway inhibitor enhances the killing effects of the HH pathway
inhibitor. Together, our results established a crosstalk between the mTOR/S6K1
and HH pathways, which provides a mechanism for SMO-independent Gli1 activation
and also a rationale for combination therapy for EAC.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3350095
PMID: 22439934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Surg Today. 2012 Aug;42(8):770-5. doi: 10.1007/s00595-012-0157-1. Epub 2012 Mar
10.

Immunohistochemical evidence of the prognostic value of hedgehog pathway
components in primary gallbladder carcinoma.

Li J(1), Wu T, Lu J, Cao Y, Song N, Yang T, Dong R, Yang Y, Zang L, Du X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, 710038, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: The activation of hedgehog (Hh) pathways has been studied extensively in
many malignant tumors to elucidate their clinical diagnostic and prognostic
utilities. However, their roles in primary gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) remain
poorly understood. This study was conducted to clarify the immunoreactivity and
prognostic value of Hh pathway components in GBC.
METHODS: Levels of sonic hedgehog (Shh), its receptor, Patched (Ptch1), and its
downstream transcription factor, Gli1 protein, were measured by
immunohistochemistry in 93 specimens from patients with GBC. We analyzed the
correlations between the expression of these factors and clinicopathological
features, including prognosis.
RESULTS: Among the 93 GBC specimens, 76 (81.7%), 70 (75.3%) and 66 (70.0%) were
positive for Shh, Ptch1 and Gli1 expression, respectively. Expressions were
significantly correlated with stage, lymph node metastasis, venous invasion,
hepatic infiltration and lymphatic invasion (all P < 0.05). Patients with
positive staining for Shh, Ptch1 and Gli1 had significantly lower survival rates 
than patients with negative staining. The expression patterns of Shh, Ptch1 and
Gli1 were all associated with a malignant behavior risk category in GBC.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report to define the role of the
Hh pathway in GBC. Shh, Ptch1 and Gli1 are frequently expressed in GBC and
associated with poorer survival. Thus, high expressions of Shh, Ptch1 and Gli1
proteins could serve as auxiliary parameters for predicting the malignant
behavior of GBC.

PMID: 22407314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cancer Biol Ther. 2012 May;13(7):487-95. doi: 10.4161/cbt.19591. Epub 2012 May 1.

Hedgehog signaling in glioblastoma multiforme.

Braun S(1), Oppermann H, Mueller A, Renner C, Hovhannisyan A, Baran-Schmidt R,
Gebhardt R, Hipkiss A, Thiery J, Meixensberger J, Gaunitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Neurochirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig AöR,
Leipzig, Germany.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant brain tumor in adults with a 
median survival of 14.6 mo under the best available treatment. New treatment
strategies are therefore urgently required, for which a profound understanding of
tumor biology is necessary. Much effort has been devoted to tumor-specific
aberrant signaling processes. Recently it was discovered that the transcription
factor Gli1, which is activated by hedgehog signaling, is a highly predictive
marker in GBM, as determined by immunohistochemistry. To determine whether GBM
cells have transcriptionally active Gli1, we performed experiments with reporter 
genes with cells isolated from surgically removed human tumors and cell lines. We
also determined whether the hedgehog signaling inhibitor cyclopamine influences
reporter gene expression and cell viability, and we determined the expression of 
Gli1, SHH and Patched1 by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Reporter gene analysis
of nine cultures and four cell lines demonstrated a significantly enhanced
transcriptional activity in six tumor cell cultures and all cell lines. Analysis 
of cell viability in the presence of cyclopamine revealed a response of all cell 
cultures with the exception of one primary culture and one cell line, but only
one cell line responded to cyclopamine with reduced hedgehog signaling activity. 
This indicates that the toxicity of cyclopamine toward GBM cells is independent
from hedgehog signaling. Since no correlation between hedgehog activity and SHH, 
Gli1 and Patched1 mRNA levels was observed we conclude that other mechanisms
aside from transcriptional regulation of these factors are responsible for
hedgehog activity in tumor cells derived from GBM.

PMID: 22406999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biol Reprod. 2012 Jun 7;86(6):174. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.099176. Print 2012
Jun.

Overactivation of hedgehog signaling alters development of the ovarian
vasculature in mice.

Ren Y(1), Cowan RG, Migone FF, Quirk SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Jun;86(6):173.

The hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is critical for ovarian function in
Drosophila, but its role in the mammalian ovary has not been defined. Previously,
expression of a dominant active allele of the HH signal transducer protein
smoothened (SMO) in Amhr2(cre/+)SmoM2 mice caused anovulation in association with
a lack of smooth muscle in the theca of developing follicles. The current study
examined events during the first 2 wk of life in Amhr2(cre/+)SmoM2 mice to gain
insight into the cause of anovulation. Expression of transcriptional targets of
HH signaling, Gli1, Ptch1, and Hhip, which are used as measures of pathway
activity, were elevated during the first several days of life in
Amhr2(cre/+)SmoM2 mice compared to controls but were similar to controls in older
mice. Microarray analysis showed that genes with increased expression in
2-day-old mutants compared to controls were enriched for the processes of
vascular and tube development and steroidogenesis. The density of platelet
endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM)-labeled endothelial tubes was
increased in the cortex of newborn ovaries of mutant mice. Costaining of
preovulatory follicles for PECAM and smooth muscle actin showed that muscle-type 
vascular support cells are deficient in theca of mutant mice. Expression of genes
for steroidogenic enzymes that are normally expressed in the fetal adrenal gland 
were elevated in newborn ovaries of mutant mice. In summary, overactivation of HH
signaling during early life alters gene expression and vascular development and
this is associated with the lifelong development of anovulatory follicles in
which the thecal vasculature fails to mature appropriately.

PMCID: PMC3386146
PMID: 22402963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Leuk Res. 2012 Jun;36(6):742-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.02.012. Epub 2012 Mar
6.

Gli inhibitor GANT61 causes apoptosis in myeloid leukemia cells and acts in
synergy with rapamycin.

Pan D(1), Li Y, Li Z, Wang Y, Wang P, Liang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

Aberrant reactivation of Gli signaling has been described in a wide variety of
human cancers and rapamycin can down-regulate Gli pathway in some solid tumors.
In this study, we attempt to define the cytotoxic effect of Gli inhibitor on AML 
cells. And the regulation action of rapamycin on Gli in AML cells also has been
assessed. Gli inhibitor GANT61 caused growth arrest and apoptosis in AML cells.
Rapamycin decreased not only the Gli protein and mRNA expressions but also
expression of the Gli-luciferase reporter in AML cells. Synergism effect between 
GANT61 and rapamycin was found in Kasumi-1, HL-60 and U937 cell lines. The
results suggest that aberrant Gli activation is a feature of some myeloid
leukemic cells and Gli activiation can be down-regulated by rapamycin.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22398221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:293-307. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00013-4.

Phosphorylation of Gli by cAMP-dependent protein kinase.

Asaoka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a central role in many developmental processes. Hh 
protein is a developmental morphogen that elicits a graded cellular response
depending on the distance between the recipient cell and the ligand-secreting
cell. Gli transcription factors are effectors that induce the expression of
downstream target genes. The outline of this cascade from Hh to Gli has been
elucidated, and many components have been identified. However, the interpretation
of graded ligand stimulation remains to be resolved. Among the components,
adenosine 3'5'-cyclic monophosphate-dependent protein kinase (PKA) functions as a
negative regulator that phosphorylates a specific region of Gli, thereby inducing
proteolytic cleavage to generate the repressor form. In addition, recent studies 
have identified different mechanisms that are followed by PKA phosphorylation of 
Gli. In this review, we examine Hh signaling and PKA phosphorylation and propose 
a possible interaction between the multiple mechanisms regulated by PKA and the
gradient-dependent response.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:273-91. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00012-2.

Protein kinase A activity and Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Kotani T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University,
Sapporo, Japan.

Protein kinase A (PKA) is a well-known kinase that plays fundamental roles in a
variety of biological processes. In Hedgehog-responsive cells, PKA plays key
roles in proliferation and fate specification by modulating the transduction of
Hedgehog signaling. In the absence of Hedgehog, a basal level of PKA activity
represses the transcription of Hedgehog target genes. The main substrates of PKA 
in this process are the Ci/Gli family of bipotential transcription factors, which
activate and repress Hedgehog target gene expression. PKA phosphorylates Ci/Gli, 
promoting the production of the repressor forms of Ci/Gli and thus repressing
Hedgehog target gene expression. In contrast, the activation of Hedgehog
signaling in response to Hedgehog increases the active forms of Ci/Gli, resulting
in Hedgehog target gene expression. Because both decreased and increased levels
of PKA activity cause abnormal cell proliferation and alter cell fate
specification, the basal level of PKA activity in Hedgehog-responsive cells
should be precisely regulated. However, the mechanism by which PKA activity is
regulated remains obscure and appears to vary between cell types, tissues, and
organisms. To date, two mechanisms have been proposed. One is a classical
mechanism in which PKA activity is regulated by a small second messenger, cAMP;
the other is a novel mechanism in which PKA activity is regulated by a protein,
Misty somites.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:253-72. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00011-0.

Phosphorylation regulation of Hedgehog signaling.

Jia J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Markey Cancer Center,
University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

The study of posttranslational regulation of proteins has occupied biochemists
for well over a half century. Understanding balanced phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of the proteins may be the key to meeting some of the most
pressing scientific challenges. A detailed examination of the phosphorylation of 
many components in the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway leads to a better understanding of
the Hh signaling mechanisms. This chapter describes the precise phosphorylation
that evolves during the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of players in the Hh
signaling cascade, including the signal transducer Smoothened and the
transcription factor Ci/Gli.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:211-27. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00009-2.

Hedgehog/Gli control by ubiquitination/acetylation interplay.

Gulino A(1), Di Marcotullio L, Canettieri G, De Smaele E, Screpanti I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog is a key morphogen regulating development and leading to tumorigenesis, 
when hyperactivated. Hedgehog signaling is mediated by transcriptional effectors 
belonging to the Gli family. Ubiquitination-related posttranslational
modifications of the Gli transcription factors, leading to proteasome-dependent
proteolytic cleavage or massive degradation, represent an important mechanism of 
regulation of the pathway. Gli ubiquitination is controlled by a number of E3
ligases belonging to the RING/Cullin and HECT families. These E3 ligases are
regulated by several members of the Hh pathway itself (e.g., Smo-activated
kinases) as well as by proteins belonging to other signaling cascades (i.e.,
Numb-activated Itch). These proteolytic signals finally suppress Gli function
either directly or indirectly (i.e., suppression of HDAC1-mediated Gli
deacetylation). The complex of these regulatory circuitries finely tunes Hedgehog
signaling providing a tight control of developmental processes, the subversion of
which leads to tumorigenesis. To this regard, these ubiquitination processes
represent promising targets for novel therapeutic strategies.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:141-71. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00007-9.

Gli-similar proteins: their mechanisms of action, physiological functions, and
roles in disease.

Lichti-Kaiser K(1), ZeRuth G, Kang HS, Vasanth S, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

Gli-similar (Glis) 1-3 proteins constitute a subfamily of Krüppel-like
zinc-finger proteins that are closely related to members of the Gli family. Glis 
proteins have been implicated in several pathologies, including cystic kidney
disease, diabetes, hypothyroidism, fibrosis, osteoporosis, psoriasis, and cancer.
In humans, a mutation in the Glis2 gene has been linked to the development of
nephronophthisis (NPHP), a recessive cystic kidney disease, while mutations in
Glis3 lead to an extended multisystem phenotype that includes the development of 
neonatal diabetes, polycystic kidneys, congenital hypothyroidism, and facial
dysmorphism. Glis3 has also been identified as a risk locus for type-1 and type-2
diabetes and additional studies have revealed a role for Glis3 in pancreatic
endocrine development, ß-cell maintenance, and insulin regulation. Similar to
Gli1-3, Glis2 and 3 have been reported to localize to the primary cilium. These
studies appear to suggest that Glis proteins are part of a primary
cilium-associated signaling pathway(s). It has been hypothesized that Glis
proteins are activated through posttranslational modifications and subsequently
translocate to the nucleus where they regulate transcription by interacting with 
Glis-binding sites in the promoter regions of target genes. This chapter
summarizes the current state of knowledge regarding mechanisms of action of the
Glis family of proteins, their physiological functions, as well as their roles in
disease.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3799816
PMID: 22391303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:115-40. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00006-7.

Identification, functional characterization, and pathobiological significance of 
GLI1 isoforms in human cancers.

Carpenter RL(1), Lo HW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Sciences, Department of Surgery, Duke University School
of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) is the nuclear mediator of Hedgehog
signaling that activates gene transcription via its zinc finger DNA-binding and
transactivation domains. GLI1 plays a critical role in several cellular
processes, including embryonic development, tumorigenesis, and tumor growth and
progression. The human GLI1 gene was identified in 1987 as an amplified gene in
glioblastoma. Somatic mutations have never been reported in the GLI1 gene in any 
cell or tumor type. Very recently in 2008-2009, the full-length GLI1 transcript
was discovered to undergo alternative splicing to form two shorter isoforms,
namely N-terminal deletion variant (GLI1<U+0394>N) and truncated GLI1 (tGLI1). Emerging 
evidence suggests that the three structurally different GLI1 isoforms are
distinctly different in their expression patterns and functions in the context of
human cancers. The tGLI1 isoform, in particular, has been shown to gain the
ability to modulate expression of the genes that are not regulated by GLI1 and to
support the biology of more aggressive cancer. Consequently, a key focus of this 
chapter is to summarize and compare the properties of the three GLI1 isoforms and
their relations to malignant biology of human cancers.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3632646
PMID: 22391302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:73-89. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00004-3.

Gli protein nuclear localization signal.

Hatayama M(1), Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

Drosophila cubitus interruptus (Ci) and its vertebrate homologues, the
glioblastoma (Gli) protein family, are the transcription factors belonging to the
metazoan Gli/Glis/Zic ZF protein superfamily that shares similar five tandemly
repeated C2H2-type zinc finger (ZF) motifs. Nuclear transport of Gli/Ci proteins 
is regulated by hedgehog (Hh) signaling and is an essential part of the Hh signal
transduction pathway. Gli/Ci proteins possess a nuclear localization signal (NLS)
and a nuclear export signal (NES), both of which are key signatures for
controlling nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. The NLS of the Gli/Ci proteins has been 
mapped to the fifth ZF domain and its C-terminal side. It contains two clusters
of basic residues (classical bipartite-type), which are conserved in metazoan
Gli/Ci homologues, but which partially deviate from the intra-ZF domain NLSs in
the Glis and Zic proteins. Recently, Importin a3 was identified as a nuclear
transport protein for Ci. When we modeled the 3D structure of the Gli
NLS-Importin a complex, the two basic clusters were predicted to fit in the two
binding interfaces of Importin a. The mechanisms controlling the function of NLSs
and NESs involve the elimination of the NES by Hh signaling-dependent protein
cleavage in the Ci and the Gli3 proteins, and the phosphorylation of a threonine 
residue close to the NLS in Gli1. Both processes depend on the activity of
protein kinase A, which has a critical role in Hh signaling in fly wing discs. In
addition, the Roadkill protein, a substrate recognition component of E3 ubiquitin
ligase, competes with the Ci protein to interact with Importin a3 resulting in
inhibition of Ci protein nuclear import.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:55-72. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00003-1.

Noncanonical Hedgehog signaling.

Brennan D(1), Chen X, Cheng L, Mahoney M, Riobo NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The notion of noncanonical hedgehog (Hh) signaling in mammals has started to
receive support from numerous observations. By noncanonical, we refer to all
those cellular and tissue responses to any of the Hh isoforms that are
independent of transcriptional changes mediated by the Gli family of
transcription factors. In this chapter, we discuss the most recent findings that 
suggest that Patched1 can regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis independently
of Smoothened (Smo) and Gli and the reports that Smo modulates actin
cytoskeleton-dependent processes such as fibroblast migration, endothelial cell
tubulogenesis, axonal extension, and neurite formation by diverse mechanisms that
exclude any involvement of Gli-dependent transcription. We also acknowledge the
existence of less stronger evidence of noncanonical signaling in Drosophila.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3513281
PMID: 22391299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Jul 1;84(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.02.009. Epub
2012 Feb 22.

Searching for molecular targets in sarcoma.

Teicher BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Branch, Developmental Therapeutics Program, National
Cancer Institute, 6130 Executive Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
Beverly.Teicher@nih.gov

Sarcoma are about 1% of cancers. Within that 1% are widely varied tumors now
divided into types and subtypes. Sarcoma occur in patients of all ages with
frequency spread evenly over the human age range. Although the specific cell of
origin of many sarcoma remains unclear, sarcoma are all tumors of mesenchymal
origin. The mesenchymal stem cell, a pluripotent cell, which gives rise to varied
differentiated cells including osteocytes, adipocytes, chondrocytes, muscle
cells, fibroblasts, neural cells and stromal cells, is the most likely ultimate
cell of origin for sarcoma. When mesenchymal stem cell genetics go awry and
malignant transformation occurs sarcoma including osteosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, 
chondrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma fibrosarcoma, liposarcoma and 
many others can initiate. Our knowledge of sarcoma genetics is increasing
rapidly. Two general groups, sarcoma arising from chromosomal translocations and 
sarcoma with very complex genetics, can be identified. Genes that are frequently 
mutated in sarcoma include TP53, NF1, PIK3CA, HDAC1, IDH1 and 2, KDR, KIT and
MED12. Genes that are frequently amplified in sarcoma include CDK4, YEATS4,
HMGA2, MDM2, JUN, DNM3, FLT4, MYCN, MAP3K5, GLI1 and the microRNAs miR-214 and
miR-199a2. Genes that are upregulated in sarcoma include MUC4, CD24, FOXL1,
ANGPTL2, HIF1a, MDK, cMET, TIMP-2, PRL, PCSK1, IGFR-1, TIE1, KDR, TEK, FLT1 and
several microRNAs. While some alterations occur in specific subtypes of sarcoma, 
others cross several sarcoma types. Discovering and developing new therapeutic
approaches for these relentless diseases is critical. The detailed knowledge of
sarcoma genetics may allow development of sarcoma subtype-targeted therapeutics.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22387046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Histol Histopathol. 2012 Apr;27(4):475-84.

Nuclear localization of GLI1 and elevated expression of FOXC2 in breast cancer is
associated with the basal-like phenotype.

Li Y(1), Yang W, Yang Q, Zhou S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Hospital and
Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

Aberrant sonic hedgehog (SHH)/glioma-associated oncogene (GLI) signaling has been
shown in the development of many tumors. The aims of the present study are to
determine the expression of two SHH signaling molecules, the glioma-associated
oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) and forkhead box C2 (FOXC2), in invasive breast cancers
(IBC), to evaluate their association with clinicopathological parameters, and to 
determine their prognostic significance in breast cancer patients. Expression of 
GLI1 and FOXC2 were assessed by immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue
microarray containing 262 unselected IBC cases. A statistical analysis was
performed to assess the correlation of GLI1 and FOXC2 expression with the
patients' clinicopathological parameters, postoperative survival rate, and
molecular subtypes. Immunoreactivity of GLI1 and FOXC2 was observed in 84% and
75% of all breast cancer tissues, respectively. There was a significant
correlation between nuclear FOXC2 and GLI1 expressions in these breast cancers,
which was associated with estrogen receptor (ER) negativity. Furthermore, there
was a significant association between nuclear expression of GLI1 and FOXC2 and a 
basal-like breast cancer phenotype. Patients with nuclear GLI1 or
FOXC2-expressing tumors had a significantly shorter survival time than those
without nuclear FOXC2 or GLI1 expression. Multivariate analysis showed that
nuclear GLI1 or FOXC2 expression was an independent factor for predicting the
prognosis of basal-like breast cancer. In conclusion, there was a significant
correlation between expression of nuclear GLI1 or FOXC2 and human breast cancer. 
More specifically, elevated levels of these proteins were associated with the
basal-like breast cancer phenotype and with a poor rate of disease-free survival.
These data suggest that GLI1 and FOXC2 are involved in tumorigenesis and that
they may be useful as diagnostic and therapeutic targets for human basal-like
breast cancers. Additional studies are warranted to better understand the
biological significance of GLI1 and FOXC2, to further refine statistics related
to patient prognosis, and to optimize treatment of patients with basal-like
breast cancer.

PMID: 22374725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Discov Med. 2012 Feb;13(69):105-13.

Hedgehog pathway and GLI1 isoforms in human cancer.

Carpenter RL(1), Lo HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Division of Surgical Sciences, Department of Surgery, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway regulates normal cell growth and differentiation. 
When deregulated, the Hedgehog pathway leads to tumorigenesis and supports more
aggressive phenotypes of human cancers, such as progression, metastasis, and
therapeutic resistance. The glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) family of
zinc finger transcription factors is the nuclear mediator of the Hedgehog pathway
that regulates genes essential for various stages of tumor development and
progression. Consequently, several components of the Hedgehog pathway are major
targets of cancer therapy, including GLI1 and smoothened. Although the GLI1 gene 
was initially identified as an amplified gene in glioblastoma, its amplification 
was found to be relatively rare. No somatic mutations have been reported in the
GLI1 gene. Notably, two decades after the discovery of the GLI1 gene, the GLI1
transcript was recently found to undergo alternative splicing forming two shorter
isoforms, an N-terminal deletion variant (GLI1<U+0394>N) and a truncated GLI1 (tGLI1).
These variants appear to have different patterns of tissue expression and
functions. Most notably, the tGLI1 isoform behaves as a gain-of-function GLI1
that can induce expression of genes not regulated by GLI1 and promotes more
aggressive cancer phenotypes. Therefore, this review will focus on the structural
and functional differences between these isoforms, and also on their
contributions to important cancer cell characteristics, including proliferation, 
motility, invasion, and angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3632644
PMID: 22369969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cell Signal. 2012 Jun;24(6):1222-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.02.004. Epub 2012
Feb 18.

Rab23 negatively regulates Gli1 transcriptional factor in a Su(Fu)-dependent
manner.

Chi S(1), Xie G, Liu H, Chen K, Zhang X, Li C, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics, Indiana
University, 980 W. Walnut St., Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, via the key signal transducer Smoothened (SMO) and Gli
transcription factors, is essential for embryonic development and carcinogenesis.
While the biological relevance of hedgehog signaling to cancer is well
established, very little is known about the molecular mechanisms by which
signaling transduction of this pathway occurs. Rab23 was discovered as a negative
regulator of the Hh pathway through a mouse genetic study. Here we report that
Rab23 directly associates with Su(Fu) and inhibits Gli1 function in a
Su(Fu)-dependent manner. By confocal microscope and immunoprecipitation, we
detected interaction between Rab23 and Su(Fu). Using Gli1-mediated reporter gene 
analysis, we found that Rab23 can suppress Gli1 transcriptional activity in wild 
type but not Su(Fu) null fibroblasts. Similarly, Rab23 expression reduced the
nuclear localization of Gli1 in wild type but not Su(Fu) null fibroblast cells.
Consistent with the GTPase motif in the protein, we showed that Rab23 has GTPase 
activity. The dominant negative form of Rab23 was unable to suppress
Gli1-mediated transcriptional activity. Taken together, these data provide
evidence to support that Rab23 negatively regulates Gli1 activity in a
Su(Fu)-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3319238
PMID: 22365972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Glia. 2012 May;60(6):851-66. doi: 10.1002/glia.22316. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

Megalin mediates the influence of sonic hedgehog on oligodendrocyte precursor
cell migration and proliferation during development.

Ortega MC(1), Cases O, Merchán P, Kozyraki R, Clemente D, de Castro F.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Neurobiología del Desarrollo-GNDe, Unidad de Neurología Experimental,
Hospital Nacional de Parapléjicos, Finca La Peraleda s/n, Toledo, Spain.

Oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) of the optic nerve are generated in the
preoptic area, from where they migrate to colonize it entirely. Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) induces the proliferation of these cells as well as influencing their
migration, acting through its canonical receptor (Ptc-1). However, the
multiligand receptor megalin (or LRP-2) is also involved in Shh-induced OPC
proliferation and migration, and thus, we have evaluated the relevance of this
interaction. During the stages at which Shh influences OPC development, we found 
megalin to be selectively expressed by optic nerve astrocytes, whereas Ptc-1 and 
Gli1 were found in OPCs. Indeed, this pattern of expression paralleled the
rostral-caudal expression of the three Shh-related molecules during the time
course of plp-dm20(+) -OPC colonization. The blockage of megalin partially
abolished OPC chemoattraction and fully impaired Shh-induced proliferation. Using
in vitro co-cultures of dissociated optic nerve cells, we demonstrated that Shh
was internalized by astrocytes via megalin, and sufficient Shh was subsequently
released to produce the biological effects on OPCs observed in the nerve.
Together, these data indicate that at least part of the influence of Shh on OPCs 
is mediated by megalin during optic nerve development, and that astrocytes
expressing megalin transiently capture Shh to present it to OPCs and/or to
control the gradient of this molecule during development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22354480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):814-20. doi: 10.1172/JCI60224. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

MCM4 mutation causes adrenal failure, short stature, and natural killer cell
deficiency in humans.

Hughes CR(1), Guasti L, Meimaridou E, Chuang CH, Schimenti JC, King PJ, Costigan 
C, Clark AJ, Metherell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey
Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
London,, UK.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):798-801.

An interesting variant of familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD), an autosomal 
recessive form of adrenal failure, exists in a genetically isolated Irish
population. In addition to hypocortisolemia, affected children show signs of
growth failure, increased chromosomal breakage, and NK cell deficiency. Targeted 
exome sequencing in 8 patients identified a variant (c.71-1insG) in
minichromosome maintenance-deficient 4 (MCM4) that was predicted to result in a
severely truncated protein (p.Pro24ArgfsX4). Western blotting of patient samples 
revealed that the major 96-kDa isoform present in unaffected human controls was
absent, while the presence of the minor 85-kDa isoform was preserved.
Interestingly, histological studies with Mcm4-depleted mice showed grossly
abnormal adrenal morphology that was characterized by non-steroidogenic GATA4-
and Gli1-positive cells within the steroidogenic cortex, which reduced the number
of steroidogenic cells in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex. Since MCM4 
is one part of a MCM2-7 complex recently confirmed as the replicative helicase
essential for normal DNA replication and genome stability in all eukaryotes, it
is possible that our patients may have an increased risk of neoplastic change. In
summary, we have identified what we believe to be the first human mutation in
MCM4 and have shown that it is associated with adrenal insufficiency, short
stature, and NK cell deficiency.

PMCID: PMC3287227
PMID: 22354170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Am J Pathol. 2012 Apr;180(4):1441-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.12.039. Epub
2012 Feb 17.

Hedgehog-Gli pathway activation during kidney fibrosis.

Fabian SL(1), Penchev RR, St-Jacques B, Rao AN, Sipilä P, West KA, McMahon AP,
Humphreys BD.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates tissue patterning during
development, including patterning and growth of limbs and face, but whether Hh
signaling plays a role in adult kidney remains undefined. In this study, using a 
panel of hedgehog-reporter mice, we show that the two Hh ligands (Indian hedgehog
and sonic hedgehog ligands) are expressed in tubular epithelial cells. We report 
that the Hh effectors (Gli1 and Gli2) are expressed exclusively in adjacent
platelet-derived growth factor receptor-ß-positive interstitial pericytes and
perivascular fibroblasts, suggesting a paracrine signaling loop. In two models of
renal fibrosis, Indian Hh ligand was upregulated with a dramatic activation of
downstream Gli effector expression. Hh-responsive Gli1-positive interstitial
cells underwent 11-fold proliferative expansion during fibrosis, and both Gli1-
and Gli2-positive cells differentiated into a-smooth muscle actin-positive
myofibroblasts. In the pericyte-like cell line 10T1/2, hedgehog ligand triggered 
cell proliferation, suggesting a possible role for this pathway in the regulation
of cell cycle progression of myofibroblast progenitors during the development of 
renal fibrosis. The hedgehog antagonist IPI-926 abolished Gli1 induction in vivo 
but did not decrease kidney fibrosis. However, the transcriptional induction of
Gli2 was unaffected by IPI-926, suggesting the existence of
smoothened-independent Gli activation in this model. This study is the first
detailed description of paracrine hedgehog signaling in adult kidney, which
indicates a possible role for hedgehog-Gli signaling in fibrotic chronic kidney
disease.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3349903
PMID: 22342522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Lab Invest. 2012 Apr;92(4):532-42. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.6. Epub 2012 Feb
13.

Estradiol triggers sonic-hedgehog-induced angiogenesis during peripheral nerve
regeneration by downregulating hedgehog-interacting protein.

Sekiguchi H(1), Ii M, Jujo K, Renault MA, Thorne T, Clarke T, Ito A, Tanaka T,
Klyachko E, Tabata Y, Hagiwara N, Losordo D.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute and Program in Cardiovascular
Regenerative Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine and Northwestern
Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA.

Both estradiol (E2) and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) contribute to angiogenesis and nerve
regeneration. Here, we investigated whether E2 improves the recovery of injured
nerves by downregulating the Shh inhibitor hedgehog-interacting protein (HIP) and
increasing Shh-induced angiogenesis. Mice were treated with local injections of
E2 or placebo one week before nerve-crush injury; 28 days after injury, nerve
conduction velocity, exercise duration, and vascularity were significantly
greater in E2-treated mice than in placebo-treated mice. E2 treatment was also
associated with higher mRNA levels of Shh, the Shh receptor Patched-1, and the
Shh transcriptional target Gli1, but with lower levels of HIP. The E2-induced
enhancement of nerve vascularity was abolished by the Shh inhibitor cyclopamine, 
and the effect of E2 treatment on Shh, Gli1, and HIP mRNA expression was
abolished by the E2 inhibitor ICI. Gli-luciferase activity in human
umbilical-vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) increased more after treatment with E2 
and Shh than after treatment with E2 alone, and E2 treatment reduced HIP
expression in HUVECs and Schwann cells without altering Shh expression.
Collectively, these findings suggest that E2 improves nerve recovery, at least in
part, by reducing HIP expression, which subsequently leads to an increase in Shh 
signaling and Shh-induced angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3319330
PMID: 22330336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Neurosurg. 2012 May;116(5):1114-20. doi: 10.3171/2012.1.JNS111285. Epub 2012
Feb 10.

Improvement of neurological recovery and stimulation of neural progenitor cell
proliferation by intrathecal administration of Sonic hedgehog.

Bambakidis NC(1), Petrullis M, Kui X, Rothstein B, Karampelas I, Kuang Y, Selman 
WR, LaManna JC, Miller RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, 
Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
bambakidis1@uhhospitals.org

OBJECT: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a glycoprotein molecule that has been shown to be
associated with the proliferative capacity of endogenous neural precursor cells
during embryonic development. It has also been shown to regulate the
proliferative capacity of neural stem cells in the adult subventricular zone
(SVZ), which are also upregulated in animal models of ischemic stroke. In the
present study, the effects of exogenous administration of intrathecal Shh protein
were examined in the setting of a rodent model of ischemic stroke, with
particular attention given to endogenous neural stem cell proliferation and
migration as well as inducible differences in behavioral recovery.
METHODS: A rodent model of ischemic stroke was created using the intraluminal
suture method of reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion. Animals were
treated with intrathecal administration of Shh protein at 24 hours after the
onset of the stroke. Behavioral testing was performed, and the animals were
killed for measurements of infarct volume 7 days after stroke.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed and measurements of cellular
proliferation were obtained, with a focus on the proportion and distribution of
neural progenitor cells in the SVZ. These values were compared across
experimental groups.
RESULTS: Treatment with intrathecal Shh protein resulted in significant
improvement in behavioral function compared with the control group, with a
significant reduction of ischemic tissue in the cerebral hemisphere. An increase 
of nestin immunoreactive cells was observed along the SVZ.
CONCLUSIONS: Intrathecal Shh agonist at doses that upregulate spinal cord GLI1
transcription increases the population of neural precursor cells after spinal
cord injury in adult rats. Intrathecal administration of Shh protein appears to
have a neuroprotective effect in animal models of ischemic stroke and is
associated with improved behavioral recovery, which may be related to its effects
on neurogenesis in the SVZ and could be associated with improved functional
recovery.

PMID: 22324418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 May;51(5):480-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21935. Epub 2012
Feb 3.

Somatic mutations in the Notch, NF-KB, PIK3CA, and Hedgehog pathways in human
breast cancers.

Jiao X(1), Wood LD, Lindman M, Jones S, Buckhaults P, Polyak K, Sukumar S, Carter
H, Kim D, Karchin R, Sjöblom T.

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Exome sequencing of human breast cancers has revealed a substantial number of
candidate cancer genes with recurring but infrequent somatic mutations. To
determine more accurately their mutation prevalence, we performed a mutation
analysis of 36 novel candidate cancer genes in 96 human breast cancers. Somatic
mutations with potential impact on protein function were observed in the genes
ADAM12, CENTB1, CENTG1, DIP2C, GLI1, GRIN2D, HDLBP, IKBKB, KPNA5, NFKB1, NOTCH1, 
and OTOF. These findings strengthen the evidence for involvement of the Notch,
Hedgehog, NF-KB, and PIK3CA pathways in breast cancer development, and point to
novel processes that likely are involved.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3302210
PMID: 22302350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 May;23(5):801-13. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2011060614. Epub 2012
Feb 2.

Sonic hedgehog signaling mediates epithelial-mesenchymal communication and
promotes renal fibrosis.

Ding H(1), Zhou D, Hao S, Zhou L, He W, Nie J, Hou FF, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA
15261, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is a developmental signal cascade that plays an
essential role in regulating embryogenesis and tissue homeostasis. Here, we
investigated the potential role of Shh signaling in renal interstitial
fibrogenesis. Ureteral obstruction induced Shh, predominantly in the renal
tubular epithelium of the fibrotic kidneys. Using Gli1(lacZ) knock-in mice, we
identified renal interstitial fibroblasts as Shh-responding cells. In cultured
renal fibroblasts, recombinant Shh protein activated Gli1 and induced a-smooth
muscle actin (a-SMA), desmin, fibronectin, and collagen I expression, suggesting 
that Shh signaling promotes myofibroblast activation and matrix production.
Blockade of Shh signaling with cyclopamine abolished the Shh-mediated induction
of Gli1, Snail1, a-SMA, fibronectin, and collagen I. In vivo, the kidneys of
Gli1-deficient mice were protected against the development of interstitial
fibrosis after obstructive injury. In wild-type mice, cyclopamine did not affect 
renal Shh expression but did inhibit induction of Gli1, Snail1, and a-SMA. In
addition, cyclopamine reduced matrix expression and mitigated fibrotic lesions.
These results suggest that tubule-derived Shh mediates epithelial-mesenchymal
communication by targeting interstitial fibroblasts after kidney injury. We
conclude that Shh/Gli1 signaling plays a critical role in promoting fibroblast
activation, production of extracellular matrix, and development of renal
interstitial fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3338290
PMID: 22302193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Apr;123(4):573-86. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-0946-z.

An essential role for p38 MAPK in cerebellar granule neuron precursor
proliferation.

Guldal CG(1), Ahmad A, Korshunov A, Squatrito M, Awan A, Mainwaring LA, Bhatia B,
Parathath SR, Nahle Z, Pfister S, Kenney AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurological Surgery and Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, 37212, USA; Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.

Development of the cerebellum occurs postnatally and is marked by a rapid
proliferation of cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNPs). CGNPs are the
cells of origin for SHH-driven medulloblastoma, the most common malignant brain
tumor in children. Here, we investigated the role of ERK, JNK, and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinases in CGNP proliferation. We found high levels of 
p38a in proliferating CGNPs. Concomitantly, members of the p38 pathway, such as
ASK1, MKK3 and ATF-2, were also elevated. Inhibition of the Shh pathway or CGNP
proliferation blunts p38a levels, irrespective of Shh treatment. Strikingly, p38a
levels were high in vivo in the external granule layer of the postnatal
cerebellum, Shh-dependent mouse medulloblastomas and human medulloblastomas of
the SHH subtype. Finally, knocking down p38a by short hairpin RNA-carrying
lentiviruses as well as the pharmacologically inhibiting of its kinase activity
caused a marked decrease in CGNP proliferation, underscoring its requirement for 
Shh-dependent proliferation in CGNPs. The inhibition of p38a also caused a
decrease in Gli1 and N-myc transcript levels, consistent with reduced
proliferation. These findings suggest p38 inhibition as a potential way to
increase the efficacy of treatments available for malignancies associated with
deregulated SHH signaling, such as basal cell carcinoma and medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3775951
PMID: 22302101  [PubMed - in process]


212. Pancreatology. 2011;11(6):601-9. doi: 10.1159/000333542. Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Resveratrol inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis through the hedgehog
signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer cell.

Mo W(1), Xu X, Xu L, Wang F, Ke A, Wang X, Guo C.

Author information: 
(1)Tenth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Digestive Diseases Center of Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effect and possible mechanisms of resveratrol on
pancreatic cancer cells in vitro.
METHODS: After being treated with resveratrol, cell viability, cell cycle phase
distribution and apoptosis rate of pancreatic cancer cells were measured by CCK-8
assay and flow cytometer, respectively. The effects of resveratrol on the
Hedgehog pathway were studied by real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting. By
interfering Gli1 expression in PANC-1 cells and overexpressing Gli1 in BxPC-3
cells, we detected the expressions of Gli1-targeted genes, such as Ptc1, CCND1
and BCL-2, compared with resveratrol experimental group. We further used the
luciferase reporter assay to explore the correlation between resveratrol and
Gli1.
RESULTS: Resveratrol inhibited the growth of pancreatic cancer cells in a dose-
and time-dependent manner. Compared with control group, the cells in the G0/G1
phase and the apoptosis rate were significantly increased. Low concentration of
resveratrol decreased the expression of the Hedgehog pathway members including
Gli1, Ptc1 and Smo. The expression of downstream target genes of the Hedgehog
pathway such as Gli1, Ptc1, CCND1 and BCL-2 were significantly decreased after
12.5 µM resveratrol treatment, which demonstrated a similar change of gene
expression when Gli1 was knocked down by the RNAi technique in PANC-1 cells.
Resveratrol also downregulated the expression of Gli1, Ptc1, CCND1 and BCL-2 in
Gli1-overexpressed BxPC-3 cells. Results of the luciferase assay showed that
resveratrol did not act on the Gli1 promoter directly.
CONCLUSION: Resveratrol can inhibit pancreatic cancer cell survival and its
mechanisms might be partly via the Hedgehog signaling pathway. and IAP.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22301921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2012 Jan;18(1):16-22.

[GLI-1 is involved in EGF-regulated enhancement of the invasiveness of prostate
cancer ARCaP(E) cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu GD(1), Zhou JC, Zeng J, Ma ZK, Su BX, Wang XY, He DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Ministry of Education, The First Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China. zhugdxjtu@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway
transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene hoinolog 1 (GLI-1) in
EGF-regulated enhancement of the invasiveness of the prostate cancer ARCaP(E)
cell line in vitro.
METHODS: The expressions of EGFR and GLI-1 in prostate cancer ARCaP(E) cells were
analyzed by immunofluorescence staining. ARCaP(E) cells were treated with EGF at 
100 ng/ml, followed by detection of the changes in cell morphology and
invasiveness, as well as in the expressions of p-ERK, ERK and GLI-1. Migration
transwell assay was used to determine the effects of 100 ng/ml EGF and GLI-1
antagonist GANT61 on the invasiveness of the ARCaP(E) cells.
RESULTS: Both EGFR and GLI-1 were expressed in the ARCaP(E) cells. EGF induced
morphological transition of epithelial-like ARCaP(E) cells to mesenchymal-like
cells, increased their in vitro invasiveness, and significantly upregulated the
expressions of p-ERK and GLI-1 in the ARCaP(E) cells (P<0.05). GANT61
significantly inhibited the in vitro invasiveness of the ARCaP(E) cells and
reduced the enhancing effect of EGF on their invasiveness (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The results from ARCaP(E) cells shed light on the cross-talk of the
HH pathway with the EGF/ERK signaling pathway. GLI-1 might be responsible for
EGF-regulated enhancement of the invasiveness of ARCaP(E) cells in vitro.

PMID: 22295843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. ANZ J Surg. 2011 Jun;81(6):440-5.

The Hedgehog signalling pathway and its prognostic impact in human gliomas.

Li Q(1), Zhang Y, Zhan H, Yuan Z, Lu P, Zhan L, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Affiliated Peoples Hospital of Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant activation of Hedgehog signalling pathway is involved in the 
progression of various human tumours, such as gastric cancer, paediatric brain
tumour and hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the correlation of this signalling 
with tumourigenesis and patients survival of gliomas has not been well
documented. The present study was undertaken to examine the expression of
Hedgehog signalling pathway in gliomas to elucidate its prognostic value in this 
tumour.
METHODS: Surgical specimens were obtained from 118 patients with primary gliomas.
The expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh), its receptor patched (Ptch), and
downstream transcription factor Gli1 was evaluated using immunohistochemical
staining. Kaplan Meier survival and Cox regression analyses were performed to
evaluate the prognosis of patients.
RESULTS: Immunostaining revealed that the activation of Hedgehog signalling
pathway was significantly associated with the Karnofsky performance scale (KPS)
score and World Health Organization (WHO) grade of patients with gliomas.
Especially, the positive expression rates of Shh, Ptch and Gli1 were
significantly higher in patients with higher grade (P = 0.008, 0.008 and 0.01)
and lower KPS score (P = 0.009, 0.009 and 0.02). Statistical analysis showed that
patients expressing Shh, Ptch and Gli1 have poorer overall survival rates than
those not expressing these proteins. Cox multi-factor analysis showed that KPS (P
= 0.02), WHO grade (P = 0.008), Shh (P = 0.01), Ptch (P = 0.01) and Gli1 (P =
0.03) were independent prognosis factors for human gliomas.
CONCLUSION: These results provide convincing evidence that the Shh-Ptch1-Gli1
signalling pathway is activated in human gliomas and correlates with
clinicopathologic features as well as with prognostic parameters of the tumours. 
Hedgehog signalling pathway may therefore play an important role in the malignant
potential and survival of gliomas.

PMID: 22295347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. EMBO Mol Med. 2012 Mar;4(3):218-33. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201100201. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Hedgehog-EGFR cooperation response genes determine the oncogenic phenotype of
basal cell carcinoma and tumour-initiating pancreatic cancer cells.

Eberl M(1), Klingler S, Mangelberger D, Loipetzberger A, Damhofer H, Zoidl K,
Schnidar H, Hache H, Bauer HC, Solca F, Hauser-Kronberger C, Ermilov AN,
Verhaegen ME, Bichakjian CK, Dlugosz AA, Nietfeld W, Sibilia M, Lehrach H,
Wierling C, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

Inhibition of Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signalling in cancer is a promising therapeutic
approach. Interactions between HH/GLI and other oncogenic pathways affect the
strength and tumourigenicity of HH/GLI. Cooperation of HH/GLI with epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signalling promotes transformation and cancer cell 
proliferation in vitro. However, the in vivo relevance of HH-EGFR signal
integration and the critical downstream mediators are largely undefined. In this 
report we show that genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of EGFR signalling
reduces tumour growth in mouse models of HH/GLI driven basal cell carcinoma
(BCC). We describe HH-EGFR cooperation response genes including SOX2, SOX9, JUN, 
CXCR4 and FGF19 that are synergistically activated by HH-EGFR signal integration 
and required for in vivo growth of BCC cells and tumour-initiating pancreatic
cancer cells. The data validate EGFR signalling as drug target in HH/GLI driven
cancers and shed light on the molecular processes controlled by HH-EGFR signal
cooperation, providing new therapeutic strategies based on combined targeting of 
HH-EGFR signalling and selected downstream target genes.

Copyright © 2012 EMBO Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3305999
PMID: 22294553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2012 Mar;49(3):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.12.008. Epub
2012 Jan 16.

Comparative genomics identification of a novel set of temporally regulated
hedgehog target genes in the retina.

McNeill B(1), Perez-Iratxeta C, Mazerolle C, Furimsky M, Mishina Y,
Andrade-Navarro MA, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth Road, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in numerous developmental and
adult processes with many links to cancer. In vertebrates, the activity of the Hh
pathway is mediated primarily through three Gli transcription factors (Gli1, 2
and 3) that can serve as transcriptional activators or repressors. The
identification of Gli target genes is essential for the understanding of the
Hh-mediated processes. We used a comparative genomics approach using the mouse
and human genomes to identify 390 genes that contained conserved Gli binding
sites. RT-qPCR validation of 46 target genes in E14.5 and P0.5 retinal explants
revealed that Hh pathway activation resulted in the modulation of 30 of these
targets, 25 of which demonstrated a temporal regulation. Further validation
revealed that the expression of Bok, FoxA1, Sox8 and Wnt7a was dependent upon
Sonic Hh (Shh) signaling in the retina and their regulation is under positive and
negative controls by Gli2 and Gli3, respectively. We also show using chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Gli2 binds to the Sox8 promoter, suggesting that Sox8 is
an Hh-dependent direct target of Gli2. Finally, we demonstrate that the Hh
pathway also modulates the expression of Sox9 and Sox10, which together with Sox8
make up the SoxE group. Previously, it has been shown that Hh and SoxE group
genes promote Müller glial cell development in the retina. Our data are
consistent with the possibility for a role of SoxE group genes downstream of Hh
signaling on Müller cell development.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22281533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 1;31(44):4718-24. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.610. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Inhibition of Gli1 results in altered c-Jun activation, inhibition of
cisplatin-induced upregulation of ERCC1, XPD and XRCC1, and inhibition of
platinum-DNA adduct repair.

Kudo K(1), Gavin E, Das S, Amable L, Shevde LA, Reed E.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA.

The transcription of ERCC1 and other nucleotide excision repair (NER) genes is
strongly influenced by c-jun. C-jun is transcriptionally regulated by Gli
proteins of the Hedgehog pathway. We therefore studied the possible relationships
between Gli1, c-jun, and the upregulation of ERCC1, XPD and XRCC1 in
cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cells. We studied the paired human
ovarian cancer cell lines A2780 and A2780-CP70. We used a shRNA construct that
specifically degrades Gli1 message. Genes we assessed for mRNA and/or protein
levels included: c-jun, ERCC1, XPD, XRCC1, Gli1, Gli2, SHH, IHH, GAPDH and
a-tubulin. Platinum-DNA adduct repair was assessed by atomic absorbance
spectrometry with Zeeman background correction. Use of the anti-Gli1 shRNA in
cisplatin-resistant cells resulted in a block of the cell's ability to upregulate
genes in response to cisplatin treatment, including: c-jun, ERCC1, XPD and XRCC1.
This block in upregulation of c-jun was concurrent with a change in the
phosphorylation pattern of the c-jun protein, shifting that pattern from a
Ser63/73 dominant pattern, to a Thr91/93 dominant pattern. A2780-CP70 cells were 
treated at their cisplatin IC50, and DNA repair was assessed after pretreatment
with anti-Gli1 shRNA or scrambled shRNA control. Control cells repaired 78% of
platinum-DNA adducts at 12<U+2009>h, compared with 33% repair in cells pretreated with
anti-Gli1 shRNA resulting in a 2.4-fold difference. Pretreatment of A2780-CP70
cells with anti-Gli1 shRNA resulted in supra-additive cell killing with
cisplatin; shifting the cisplatin IC50 (half maximal inhibitory concentration)
from 30<U+2009>µM to 5<U+2009>µM. Pretreatment of these cells with cyclopamine did not shift
the cisplatin IC50. We conclude that the transcriptional protein Gli1 is
important in the upregulation of these three DNA repair genes in human ovarian
cancer cells, and that Gli1 strongly influences platinum-DNA adduct repair, and
cellular sensitivity to cisplatin. This Gli1 role has c-jun as an intermediate in
the pathway. In all, inhibition of Gli1 by a specific shRNA inhibits the
upregulation of c-jun Ser63/73, and also inhibits the upregulation of three genes
essential to NER (ERCC1, XPD) and base excision repair (XRCC1).

PMID: 22266871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Apr;33(2):254-63. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.12.010. Epub 
2012 Jan 12.

Transcriptional responses of zebrafish embryos exposed to potential sonic
hedgehog pathway interfering compounds deviate from expression profiles of
cyclopamine.

Büttner A(1), Busch W, Klüver N, Giannis A, Scholz S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Leipzig, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Johannisallee 29, 04103
Leipzig, Germany. anita.buettner@gmx.de

The molecular responses of two small molecules, SANT-2 and GANT-61, potentially
interfering with the sonic hedgehog pathway (Shh) have been studied in zebrafish 
embryos by microarray analysis. For both compounds and the positive reference
cyclopamine previous reporter gene assays for the transcription factor Gli1 have 
indicated an inhibition of the hedgehog signaling pathway. In zebrafish embryos a
typical phenotype (cyclopia) associated with Shh interference was only observed
for cyclopamine. Furthermore, only cyclopamine led to the repression of genes
specifically associated with hedgehog signaling and confirmed published
microarray data. In contrast to these data hspb11 was additionally identified as 
the most pronounced down-regulated genes for exposure to cyclopamine. No or
different effects on gene expression patterns were provoked by SANT-2 or GANT-61,
respectively. Reasons for the discrepancies between cellular reporter and the
zebrafish embryo assay and potential implications for the identification of
compounds interfering with specific developmental pathways are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22265815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 9;287(11):7845-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.315416. Epub 2012 
Jan 19.

RACK1 promotes non-small-cell lung cancer tumorigenicity through activating sonic
hedgehog signaling pathway.

Shi S(1), Deng YZ, Zhao JS, Ji XD, Shi J, Feng YX, Li G, Li JJ, Zhu D, Koeffler
HP, Zhao Y, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China.

Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a deadly disease due to lack of effective
diagnosis biomarker and therapeutic target. Much effort has been made in defining
gene defects in NSCLC, but its full molecular pathogenesis remains unexplored.
Here, we found RACK1 (receptor of activated kinase 1) was elevated in most NSCLC,
and its expression level correlated with key pathological characteristics
including tumor differentiation, stage, and metastasis. In addition, RACK1
activated sonic hedgehog signaling pathway by interacting with and activating
Smoothened to mediate Gli1-dependent transcription in NSCLC cells. And silencing 
RACK1 dramatically inhibited in vivo tumor growth and metastasis by blocking the 
sonic hedgehog signaling pathway. These results suggest that RACK1 represents a
new promising diagnosis biomarker and therapeutic target for NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3318742
PMID: 22262830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Apr 10;19(2):167-79. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0305. Print
2012 Apr.

Activation of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway in thyroid neoplasms and its potential
role in tumor cell proliferation.

Xu X(1), Ding H, Rao G, Arora S, Saclarides CP, Esparaz J, Gattuso P, Solorzano
CC, Prinz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois 60612, USA. xxu@rush.edu

The sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway is activated in several types of malignancy and 
plays an important role in tumor cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. SHH
binding to a 12-pass transmembrane receptor, Patched (PTCH), leads to freeing of 
Smoothened (SMO) and subsequent activation of GLI transcription factors. In the
present study, we analyzed the expression of SHH, PTCH, SMO, and GLI1 in 31
follicular thyroid adenomas (FTA), 8 anaplastic thyroid carcinomas (ATC), and 51 
papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) by immunohistochemical staining. More than 65%
of FTA, PTC, and ATC specimens stained positive for SHH, PTCH, SMO, and GLI.
However, the expression of the genes encoding these four molecules did not
correlate with any clinicopathologic parameters, including the age, gender, the
status of BRAF gene mutation, tumor stage, local invasion, and metastasis. Three 
thyroid tumor cell lines (KAT-18, WRO82, and SW1736) all expressed the genes
encoding these four molecules. 5-Bromo-2-deoxyuridine labeling and MTT cell
proliferation assays revealed that cyclopamine (CP), an inhibitor of the SHH
pathway, was able to inhibit the proliferation of KAT-18 and WRO82 cells more
effectively than SW1736 cells. CP led to the arrest of cell cycle or apoptosis.
Knockdown of SHH and GLI expression by miRNA constructs that target SHH or GLI
mRNA in KAT-18 and SW1736 cells led to the inhibition of cell proliferation. Our 
results suggest that the SHH pathway is widely activated in thyroid neoplasms and
may have potential as an early marker of thyroid cancer or as a potential
therapeutic target for thyroid cancer treatment.

PMID: 22241722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Exp Hematol. 2012 May;40(5):418-27. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.01.003. Epub 2012 
Jan 10.

Sonic hedgehog maintains survival and growth of chronic myeloid leukemia
progenitor cells through ß-catenin signaling.

Su W(1), Meng F, Huang L, Zheng M, Liu W, Sun H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays an important role in many human cancers and 
cancer stem cells. Here we investigate the activity and functional role of Shh
signaling in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and leukemia progenitor cells.
Differential activation of Shh signaling was found in about 50% CML chronic phase
samples, about 70% of CML accelerated phase samples, and >80% CML blast crisis
phase samples. Deregulated activation of Shh signaling was observed in CD34(+)
and c-kit(+) leukemia progenitor cells. Stimulation of Shh signaling with
exogenous Shh peptide induced expansion of CD34(+) and c-kit(+) progenitor cells 
(p < 0.05), inversely, blocking the pathway with signal inhibitor induced cell
apoptosis (p < 0.05). Low level of Shh protein was observed in CML bone marrow
stromal cells, and CD34(+) progenitor cells are less sensitive to exogenous Shh
peptide and more sensitive to cyclopamine than CD34(-) cells (p < 0.05), implying
cell-autonomous activation of Shh signaling play a predominant role in progenitor
cells. Coactivation of Shh and ß-catenin signaling was found in CD34(+) and
c-kit(+) progenitor cells. Administration of Shh-neutralizing antibody or
Wnt3a-neutralizing antibody in c-kit(+) progenitor cells induced cell apoptosis; 
however, Wnt3a peptide could salvage cell apoptosis, while Shh peptide failed to 
revert anti-Wnt3a-induced cell apoptosis. C-MYC, GLI1, BCL-2, and P21 were also
found to be downstream targets of Shh signaling, mediating apoptosis or G(2)/M
cell cycle arrest of progenitor cells. Our results demonstrate that autoactivated
Shh signaling provides survival and proliferative cues in CML progenitor cells
through downstream ß-catenin signaling, suggesting a novel therapeutic approach
in CML.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22240607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Osteoporos Int. 2012 Oct;23(10):2435-45. doi: 10.1007/s00198-011-1871-z. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

Iron excess limits HHIPL-2 gene expression and decreases osteoblastic activity in
human MG-63 cells.

Doyard M(1), Fatih N, Monnier A, Island ML, Aubry M, Leroyer P, Bouvet R, Chalès 
G, Mosser J, Loréal O, Guggenbuhl P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMRU991, CHU Pontchaillou, 35033 Rennes Cedex, France.

In order to understand mechanisms involved in osteoporosis observed during iron
overload diseases, we analyzed the impact of iron on a human osteoblast-like cell
line. Iron exposure decreases osteoblast phenotype. HHIPL-2 is an iron-modulated 
gene which could contribute to these alterations. Our results suggest osteoblast 
impairment in iron-related osteoporosis.INTRODUCTION: Iron overload may cause
osteoporosis. An iron-related decrease in osteoblast activity has been suggested.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of iron exposure on human osteoblast cells
(MG-63) by analyzing the impact of ferric ammonium citrate (FAC) and iron citrate
(FeCi) on the expression of genes involved in iron metabolism or associated with 
osteoblast phenotype. A transcriptomic analysis was performed to identify
iron-modulated genes.
RESULTS: FAC and FeCi exposure modulated cellular iron status with a decrease in 
TFRC mRNA level and an increase in intracellular ferritin level. FAC increased
ROS level and caspase 3 activity. Ferroportin, HFE and TFR2 mRNAs were expressed 
in MG-63 cells under basal conditions. The level of ferroportin mRNA was
increased by iron, whereas HFE mRNA level was decreased. The level of mRNA alpha 
1 collagen type I chain, osteocalcin and the transcriptional factor RUNX2 were
decreased by iron. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that the mRNA level of
HedgeHog Interacting Protein Like-2 (HHIPL-2) gene, encoding an inhibitor of the 
hedgehog signaling pathway, was decreased in the presence of FAC. Specific
inhibition of HHIPL-2 expression decreased osteoblast marker mRNA levels.
Purmorphamine, hedgehog pathway activator, increased the mRNA level of GLI1, a
target gene for the hedgehog pathway, and decreased osteoblast marker levels.
GLI1 mRNA level was increased under iron exposure.
CONCLUSION: We showed that in human MG-63 cells, iron exposure impacts iron
metabolism and osteoblast gene expression. HHIPL-2 gene expression modulation may
contribute to these alterations. Our results support a role of osteoblast
impairment in iron-related osteoporosis.

PMID: 22237814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Diabetologia. 2012 Apr;55(4):1024-34. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2434-8. Epub 2012
Jan 12.

Hedgehog signals inhibit postnatal beta cell neogenesis from adult rat exocrine
pancreas in vitro.

Mfopou JK(1), Baeyens L, Bouwens L.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Center, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Laarbeeklaan, Brussels, 
Belgium.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Transdifferentiation of pancreatic exocrine cells into
insulin-producing beta cells may represent an important alternative to islets
required for diabetes cell therapy. Rat pancreatic acinar cells are known to
transdifferentiate into functional beta cells, with recapitulation of several
pancreas developmental features. Considering the inhibitory functions of hedgehog
signalling in early and mid-stage pancreatic development, we questioned whether
it also operates in transdifferentiating acinar cells and whether its modulation 
would influence postnatal beta cell neogenesis in vitro.
METHODS: Rat exocrine cells were precultured in suspension for 4 days and then
incubated with EGF and leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) for 72 h. The hedgehog
signalling pathway was modulated during this, and its effects analysed by RT-PCR,
immunocytochemistry and western blot.
RESULTS: Our data indicate induction of Dhh and Ihh, but not Shh, expression
during acinar cell culture, resulting in activation of hedgehog targets (Ptc1,
Gli1). Exposure of the metaplastic cells to EGF and LIF induced beta cell
differentiation without affecting endogenous hedgehog activity. Whereas blocking 
endogenous hedgehog only slightly increased beta cell neogenesis, exposure to
embryoid body-conditioned medium activated hedgehog signalling as well as other
pathways such as Notch, resulting in severe blockade of beta cell neogenesis.
Interestingly, this effect was partially rescued by treatment with the hedgehog
inhibitor, 3-keto-N-(aminoethyl-aminocaproyl-dihydrocinnamoyl)-cyclopamine
(KAAD-cyclopamine), alone.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We report here Dhh/Ihh-dependent activation of
hedgehog targets during pancreatic exocrine cell metaplasia in vitro and a
persistent inhibitory function of hedgehog signalling in a model of postnatal
beta cell differentiation.

PMID: 22237687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Apr;138(4):675-86. doi: 10.1007/s00432-011-1146-2. 
Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Tumorspheres derived from prostate cancer cells possess chemoresistant and cancer
stem cell properties.

Zhang L(1), Jiao M, Li L, Wu D, Wu K, Li X, Zhu G, Dang Q, Wang X, Hsieh JT, He
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an 710061, China.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer (PCa) becomes lethal when cancer cells develop into
castration-resistant PCa, which remains incurable because of the poor
understanding of their cell origin and characteristics. We aim to investigate the
potential role of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in PCa progression.
METHODS: Human PCa cell lines (LNCaP, 22RV1, DU145 and PC-3) were plated in
serum-free suspension culture system allowed for tumorsphere forming. To evaluate
the CSC characteristics of tumorspheres, the self-renewal, chemoresistance,
tumorigenicity of the PCa tumorsphere cells, and the expression levels of
stemness-related proteins in the PCa tumorsphere cells were assessed, comparing
with the parental adherent cells.
RESULTS: Tumorsphere cells from PCa cell lines displayed enhanced self-renewal,
chemoresistance and tumor-initiating capacity when compared with the adherent
cells. Additionally, these cells overexpressed CSC marker CD44. Also, the
tumorsphere cells expressed high levels of "stemness" genes Gli1, ABCG2 and
Bmi-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data demonstrated that tumorspheres derived from
PCa cells possess chemoresistant and CSC properties. Our study suggests that the 
identification of PCa CSCs could provide new insight into the lethal phenotype of
PCa and therapeutic implications.

PMID: 22237455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012 Feb;4(2):142-52. doi: 10.1039/c1ib00104c. Epub 2012 Jan 
11.

Hedgehog signaling in myofibroblasts directly promotes prostate tumor cell
growth.

Domenech M(1), Bjerregaard R, Bushman W, Beebe DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Wisconsin Institute for Medical
Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Despite strong evidence for the involvement of the stroma in Hedgehog signaling, 
little is known about the identity of the stromal cells and the signaling
mechanisms that mediate the growth promoting effect of Hh signaling. We developed
an in vitro co-culture model using microchannel technology to examine the effect 
of paracrine Hh signaling on proliferation of prostate cancer cells. We show here
that activation of Hh signaling in myofibroblasts is sufficient to accelerate
tumor cell growth. This effect was independent of any direct effect of Hh ligand 
on tumor cells or other cellular components of the tumor stroma. Further, the
trophic effect of Hh pathway activation in myofibroblasts does not require
collaboration of other elements of the stroma or direct physical interaction with
the cancer cells. By isolating the tropic effect of Hh pathway activation in
prostate stroma, we have taken the first step toward identifying cell-specific
mechanisms that mediate the effect of paracrine Hh signaling on tumor growth.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012

PMCID: PMC3335396
PMID: 22234342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Hum Pathol. 2012 Aug;43(8):1229-33. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.08.026. Epub 2012
Jan 4.

Loss of heterozygosity of the PTCH gene in ameloblastoma.

Farias LC(1), Gomes CC, Brito JA, Galvão CF, Diniz MG, de Castro WH, Bernardes
Vde F, De Marco LA, Gomez RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Pathology, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte-MG CEP 31270, Brazil.

Ameloblastoma is a locally aggressive benign neoplasm derived from odontogenic
epithelium, with high recurrence rates. Alterations in the Sonic Hedgehog
signaling pathway, including PTCH gene mutations, have been associated with the
pathogenesis of some odontogenic tumors. The purpose of the present study was to 
assess loss of heterozygosity at the PTCH locus in ameloblastoma. Twelve
ameloblastomas were included, and loss of heterozygosity was assessed by using 3 
microsatellite markers D9S252, D9S127, and D9S287 and 3 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms rs112794371, rs111446700, and rs357564, all located at the PTCH
gene locus. Furthermore, we investigated GLI1 and GLI2 transcription levels by
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in 8 ameloblastomas 
and, concomitantly, PTCH protein levels by immunohistochemical analysis. Loss of 
heterozygosity at 9q21.33-9q.31 was detected in 4 (40.0%) of 10 informative cases
of ameloblastoma. All 8 analyzed samples expressed GLI1 messenger RNA and 7 cases
GLI2 messenger RNA. Interestingly, loss of heterozygosity at the PTCH locus was
not correlated with GLI1 or GLI2 transcription levels, nor was there any
correlation with PTCH protein expression. In conclusion, our findings suggest
that loss of heterozygosity in the PTCH region may be relevant to the
pathogenesis of ameloblastoma but may target a different gene than PTCH.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22221699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2012:605-9. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2012.32.605.

Hedgehog Pathway in Pediatric Cancers: They're Not Just for Brain Tumors Anymore.

Macdonald TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Pediatric Neuro-Oncology Program, Aflac Cancer Center and Blood
Disorders Service, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, and Emory University School 
of Medicine, Emory Children's Center, Atlanta, GA.

The Hedgehog (HH) pathway regulates fundamental processes in embryonic
development, including stem cell maintenance, cell differentiation, tissue
polarity, and cell proliferation. In the vertebrate pathway, Sonic hedgehog (SHH)
binds to Patched1 (PTCH1), which relieves its inhibition of Smoothened (SMO),
allowing the GLI family of transcription factors to translocate to the nucleus
and activate HH target genes such as GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, CYCLIN D1, BCL-2, and
MYCN. The HH pathway is also an active participant in tumorigenesis. In 1996,
loss-of-function mutation in PTCH1 was discovered to be the cause of nevoid basal
cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS, or Gorlin syndrome), an autosomal dominant
disease associated with increased rates of basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
medulloblastoma (MB), and rarely, rhabdomyosarcoma. It is now estimated that 100%
of sporadic BCC and up to 20% to 30% of MB also harbor activating HH pathway
mutations. Together, these discoveries firmly established the linkage between HH 
pathway activation and cancer development. Intense research has since been
focused on further defining the role of the HH pathway in BCC and MB and
potential therapeutic strategies to inhibit HH signaling. Early clinical trials
of SMO inhibitors have shown promising results in the treatment of adult BCC and 
SHH-driven MB. More recently, a number of other pediatric cancers have been
reported to show HH activity, making these tumors potential candidates for HH
inhibitor therapy. To date however, no HH pathway mutations have been identified 
in other pediatric cancers. This review will describe the HH pathway signaling in
development and cancer with a focus on recent evidence for HH pathway activation 
in central nervous system (CNS) and non-CNS pediatric cancers.

PMID: 24451804  [PubMed - in process]


228. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 1;21(7):1016-46. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0271. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

Pharmacological modulation of the Hedgehog pathway differentially affects
dorsal/ventral patterning in mouse and human embryonic stem cell models of
telencephalic development.

Nat R(1), Salti A, Suciu L, Ström S, Dechant G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. 
irina-roxana.nat@i-med.ac.at

A complex set of extrinsic and intrinsic signals acts in specific temporal and
spatial orders to enable neural differentiation during development. These
processes have been extensively studied in animal models, but human neural
development remains much less understood. This lack of detailed information about
human early neurogenesis is a hindrance for the differentiation of pluripotent
stem cell lines into specific neuronal phenotypes. Therefore, it is important to 
strengthen the interspecies comparative approaches. We describe a novel model
system in which in vitro differentiation of human and mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells are temporally aligned to each other and compared with mouse telencephalic 
neurogenesis in vivo. In this comparative model system, we tested the in vitro
role of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling for ES cell-derived telencephalic
differentiation. In vivo, Hh signaling mediates dorsal/ventral patterning during 
early stages of telencephalic development. We monitored the effect of
pharmacological modulators of the Hh signaling pathway, purmorphamine-an agonist 
and cyclopamine-an antagonist of the Smoothened receptor (Smo), on the expression
of region-specific transcription factors and signaling molecules relevant for
telencephalic development in vivo. Purmorphamine strongly upregulated the
expression of telencephalic ventral markers Nkx2.1, Nkx6.2, Lhx6, and Lhx8 in
mouse and human cells, thus reflecting the in vivo process of the medial
ganglionic eminence patterning and specification. Cyclopamine upregulated the
expression of telencephalic dorsal markers, but at lower levels in human compared
with mouse cells. Modulation of Smo in vitro differentially affected, in mouse
and human cells, the expression of molecules of the Hh pathway, especially the
Gli1 and Gli3 effectors, Sonic Hh ligand and Ptch receptors. These results
provide evidence for the different default differentiation of mouse and human ES 
cells and prove the utility of the comparative system for optimizing the directed
differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells.

PMID: 22204396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2012 Jan 1;17:90-9.

Cooperative Hedgehog-EGFR signaling.

Mangelberger D(1), Kern D, Loipetzberger A, Eberl M, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Tumor Biology, Department of Molecular Biology,
University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

It has been known for many years that cooperative interactions between oncogenes 
(e.g. RAS, MYC, BCL2) can fuel cancer growth (1-5), but the restricted
druggability of many of those interacting cancer genes has hampered translation
of combined targeting to medical cancer therapy. The identification and
characterization of cooperative cancer signaling pathways amenable to medical
therapy is therefore a crucial step towards the establishment of efficient
targeted combination treatments urgently needed to improve cancer therapy. Here
we review recent findings of our group and colleagues on the molecular mechanisms
of cooperative Hedgehog/GLI and Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)
signaling, two clinically relevant oncogenic pathways involved in the development
of many human malignancies. We also discuss the possible implications of these
findings for the design of a therapeutic regimen relying on combined targeting of
key effectors of both pathways.

PMCID: PMC3284771
PMID: 22201734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Dyn. 2012 Feb;241(2):403-14. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23723. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

Thyroid hormone-induced sonic hedgehog signal up-regulates its own pathway in a
paracrine manner in the Xenopus laevis intestine during metamorphosis.

Hasebe T(1), Kajita M, Fu L, Shi YB, Ishizuya-Oka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Nippon Medical School, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa,
Japan. hasebet@nms.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: During Xenopus laevis metamorphosis, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is directly
induced by thyroid hormone (TH) at the transcription level as one of the earliest
events in intestinal remodeling. However, the regulation of other components of
this signaling pathway remains to be analyzed. Here, we analyzed the
spatiotemporal expression of Patched (Ptc)-1, Smoothened (Smo), Gli1, Gli2, and
Gli3 during natural and TH-induced intestinal remodeling.
RESULTS: We show that all of the genes examined are transiently up-regulated in
the mesenchymal tissues during intestinal metamorphosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Interestingly, in the presence of protein synthesis inhibitors, Gli2
but not the others was induced by TH, suggesting that Gli2 is a direct TH
response gene, while the others are likely indirect ones. Furthermore, we
demonstrate by the organ culture experiment that overexpression of Shh enhances
the expression of Ptc-1, Smo, and Glis even in the absence of TH, indicating that
Shh regulates its own pathway components during intestinal remodeling.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3428560
PMID: 22190352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Acta Histochem. 2012 Oct;114(6):620-5. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2011.11.007. Epub
2011 Dec 15.

Different expression patterns of Gli1-3 in mouse embryonic maxillofacial
development.

Du J(1), Fan Z, Ma X, Wu Y, Liu S, Gao Y, Wang J, Shen Y, Fan M, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Laboratory for Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Capital Medical 
University School of Stomatology, Beijing, China.

The Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway plays many key roles in the
development of Drosophila and vertebrate embryos, including regulating
craniofacial development. The GLI family of transcription factors (GLI1, 2, and
3) mediates the SHH morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of
downstream target genes. Signaling aberrations seriously affect vertebrate
development. To better understand the regulation of GLI transcription factors, we
investigated the expression patterns of Gli1-3 during murine embryonic
craniofacial development using in situ hybridization with whole-mounts and
sections and quantitative real-time PCR. We found that Gli1 expression was mostly
detected in the mesenchyme in embryonic dermis, and strongly detected in
embryonic oral mucosa at late stages of face development. Gli2 was strong in
mesenchyme, both in dermis and oral mucosa. Gli3 expression was detected fainter 
in the epithelium than the mesenchyme at 11 days post-coitum (dpc), but at 14.5
dpc, expression was stronger in the epithelium. Of the three genes, Gli1
expression was highest in early stages of face development, Gli3 expression was
highest in the second half of facial development (and remained stable
thereafter), whereas Gli2 expression remained low throughout facial development. 
The present findings suggest that Gli1-3 may play different roles during facial
development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2012 Feb;20(2):152-61. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2011.11.009.
Epub 2011 Nov 27.

Depletion of primary cilia in articular chondrocytes results in reduced Gli3
repressor to activator ratio, increased Hedgehog signaling, and symptoms of early
osteoarthritis.

Chang CF(1), Ramaswamy G, Serra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Primary cilia are present in almost every cell type including
chondrocytes. Studies have shown that defects in primary cilia result in skeletal
dysplasia. The purpose of this study was to understand how loss of primary cilia 
affects articular cartilage.
DESIGN: Ift88 encodes a protein that is required for intraflagellar transport and
formation of primary cilia. In this study, we used Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl)
transgenic mice in which primary cilia were deleted in chondrocytes.
Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) articular cartilage was characterized by histological
staining, real time RT-PCR, and microindentation. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling was
measured by expression of Ptch1 and Gli1 mRNA. The levels of Gli3 proteins were
determined by western blot.
RESULTS: Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) articular cartilage was thicker and had increased 
cell density, likely due to decreased apoptosis during cartilage remodeling.
Mutant articular cartilage also showed increased expression of osteoarthritis
(OA) markers including Mmp13, Adamts5, ColX, and Runx2. OA was also evident by
reduced stiffness in mutant cartilage as measured by microindentation.
Up-regulation of Hh signaling, which has been associated with OA, was present in 
mutant articular cartilage as measured by expression of Ptch1 and Gli1.
Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) cartilage also demonstrated reduced Gli3 repressor to
activator ratio.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that primary cilia are required for normal
development and maintenance of articular cartilage. It was shown that primary
cilia are required for processing full length Gli3 to the truncated repressor
form. We propose that OA symptoms in Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) cartilage are due to
reduced Hh signal repression by Gli3.

Copyright © 2011 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3260404
PMID: 22173325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Gastroenterol. 2012 Apr;47(4):452-60. doi: 10.1007/s00535-011-0507-6. Epub 2011
Dec 15.

Targeting the hedgehog signaling pathway with interacting peptides to Patched-1.

Nakamura M(1), Tanaka H, Nagayoshi Y, Nakashima H, Tsutsumi K, Ohtsuka T,
Takahata S, Tanaka M, Okada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery, Kawasaki Medical School, 577 Matsushima,
Kurashiki 701-0192, Japan. mnakamura@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in many
cancers. Overproduction of sonic hedgehog (Shh), a ligand in the Hh pathway,
increases Hh signaling activity by inhibiting Patched-1 (Ptch1), a suppressive
receptor in the Hh pathway. The purpose of this study was to establish a novel
strategy for treating pancreatic cancer and other Hh-dependent cancers through
control of the tumor-suppressive function of Ptch1.
METHODS: We synthesized seven interacting peptides to the amino-acid sequence of 
the Ptch1 docking site for Shh. Human pancreatic cancer cell lines (AsPC-1,
SUIT2) were cultured in the presence or absence of the peptides. Cell
proliferation was assessed by cell counting and by the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. The
activity of the Hh pathway was estimated by real-time polymerase chain reaction
of the target gene product Gli1. To confirm their anti-tumor activity in vivo,
the effect of the peptides in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer was determined. 
Finally, the Hh signaling activity of the xenograft was examined.
RESULTS: Three of the interacting peptides to Ptch1 suppressed the proliferation 
of the two pancreatic cancer cell lines and decreased the expression of Gli1,
both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that interacting peptides to Ptch1 may be a new 
tool for controlling the Hh-dependent growth of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22170414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e27941. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027941. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Aberrant Hedgehog ligands induce progressive pancreatic fibrosis by paracrine
activation of myofibroblasts and ductular cells in transgenic zebrafish.

Jung IH(1), Jung DE, Park YN, Song SY, Park SW.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate School of National Core Research Center for Nanomedical
Technology, Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is frequently up-regulated in fibrogenic pancreatic
diseases including chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. Although recent
series suggest exclusive paracrine activation of stromal cells by Hh ligands from
epithelial components, debates still exist on how Hh signaling works in
pathologic conditions. To explore how Hh signaling affects the pancreas, we
investigated transgenic phenotypes in zebrafish that over-express either Indian
Hh or Sonic Hh along with green fluorescence protein (GFP) to enable real-time
observation, or GFP alone as control, at the ptf1a domain. Transgenic embryos and
zebrafish were serially followed for transgenic phenotypes, and investigated
using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), in 
situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry. Over-expression of Ihh or Shh
reveals virtually identical phenotypes. Hh induces morphologic changes in a
developing pancreas without derangement in acinar differentiation. In older
zebrafish, Hh induces progressive pancreatic fibrosis intermingled with
proliferating ductular structures, which is accompanied by the destruction of the
acinar structures. Both myofibroblasts and ductular are activated and
proliferated by paracrine Hh signaling, showing restricted expression of Hh
downstream components including Patched1 (Ptc1), Smoothened (Smo), and Gli1/2 in 
those Hh-responsive cells. Hh ligands induce matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs),
especially MMP9 in all Hh-responsive cells, and transform growth factor-ß1
(TGFß1) only in ductular cells. Aberrant Hh over-expression, however, does not
induce pancreatic tumors. On treatment with inhibitors, embryonic phenotypes are 
reversed by either cyclopamine or Hedgehog Primary Inhibitor-4 (HPI-4).
Pancreatic fibrosis is only prevented by HPI-4. Our study provides strong
evidence of Hh signaling which induces pancreatic fibrosis through paracrine
activation of Hh-responsive cells in vivo. Induction of MMPs and TGFß1 by Hh
signaling expands on the current understanding of how Hh signaling affects
fibrosis and tumorigenesis. These transgenic models will be a valuable platform
in exploring the mechanism of fibrogenic pancreatic diseases which are induced by
Hh signaling activation.

PMCID: PMC3229500
PMID: 22164219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Feb 1;18(3):869-81. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2188.
Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Stem cell pathways contribute to clinical chemoresistance in ovarian cancer.

Steg AD(1), Bevis KS, Katre AA, Ziebarth A, Dobbin ZC, Alvarez RD, Zhang K,
Conner M, Landen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

PURPOSE: Within heterogeneous tumors, subpopulations often labeled cancer stem
cells (CSC) have been identified that have enhanced tumorigenicity and
chemoresistance in ex vivo models. However, whether these populations are more
capable of surviving chemotherapy in de novo tumors is unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined 45 matched primary/recurrent tumor pairs of
high-grade ovarian adenocarcinomas for expression of CSC markers ALDH1A1, CD44,
and CD133 using immunohistochemistry. Tumors collected immediately after
completion of primary therapy were then laser capture microdissected and
subjected to a quantitative PCR array examining stem cell biology pathways
(Hedgehog, Notch, TGF-ß, and Wnt). Select genes of interest were validated as
important targets using siRNA-mediated downregulation.
RESULTS: Primary samples were composed of low densities of ALDH1A1, CD44, and
CD133. Tumors collected immediately after primary therapy were more densely
composed of each marker, whereas samples collected at first recurrence, before
initiating secondary therapy, were composed of similar percentages of each marker
as their primary tumor. In tumors collected from recurrent platinum-resistant
patients, only CD133 was significantly increased. Of stem cell pathway members
examined, 14% were significantly overexpressed in recurrent compared with matched
primary tumors. Knockdown of genes of interest, including endoglin/CD105 and the 
hedgehog mediators Gli1 and Gli2, led to decreased ovarian cancer cell viability,
with Gli2 showing a novel contribution to cisplatin resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that ovarian tumors are enriched with CSCs and
stem cell pathway mediators, especially at the completion of primary therapy.
This suggests that stem cell subpopulations contribute to tumor chemoresistance
and ultimately recurrent disease.

PMCID: PMC3271164
PMID: 22142828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28077. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028077. Epub 2011 Nov 29.

Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling antagonizes serous ovarian cancer growth in a
primary xenograft model.

McCann CK(1), Growdon WB, Kulkarni-Datar K, Curley MD, Friel AM, Proctor JL,
Sheikh H, Deyneko I, Ferguson JA, Vathipadiekal V, Birrer MJ, Borger DR,
Mohapatra G, Zukerberg LR, Foster R, Macdougall JR, Rueda BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vincent Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vincent Center for
Reproductive Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence links aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling 
with the pathogenesis of several cancers including medulloblastoma, basal cell,
small cell lung, pancreatic, prostate and ovarian. This investigation was
designed to determine if inhibition of this pathway could inhibit serous ovarian 
cancer growth.
METHODOLOGY: We utilized an in vivo pre-clinical model of serous ovarian cancer
to characterize the anti-tumor activity of Hh pathway inhibitors cyclopamine and 
a clinically applicable derivative, IPI-926. Primary human serous ovarian tumor
tissue was used to generate tumor xenografts in mice that were subsequently
treated with cyclopamine or IPI-926.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Both compounds demonstrated significant anti-tumor activity
as single agents. When IPI-926 was used in combination with paclitaxel and
carboplatinum (T/C), no synergistic effect was observed, though sustained
treatment with IPI-926 after cessation of T/C continued to suppress tumor growth.
Hh pathway activity was analyzed by RT-PCR to assess changes in Gli1 transcript
levels. A single dose of IPI-926 inhibited mouse stromal Gli1 transcript levels
at 24 hours with unchanged human intra-tumor Gli1 levels. Chronic IPI-926 therapy
for 21 days, however, inhibited Hh signaling in both mouse stromal and human
tumor cells. Expression data from the micro-dissected stroma in human serous
ovarian tumors confirmed the presence of Gli1 transcript and a significant
association between elevated Gli1 transcript levels and worsened survival.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: IPI-926 treatment inhibits serous tumor growth
suggesting the Hh signaling pathway contributes to the pathogenesis of ovarian
cancer and may hold promise as a novel therapeutic target, especially in the
maintenance setting.

PMCID: PMC3226669
PMID: 22140510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Jan 6;506(1):1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.11.027. Epub
2011 Nov 25.

Inhibition of sonic hedgehog signaling aggravates brain damage associated with
the down-regulation of Gli1, Ptch1 and SOD1 expression in acute ischemic stroke.

Ji H(1), Miao J, Zhang X, Du Y, Liu H, Li S, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050000, PR China.

Oxidative and cytotoxic damage play an important role in cerebral ischemic
pathogenesis and may represent a target for treatment. Recent studies have
indicated that sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling could protect neurons against
oxidative stress by increasing superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) activity.
Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1) and patched-1 (Ptch1) are both
components and transcriptional targets of the Shh pathway. Here, we designed this
study to determine the effect of inhibition of Shh pathway on the development of 
cerebral ischemia injury. Male, Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). Cyclopamine (0.18mg/kg), the classical 
inhibitor of Shh signaling, was stereotactic injected into the lateral cerebral
ventricle immediately after pMCAO. At 24h neurological deficit was evaluated
using a modified six point scale; brain water content was measured; infarct size 
was analyzed with 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC).
Immunohistochemistry, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR),
Western Blotting and activity assay were used to analyze the expression of Gli1, 
Ptch1 and SOD1. Compared with Vehicle group, cyclopamine down-regulated Gli1,
Ptch1 and SOD1 in pMCAO-affected brain tissue (P<0.05), and increased infarct
volume (P<0.05), brain water content (P<0.05) and behavioral deficits (P<0.05).
Collectively, the present results suggest that inhibition of Shh signaling
pathway exacerbated rat ischemic damage caused by pMCAO, which may be correlated 
with down-regulated expression of Gli1, Ptch1 and SOD1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22133807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Blood. 2012 Jan 26;119(4):997-1007. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-359075. Epub 2011 
Nov 30.

Trisomy 12 and elevated GLI1 and PTCH1 transcript levels are biomarkers for
Hedgehog-inhibitor responsiveness in CLL.

Decker S(1), Zirlik K, Djebatchie L, Hartmann D, Ihorst G, Schmitt-Graeff A,
Herchenbach D, Jumaa H, Warmuth M, Veelken H, Dierks C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Hugstetter Strasse 55, Freiburg, Germany.

Hedgehog (HH) signaling is activated in various lymphoid malignancies, but
conflicting results exist about its role in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Here, we demonstrate that the expression of essential HH pathway components like 
GLI1, PTCH1, and the HH ligands is highly diverse in CLL. A subset of 36.7% of 60
tested CLL samples responded to all 3 SMOOTHENED (SMO) inhibitors, whereas 40%
were completely resistant. Responsiveness correlated with elevated GLI1 and PTCH1
transcript levels and the presence of trisomy 12, whereas no other karyotype
correlated with responsiveness. All trisomy 12 CLLs displayed constitutive HH
pathway activation driven by autocrine DESERT HH (DHH) ligand secretion, which
could be blocked by the HH-blocking Ab 5E1. Cocultures with DHH-expressing BM
stromal cells reduced sensitivity of CLLs to SMO-inhibitor treatment by
activation of noncanonical ERK phosphorylation directly downstream of the PTCH1
receptor without involvement of SMO and could be overcome by the HH-blocking Ab
5E1 or a combination of SMO and ERK inhibitors. Our results demonstrate that the 
HH-signaling pathway is an interesting therapeutic target for a subset of
patients with CLL, characterized by high GLI1 and PTCH1 transcript levels, and
all patients with trisomy 12 and indicate HH-blocking Abs to be favorable over
SMO inhibitors in overcoming stroma-mediated protective effects.

PMID: 22130798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Lung Cancer. 2012 May;76(2):191-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.10.015. Epub 2011 
Nov 23.

Hedgehog signaling pathway molecules and ALDH1A1 expression in early-stage
non-small cell lung cancer.

Raz G(1), Allen KE, Kingsley C, Cherni I, Arora S, Watanabe A, Lorenzo CD,
Edwards V DK, Sridhar S, Hostetter G, Weiss GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Cell Biology Division, The Translational Genomics Research
Institute (TGen), Phoenix, AZ, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Hedgehog Signaling Pathway (HHSP) has been implicated in the
development of multiple cancers. HHSP activation may primarily be hedgehog
ligand-dependent in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC); while a subset may be
ligand-independent. In this study NSCLC primary tumors were used to identify
correlations between multiple biomarkers thought to be involved in the HHSP and
the clinical outcomes of patients with NSCLC. Identification of such correlations
could be used to aid in NSCLC treatment and predicting patient prognosis.
METHODS: A tissue microarray representing 248 clinically annotated stage I-II
NSCLC cases was stained using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and scored for HHSP
proteins namely, SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, and GLI2; as well as, ALDH1A1, a putative
cancer stem cell marker. Data was analyzed for correlation between IHC staining, 
EGFR and KRAS mutations, and clinical characteristics including relapse-free
survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: In adenocarcinoma, there were significant correlations of IHC expression
between SHH and downstream HHSP receptor SMO (p=0.017) and transcription factor
GLI1 (p=0.001), while SMO correlated with GLI1 (p=0.007). In squamous cell
carcinoma, SHH significantly correlated with GLI2 protein expression (p=0.003).
After multiple testing correction, there was no significant correlation between
any of the six markers and RFS or OS.
CONCLUSIONS: Key downstream components of the HHSP show correlation with sonic
hedgehog ligand (SHH) expression, suggesting that ligand-dependent signaling is
more prevalent in primary NSCLC tumors. Surprisingly, in early-stage NSCLC, there
were no significant correlations between HHSP proteins or ALDH1A1 and RFS or OS.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22115706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Sci Signal. 2011 Nov 22;4(200):pt9. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002540.

Hedgehog signaling and the Gli code in stem cells, cancer, and metastases.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Geneva Medical School, 8242 Centre Médicale Universitaire,
Geneva, Switzerland. Ariel.RuizAltaba@unige.ch

The Hedgehog (Hh)-Gli signaling pathway is an essential pathway involved in
development and cancer. It controls the Gli code-the sum of all activator and
repressor functions of the Gli transcription factors. Through the Gli code, and
Gli1 in particular, it modulates the fate and behavior of stem and cancer stem
cells, as well as tumor growth and survival in many human cancer types. It also
affects recurrence and metastasis and is enhanced in advanced tumors, where it
promotes an embryonic stem (ES) cell-like gene expression signature. A central
component of this signature, Nanog, is critical for glioblastoma and cancer stem 
cell survival and expansion. Gli1 activity is also enhanced by several oncogenic 
proteins, including Ras, Myc, and Akt, and by loss of tumor suppressors, such as 
p53 and PTEN. The oncogenic load boosts Gli1 levels, which supports tumor
progression, and promotes a critical threshold of Gli1 activity that allows cells
to enter the metastatic transition. In colon cancers, this transition is defined 
by enhanced Hh-Gli and, surprisingly, by repressed Wnt-Tcf signaling. Together
our data support a model in which the Gli code, and Gli1 in particular, acts as a
key sensor that responds to both Hh signals and the oncogenic load. We
hypothesize that, in turn, the Gli-regulated ES-like factors induce a
reprogramming event in cancer stem cells that promotes high invasion, growth
and/or metastasis. Targeting the Gli code, the autoregulatory Gli1-Nanog module
and interacting partners and pathways thus offers new therapeutic possibilities.

PMID: 22114144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e19904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019904. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

A novel synthetic smoothened antagonist transiently inhibits pancreatic
adenocarcinoma xenografts in a mouse model.

Strand MF(1), Wilson SR, Dembinski JL, Holsworth DD, Khvat A, Okun I, Petersen D,
Krauss S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit for Cell Signalling, Institute for Microbiology, Oslo University
Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway. martin.frank.strand@rr-research.no

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is over-activated in several solid tumors
where it plays a central role in cell growth, stroma recruitment and tumor
progression. In the Hh signaling pathway, the Smoothened (SMO) receptor comprises
a primary drug target with experimental small molecule SMO antagonists currently 
being evaluated in clinical trials.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using Shh-Light II (Shh-L2) and alkaline phosphatase (AP)
based screening formats on a "focused diversity" library we identified a novel
small molecule inhibitor of the Hh pathway, MS-0022
(2-bromo-N-(4-(8-methylimidazo[1,2-a]pyridin-2-yl)phenyl)benzamide). MS-0022
showed effective Hh signaling pathway inhibition at the level of SMO in the low
nM range, and Hh pathway inhibition downstream of Suppressor of fused (SUFU) in
the low µM range. MS-0022 reduced growth in the tumor cell lines PANC-1, SUIT-2, 
PC-3 and FEMX in vitro. MS-0022 treatment led to a transient delay of tumor
growth that correlated with a reduction of stromal Gli1 levels in SUIT-2
xenografts in vivo.
SIGNIFICANCE: We document the in vitro and in vivo efficacy and bioavailability
of a novel small molecule SMO antagonist, MS-0022. Although MS-0022 primarily
interferes with Hh signaling at the level of SMO, it also has a downstream
inhibitory effect and leads to a stronger reduction of growth in several tumor
cell lines when compared to related SMO antagonists.

PMCID: PMC3115942
PMID: 21698280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Neural Dev. 2011 Jun 20;6:29. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-29.

Temporal-spatial changes in Sonic Hedgehog expression and signaling reveal
different potentials of ventral mesencephalic progenitors to populate distinct
ventral midbrain nuclei.

Blaess S(1), Bodea GO, Kabanova A, Chanet S, Mugniery E, Derouiche A, Stephen D, 
Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10021, USA. sblaess@uni-bonn.de

BACKGROUND: The ventral midbrain contains a diverse array of neurons, including
dopaminergic neurons of the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and substantia nigra
(SN) and neurons of the red nucleus (RN). Dopaminergic and RN neurons have been
shown to arise from ventral mesencephalic precursors that express Sonic Hedgehog 
(Shh). However, Shh expression, which is initially confined to the mesencephalic 
ventral midline, expands laterally and is then downregulated in the ventral
midline. In contrast, expression of the Hedgehog target gene Gli1 initiates in
the ventral midline prior to Shh expression, but after the onset of Shh
expression it is expressed in precursors lateral to Shh-positive cells. Given
these dynamic gene expression patterns, Shh and Gli1 expression could delineate
different progenitor populations at distinct embryonic time points.
RESULTS: We employed genetic inducible fate mapping (GIFM) to investigate whether
precursors that express Shh (Shh-GIFM) or transduce Shh signaling (Gli1-GIFM) at 
different time points give rise to different ventral midbrain cell types. We find
that precursors restricted to the ventral midline are labeled at embryonic day
(E)7.5 with Gli1-GIFM, and with Shh-GIFM at E8.5. These precursors give rise to
all subtypes of midbrain dopaminergic neurons and the anterior RN. A broader
domain of progenitors that includes the ventral midline is marked with Gli1-GIFM 
at E8.5 and with Shh-GIFM at E9.5; these fate-mapped cells also contribute to all
midbrain dopaminergic subtypes and to the entire RN. In contrast, a lateral
progenitor domain that is labeled with Gli1-GIFM at E9.5 and with Shh-GIFM at
E11.5 has a markedly reduced potential to give rise to the RN and to SN
dopaminergic neurons, and preferentially gives rise to the ventral-medial VTA. In
addition, cells derived from Shh- and Gli1-expressing progenitors located outside
of the ventral midline give rise to astrocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: We define a ventral midbrain precursor map based on the timing of
Gli1 and Shh expression, and suggest that the diversity of midbrain dopaminergic 
neurons is at least partially determined during their precursor stage when their 
medial-lateral position, differential gene expression and the time when they
leave the ventricular zone influence their fate decisions.

PMCID: PMC3135491
PMID: 21689430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 12;31(2):187-99. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.232. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

Sonic hedgehog regulates Bmi1 in human medulloblastoma brain tumor-initiating
cells.

Wang X(1), Venugopal C, Manoranjan B, McFarlane N, O'Farrell E, Nolte S,
Gunnarsson T, Hollenberg R, Kwiecien J, Northcott P, Taylor MD, Hawkins C, Singh 
SK.

Author information: 
(1)McMaster Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Bmi1 is a key stem cell regulatory gene implicated in the pathogenesis of many
aggressive cancers, including medulloblastoma. Overexpression of Bmi1 promotes
cell proliferation and is required for hedgehog (Hh) pathway-driven
tumorigenesis. This study aimed to determine if Sonic hedgehog (Shh) modulates
the key stem cell regulatory gene Bmi1 in childhood medulloblastoma brain
tumor-initiating cells (BTICs). Although current literature suggests that there
is a correlation between Shh pathway genes and Bmi1 expression, it is unclear
whether there is indeed a direct regulatory mechanism. To address whether Shh
induces expression of Bmi1, stem cell-enriched populations from medulloblastoma
cell lines and primary samples were treated with Shh ligand and KAAD-cyclopamine 
(Shh antagonist). Our data indicate that Bmi1 expression positively correlates
with increasing Shh ligand concentrations. Chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals 
that Gli1 preferentially binds to the Bmi1 promoter, and Bmi1 transcript levels
are increased and decreased by Gli1 overexpression and downregulation,
respectively. Knockdown experiments of Bmi1 in vitro and in vivo demonstrate that
Hh signaling not only drives Bmi1 expression, but a feedback mechanism exists
wherein downstream effectors of Bmi1 may, in turn, activate Hh pathway genes.
These findings implicate Bmi1 and Hh as mutually indispensable pathways in
medulloblastoma BTIC maintenance. Recent molecular characterization of
medulloblastoma also reveals that Bmi1 is overexpressed across all subgroups of
medulloblastoma, particularly in the most aggressive subtypes. Lastly, despite
recent identification of BTIC markers, the molecular characterization of these
cell populations remains unclear. In this work, we propose that the BTIC marker
CD133 may segregate a cell population with a Hh-receptor phenotype, thus
demonstrating a cell-cell interaction between the CD133+ Hh receptor cells and
the CD133- Hh-secreting cells.

PMID: 21685941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cancer Sci. 2011 Oct;102(10):1756-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02010.x. Epub
2011 Jul 26.

Hedgehog signaling pathway as a therapeutic target in various types of cancer.

Onishi H(1), Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. ohnishi@surg1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is an important factor in growth and patterning during
embryonic development. A mutation in Patched, Smoothened or Gli1, which regulate 
the Hh signaling pathway, might lead to the onset of glioblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma, medulloblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma. Recently, Hh signaling has been 
reported to be activated in a ligand-dependent manner, contributing to
carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Hedgehog signaling is reactivated in
various types of cancer, and this contributes to cancer progression by
facilitating proliferation, invasion and cell survival. Moreover, Hh signaling is
associated with several other signaling pathways that contribute to cancer
progression. These observations indicate that controlling Hh signaling might
become a target for novel molecular targeting therapy.

PMID: 21679342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Int J Oncol. 2011 Oct;39(4):899-906. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1076. Epub 2011 Jun
14.

Pharmacological inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway prevents human
rhabdomyosarcoma cell growth.

Kawabata N(1), Ijiri K, Ishidou Y, Yamamoto T, Nagao H, Nagano S, Maeda S, Komiya
S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.

The Hedgehog pathway functions as an organizer in embryonic development. Recent
studies have shown that mutation of the PTCH1 gene involved in the Hedgehog
pathway affects rhabdomyosarcoma development. However, the expression of Hedgehog
pathway molecules in human rhabdomyosarcoma cells has not been well clarified. In
addition, the effect of pharmacological inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway is not
known. We investigated the expression of the genes involved in the Hedgehog
pathway using human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines and biopsy specimens. Further, we
evaluated the effect of pharmacological inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway using 
cyclopamine or GANT61 by WST assay, cell proliferation assay and cell death
detection assay. Real-time PCR revealed that human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines
and biopsy specimens overexpressed the following genes: Sonic hedgehog, Indian
hedgehog, Desert hedgehog, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2 and ULK3. Immunohistochemistry 
revealed that rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines and biopsy specimens expressed SMO and 
GLI2. Inhibition of SMO by cyclopamine slowed the growth of human
rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines. Similarly, inhibition of GLI by GANT61 slowed the
growth of human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines. Inhibition of cell proliferation and
apoptotic cell death together prevented the growth of rhabdomyosarcoma cells by
cyclopamine and GANT61 treatment. Our findings suggest that pharmacological
inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway may be a useful approach for treating
rhabdomyosarcoma patients.

PMID: 21674124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 5;31(1):104-15. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.219. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Upregulation of VEGF-A and CD24 gene expression by the tGLI1 transcription factor
contributes to the aggressive behavior of breast cancer cells.

Cao X(1), Geradts J, Dewhirst MW, Lo HW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Sciences, Department of Surgery, Duke University School
of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway is one of the most dysregulated pathways in human 
cancers. The glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) transcription factor is 
the terminal effector of the Hedgehog pathway, frequently activated in human
breast cancer and an emerging target of breast cancer therapy. While somatic
mutations in the human GLI1 gene have never been reported in any cell or tumor
type, we recently uncovered the existence of a novel alternatively spliced,
truncated GLI1 (tGLI1) that has an in-frame deletion of 41 codons spanning the
entire exon 3 and part of exon 4 of the GLI1 gene. Using glioblastoma models, we 
showed that tGLI1 has gained the ability to promote glioblastoma migration and
invasion via its gain-of-function transcriptional activity. However, the
pathological impact of tGLI1 on breast cancer remains undefined. Here, we report 
that tGLI1 is frequently expressed in human breast cancer cell lines and primary 
specimens we have examined to date, but is undetectable in normal breast tissues.
We found for the first time that tGLI1, but not GLI1, binds to and enhances the
human vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) gene promoter, leading to its
upregulation. Consequently, tGLI1-expressing MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
secret higher levels of VEGF-A and contain a higher propensity, than the isogenic
cells with control vector and GLI1, to stimulate in vitro angiogenesis of human
vascular endothelial cells. We further showed that tGLI1 has gained the ability
to enhance the motility and invasiveness of breast cancer cells in a
proliferation-independent manner and that this functional gain is associated with
increased expression of migration/invasion-associated genes, CD24, MMP-2 and
MMP-9. tGLI1 has also acquired the property to facilitate anchorage-independent
growth of breast cancer cells. Collectively, our results define tGLI1 as a
gain-of-function GLI1 transcription factor and a novel mediator of the behavior
of clinically more aggressive breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3175334
PMID: 21666711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Pathol. 2011 Dec;225(4):525-34. doi: 10.1002/path.2901. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

Zic2 synergistically enhances Hedgehog signalling through nuclear retention of
Gli1 in cervical cancer cells.

Chan DW(1), Liu VW, Leung LY, Yao KM, Chan KK, Cheung AN, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Hong Kong, People's Republic of China.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signalling has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of human cancers. However, the cognate molecular mechanisms
contributing to this disregulated pathway are incompletely understood. In this
study, we showed that Zic2 was frequently over-expressed and associated with
high-grade cervical cancer (p = 0.032), high levels of Gli1 (p < 0.001) and
CyclinD1 (p < 0.001) by immunohistochemical and quantitative RT-PCR analyses.
Further biochemical studies using luciferase reporter, co-immunoprecipitation,
subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analyses demonstrated that Zic2 
can physically interact with Gli1 and retain it in the nucleus, which in turn
increases Gli-mediated transcriptional activity. Gain- and loss-of-function
analyses of Zic2 showed that Zic2 could increase Hh signalling activity, cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth ability in cervical cancer cells. 
Conversely, deletion of the zinc finger domain at C-terminus of Zic2
significantly abrogated its interaction with Gli1, the retention of Gli1 in the
nucleus, effects on Hh signalling activity and oncogenic properties in cervical
cancer cells. Our findings suggest that Zic2 is a positive modulator increasing
Gli1 transcriptional and oncogenic activity by retaining Gli1 in the nucleus of
cervical cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21661123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Surg Oncol. 2011 Oct;104(5):472-9. doi: 10.1002/jso.21988. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Hedgehog signaling protein expression and its association with prognostic
parameters in prostate cancer: a retrospective study from the view point of new
2010 anatomic stage/prognostic groups.

Kim TJ(1), Lee JY, Hwang TK, Kang CS, Choi YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospital Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The expression of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway in prostate cancer 
is well-known but its clinicopathologic role has not been elucidated well.
METHODS: Prostatectomy cases of prostate cancer (n=155) were prepared and
assessed by clinicopathologic parameters including new 2010 anatomic
stage/prognostic groups (ASPG) of prostate cancer. The expression of five Hh
signaling proteins including Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Patched, Smoothened, and
GLIoma-associated oncogene, in addition with Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)) were
analyzed immunohistochemically. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed
to assess the mRNA expression status.
RESULTS: The expression of each Hh signaling protein was significantly correlated
with poor prognostic parameters such as larger tumor size, high pretreatment
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), high Gleason score, perineural invasion and new 
ASPG. Among Hh signaling proteins, Sonic hedgehog and Smoothened expressions tend
to have a significantly higher risk of PSA recurrence (P<0.001 and P=0.011,
respectively). Multivariate analysis proved Shh expression as independent
prognostic factors of PSA recurrence along with Gleason score, ASPG, tumor
volume, and pretreatment PSA.
CONCLUSIONS: Hh signaling activity is significantly associated with worse
prognostic parameters. Shh can be regarded as a poor prognostic factor for PSA
recurrence.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21656527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Mar 20;21(5):729-41. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0134. Epub 2011
Aug 8.

Enhanced production of neuroprogenitors, dopaminergic neurons, and identification
of target genes by overexpression of sonic hedgehog in human embryonic stem
cells.

Wu SM(1), Tan KS, Chen H, Beh TT, Yeo HC, Ng SK, Wei S, Lee DY, Choo AB, Chan KK.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, A*STAR (Agency for
Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore, Singapore.

Molecular and cellular signaling pathways are involved in the process of neural
differentiation from human embryonic stem cells (hESC) to terminally
differentiated neurons. The Sonic hedgehog (SHH) morphogen is required to direct 
the differentiation of hESC to several neural subtypes, for example, dopaminergic
(DA) or motor neurons. However, the roles of SHH signaling and the pathway target
genes that regulate the diversity of cellular responses arising from SHH
activation during neurogenesis of hESC have yet to be elucidated. In this study, 
we report that overexpression of SHH in hESC promotes the derivation of
neuroprogenitors (NP), increases proliferation of NP, and subsequently increases 
the yield of DA neurons. Next, gene expression changes resulting from the
overexpression of SHH in hESC-derived NP were examined by genome-wide
transcriptional profiling. Categorizing the differentially expressed genes
according to the Gene Ontology biological processes showed that they are involved
in numerous cellular processes, including neural development, NP proliferation,
and neural specification. In silico GLI-binding sites analysis of the
differentially expressed genes also identified a set of putative novel direct
target genes of SHH in hESC-derived NP, which are involved in nervous system
development. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and promoter-luciferase assays
confirmed that GLI1 binds to the promoter region and activates transcription of
HEY2, a NOTCH signaling target gene. Taken together, our data provide evidence
for the first time that there is cross-talk between the NOTCH and SHH signaling
pathways in hESC-derived NP and also provide significant new insights into
transcriptional targets in SHH-mediated neural differentiation of hESC.

PMID: 21649559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cancer Res. 2011 Aug 1;71(15):5336-45. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2633. Epub
2011 Jun 6.

Sequential activation of Snail1 and N-Myc modulates sonic hedgehog-induced
transformation of neural cells.

Colvin Wanshura LE(1), Galvin KE, Ye H, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Wetmore C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.

Activation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway and increased expression of Gli1
play an important role in proliferation and transformation of granule cell
progenitors (GCP) in the developing cerebellum. Medulloblastomas arising from
cerebellar GCPs are frequently driven by Shh pathway-activating mutations;
however, molecular mechanisms of Shh pathway dysregulation and transformation of 
neural progenitors remain poorly defined. We report that the transcription factor
and oncogene Snail1 (Sna1) is directly induced by Shh pathway activity in GCPs,
murine medulloblastomas, and human medulloblastoma cells. Enforced expression of 
Sna1 was sufficient to induce GCPs and medulloblastoma cell proliferation in the 
absence of Shh/Gli1 exposure. In addition, enforced expression of Sna1 increased 
transformation of medulloblastoma cells in vitro and in vivo. Analysis of
potential Sna1 targets in neural cells revealed a novel Sna1 target, N-Myc, a
transcription factor known to play a role in Shh-mediated GCP proliferation and
medulloblastoma formation. We found that Sna1 directly induced transcription of
N-Myc in human medulloblastoma cells and that depletion of N-Myc ablated the
Sna1-induced proliferation and transformation. Taken together, these results
provide further insight into the mechanism of Shh-induced transformation of
neural progenitor cells and suggest that induction of Sna1 may serve to amplify
the oncogenic potential of Shh pathway activation through N-Myc induction.

PMCID: PMC3412689
PMID: 21646478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;47(1):99-107. doi: 10.1530/JME-10-0177.

Organization of the Indian hedgehog--parathyroid hormone-related protein system
in the postnatal growth plate.

Chau M(1), Forcinito P, Andrade AC, Hegde A, Ahn S, Lui JC, Baron J, Nilsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Cartilage Unit, Center for Molecular Medicine and Division of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Womens and Childrens Health, Karolinska 
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

In embryonic growth cartilage, Indian hedgehog (Ihh) and parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) participate in a negative feedback loop that
regulates chondrocyte differentiation. Postnatally, this region undergoes major
structural and functional changes. To explore the organization of the IhhPTHrP
system in postnatal growth plate, we microdissected growth plates of 7-day-old
rats into their constituent zones and assessed expression of genes participating 
in the hPTHrP feedback loop. Ihh, Patched 1, Smoothened, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and
Pthr1 were expressed in regions analogous to the expression domains in embryonic 
growth cartilage. However, PTHrP was expressed in resting zone cartilage, a site 
that differs from the embryonic source, the periarticular cells. We then used
mice in which lacZ has replaced coding sequences of Gli1 and thus serves as a
marker for active hedgehog signaling. At 1, 4, 8, and 12 weeks of age, lacZ
expression was detected in a pattern analogous to that of embryonic cartilage.
The findings support the hypothesis that the embryonic IhhPTHrP feedback loop is
maintained in the postnatal growth plate except that the source of PTHrP has
shifted to a more proximal location in the resting zone.

PMID: 21642420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020271. Epub 2011 May 25.

GLI1 confers profound phenotypic changes upon LNCaP prostate cancer cells that
include the acquisition of a hormone independent state.

Nadendla SK(1), Hazan A, Ward M, Harper LJ, Moutasim K, Bianchi LS, Naase M,
Ghali L, Thomas GJ, Prowse DM, Philpott MP, Neill GW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular
Science, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, United Kingdom.

The GLI (GLI1/GLI2) transcription factors have been implicated in the development
and progression of prostate cancer although our understanding of how they
actually contribute to the biology of these common tumours is limited. We
observed that GLI reporter activity was higher in normal (PNT-2) and tumourigenic
(DU145 and PC-3) androgen-independent cells compared to androgen-dependent LNCaP 
prostate cancer cells and, accordingly, GLI mRNA levels were also elevated.
Ectopic expression of GLI1 or the constitutively active <U+0394>NGLI2 mutant induced a
distinct cobblestone-like morphology in LNCaP cells that, regarding the former,
correlated with increased GLI2 as well as expression of the basal/stem-like
markers CD44, ß1-integrin, <U+0394>Np63 and BMI1, and decreased expression of the
luminal marker AR (androgen receptor). LNCaP-GLI1 cells were viable in the
presence of the AR inhibitor bicalutamide and gene expression profiling revealed 
that the transcriptome of LNCaP-GLI1 cells was significantly closer to DU145 and 
PC-3 cells than to control LNCaP-pBP (empty vector) cells, as well as identifying
LCN2/NGAL as a highly induced transcript which is associated with hormone
independence in breast and prostate cancer. Functionally, LNCaP-GLI1 cells
displayed greater clonal growth and were more invasive than control cells but
they did not form colonies in soft agar or prostaspheres in suspension suggesting
that they do not possess inherent stem cell properties. Moreover, targeted
suppression of GLI1 or GLI2 with siRNA did not reverse the transformed phenotype 
of LNCaP-GLI1 cells nor did double GLI1/GLI2 knockdowns activate AR expression in
DU145 or PC-3 cells. As such, early targeting of the GLI oncoproteins may hinder 
progression to a hormone independent state but a more detailed understanding of
the mechanisms that maintain this phenotype is required to determine if their
inhibition will enhance the efficacy of anti-hormonal therapy through the
induction of a luminal phenotype and increased dependency upon AR function.

PMCID: PMC3102098
PMID: 21633508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;71(11):4002-14. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3738.

Hedgehog overexpression is associated with stromal interactions and predicts for 
poor outcome in breast cancer.

O'Toole SA(1), Machalek DA, Shearer RF, Millar EK, Nair R, Schofield P, McLeod D,
Cooper CL, McNeil CM, McFarland A, Nguyen A, Ormandy CJ, Qiu MR, Rabinovich B,
Martelotto LG, Vu D, Hannigan GE, Musgrove EA, Christ D, Sutherland RL, Watkins
DN, Swarbrick A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW,
Australia.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in several malignancies but its
clinical significance in breast cancer is unclear. In a cohort of 279 patients
with invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast, expression of Hh ligand was
significantly associated with increased risk of metastasis, breast
cancer-specific death, and a basal-like phenotype. A paracrine signature,
encompassing high epithelial Hh ligand and high stromal Gli1, was an independent 
predictor for overall survival in multivariate analysis. In 2 independent
histological progression series (n = 301), Hh expression increased with atypia.
Hh ligand overexpression in a mouse model of basal breast cancer increased
growth, induced a poorly differentiated phenotype, accelerated metastasis, and
reduced survival. A stromal requirement for these effects was supported by the
lack of similar Hh-mediated changes in vitro, and by stromal-specific expression 
of Hh target genes in vivo. Furthermore, inhibition of Hh ligand with a
monoclonal antibody (5E1) inhibited tumor growth and metastasis. These data
suggest that epithelial-stromal Hh signaling, driven by ligand expression in
carcinoma cells, promotes breast cancer growth and metastasis. Blockade of Hh
signaling to peritumoral stromal cells may represent a novel therapeutic approach
in some basal-like breast cancers.

PMID: 21632555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Oncogene. 2011 Dec 8;30(49):4874-86. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.195. Epub 2011 May 30.

ABCG2 is a direct transcriptional target of hedgehog signaling and involved in
stroma-induced drug tolerance in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Singh RR(1), Kunkalla K, Qu C, Schlette E, Neelapu SS, Samaniego F, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. rsingh@mdanderson.org

Successful treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is frequently
hindered by the development of resistance to conventional chemotherapy resulting 
in disease relapse and high mortality. High expression of antiapoptotic and/or
drug transporter proteins induced by oncogenic signaling pathways has been
implicated in the development of chemoresistance in cancer. Previously, our
studies showed that high expression of adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette
drug transporter ABCG2 in DLBCL correlated inversely with disease- and
failure-free survival. In this study, we have implicated activated hedgehog (Hh) 
signaling pathway as a key factor behind high ABCG2 expression in DLBCL through
direct upregulation of ABCG2 gene transcription. We have identified a single
binding site for GLI transcription factors in the ABCG2 promoter and established 
its functionality using luciferase reporter, site-directed mutagenesis and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays. Furthermore, in DLBCL tumor samples,
significantly high ABCG2 and GLI1 levels were found in DLBCL tumors with lymph
node involvement in comparison with DLBCL tumor cells collected from pleural
and/or peritoneal effusions. This suggests a role for the stromal
microenvironment in maintaining high levels of ABCG2 and GLI1. Accordingly, in
vitro co-culture of DLBCL cells with HS-5 stromal cells increased ABCG2 mRNA and 
protein levels by paracrine activation of Hh signaling. In addition to ABCG2,
co-culture of DLBCL cells with HS-5 cells also resulted in increase expression of
the antiapoptotic proteins BCL2, BCL-xL and BCL2A1 and in induced chemotolerance 
to doxorubicin and methotrexate, drugs routinely used for the treatment of DLBCL.
Similarly, activation of Hh signaling in DLBCL cell lines with recombinant Shh
N-terminal peptide resulted in increased expression of BCL2 and ABCG2 associated 
with increased chemotolerance. Finally, functional inhibition of ABCG2 drug
efflux activity with fumitremorgin C or inhibition of Hh signaling with
cyclopamine-KAAD abrogated the stroma-induced chemotolerance suggesting that
targeting ABCG2 and Hh signaling may have therapeutic value in overcoming
chemoresistance in DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC3165099
PMID: 21625222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011 Dec 1;57(6):930-8. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23174. Epub 2011
May 25.

Hedgehog pathway activity in pediatric embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma and
undifferentiated sarcoma: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

Pressey JG(1), Anderson JR, Crossman DK, Lynch JC, Barr FG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. jpressey@uab.edu

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is
implicated widely in both pediatric and adult malignancies. Inactivation of the
Hh regulator PTCH is responsible for the Gorlin cancer predisposition syndrome.
The spectrum of tumors found in Gorlin Syndrome includes basal cell carcinoma,
medulloblastoma, and rarely, rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). A previous report utilizing 
in situ hybridization has provided initial evidence for the expression of Hh
targets GLI1 and PTCH in RMS tumors.
PROCEDURE: To investigate the role of Hh pathway signaling in pediatric RMS and
undifferentiated sarcoma (US) tumors, the expression of Hh pathway targets GLI1
and PTCH was measured. RNA was extracted from archival human tumor specimens
collected from pediatric patients enrolled on Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study
III and IV, and subjected to quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction.
RESULTS: Expression of GLI1 with or without PTCH was detected in substantial
subsets of embryonal RMS (ERMS) and US tumors but only rarely in alveolar RMS
tumors. Neither PTCH mutations nor activating SMO mutations were detected in ERMS
tumors with high GLI1 expression. Microarray analysis demonstrated relative
overexpression of downstream Hh targets in ERMS tumors with high or intermediate 
GLI1 expression. Unlike a recent report, Hh pathway activity in ERMS tumors did
not correlate with a unique clinical phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support a role for Hh pathway activation in the genesis
of a subset of ERMS and US tumors. Hh signaling may represent a novel therapeutic
target in affected tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3164386
PMID: 21618411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 15;17(14):4682-92. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0975. 
Epub 2011 May 24.

Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic analysis of vismodegib in preclinical models of
mutational and ligand-dependent Hedgehog pathway activation.

Wong H(1), Alicke B, West KA, Pacheco P, La H, Januario T, Yauch RL, de Sauvage
FJ, Gould SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Oncology, Genentech Inc, 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

PURPOSE: Vismodegib (GDC-0449) is a potent and selective inhibitor of the
Hedgehog (Hh) pathway that shows antitumor activity in preclinical models driven 
by mutational or ligand-dependent activation of the Hh pathway. We wished to
characterize the pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) relationship of
vismodegib in both model systems to guide optimal dose and schedule for
vismodegib in the clinic.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Preclinical efficacy and PK/PD studies were carried out with
vismodegib in a Ptch(+/-) allograft model of medulloblastoma exhibiting
mutational activation of the Hh pathway and patient-derived colorectal cancer
(CRC) xenograft models exhibiting ligand-dependent pathway activation. Inhibition
of the hedgehog pathway was related to vismodegib levels in plasma and to
antitumor efficacy using an integrated population-based PK/PD model.
RESULTS: Oral dosing of vismodegib caused tumor regressions in the Ptch(+/-)
allograft model of medulloblastoma at doses =25 mg/kg and tumor growth inhibition
at doses up to 92 mg/kg dosed twice daily in two ligand-dependent CRC models,
D5123, and 1040830. Analysis of Hh pathway activity and PK/PD modeling reveals
that vismodegib inhibits Gli1 with a similar IC(50) in both the medulloblastoma
and D5123 models (0.165 µmol/L ±11.5% and 0.267 µmol/L ±4.83%, respectively).
Pathway modulation was linked to efficacy using an integrated PK/PD model
revealing a steep relationship where > 50% of the activity of vismodegib is
associated with >80% repression of the Hh pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that even small reductions in vismodegib
exposure can lead to large changes in antitumor activity and will help guide
proper dose selection for vismodegib in the clinic.

PMID: 21610148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Development. 2011 Jun;138(12):2533-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.063479.

Regulation of mammalian Gli proteins by Costal 2 and PKA in Drosophila reveals
Hedgehog pathway conservation.

Marks SA(1), Kalderon D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling activates full-length Ci/Gli family transcription factors
and prevents Ci/Gli proteolytic processing to repressor forms. In the absence of 
Hh, Ci/Gli processing is initiated by direct Pka phosphorylation. Despite those
fundamental similarities between Drosophila and mammalian Hh pathways, the
differential reliance on cilia and some key signal transduction components had
suggested a major divergence in the mechanisms that regulate Ci/Gli protein
activities, including the role of the kinesin-family protein Costal 2 (Cos2),
which directs Ci processing in Drosophila. Here, we show that Cos2 binds to three
regions of Gli1, just as for Ci, and that Cos2 functions to silence mammalian
Gli1 in Drosophila in a Hh-regulated manner. Cos2 and the mammalian kinesin Kif7 
can also direct Gli3 and Ci processing in fly, underscoring a fundamental
conserved role for Cos2 family proteins in Hh signaling. We also show that direct
PKA phosphorylation regulates the activity, rather than the proteolysis of Gli in
Drosophilia, and we provide evidence for an analogous action of PKA on Ci.

PMCID: PMC3100709
PMID: 21610030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Oncogene. 2011 Nov 3;30(44):4523-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.163. Epub 2011 May 16.

GLI1-dependent transcriptional repression of CYLD in basal cell carcinoma.

Kuphal S(1), Shaw-Hallgren G, Eberl M, Karrer S, Aberger F, Bosserhoff AK,
Massoumi R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Germany.

CYLD is a deubiquitination enzyme that regulates different cellular processes,
such as cell proliferation and cell survival. Mutation and loss of heterozygosity
of the CYLD gene causes development of cylindromatosis, a benign tumour
originating from the skin. Our study shows that CYLD expression is dramatically
downregulated in basal cell carcinoma (BCC), the most common cancer in humans.
Reduced CYLD expression in basal cell carcinoma was mediated by GLI1-dependent
activation of the transcriptional repressor Snail. Inhibition of GLI1 restored
the CYLD expression-mediated Snail signaling pathway, and caused a significant
delay in the G1 to S phase transition, as well as proliferation. Our data suggest
that GLI1-mediated suppression of CYLD has a significant role in basal cell
carcinoma progression.

PMID: 21577203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2011 Jun;70(6):430-7. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31821b94db.

GLI2 is a potential therapeutic target in pediatric medulloblastoma.

Buczkowicz P(1), Ma J, Hawkins C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Canada.

To determine whether the zinc finger transcription factors GLI1 to GLI3 and
suppressor of fused (SUFU) components of the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway may
be prognostic markers and potential therapeutic targets in pediatric
medulloblastoma (MB), we investigated the relationship of the expression of these
proteins to prognosis in the MB of 124 patients who had undergone surgery at the 
Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Ontario, Canada). The expressions of GLI1 (p
= 0.011) and GLI2 (p = 0.003), but not of GLI3 (p = 0.774) or SUFU (p = 0.137),
in the MB were associated with a worse overall survival by Kaplan-Meier analysis.
Overall survival of patients positive for GLI1 and GLI2 was 6.01 ± 0.85 years and
5.27 ± 1.44 years, respectively, versus 10.11 ± 1.52 years and 10.18 ± 0.22 years
for patients negative for GLI1 and GLI2, respectively. Knockdown of GLI2 in 3 MB 
cell lines resulted in decreased cell number and viability, as determined by the 
MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay;
knockdown of GLI1 had no effect. The decrease in cell number with GLI2 knockdown 
was caused by G0 cell cycle arrest; there was no induction of apoptosis. These
results suggest that targeting the Sonic hedgehog pathway in positive patients
may be a useful adjuvant therapeutic strategy for MB.

PMID: 21572341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4454-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2313. Epub
2011 May 12.

Hedgehog-producing cancer cells respond to and require autocrine Hedgehog
activity.

Singh S(1), Wang Z, Liang Fei D, Black KE, Goetz JA, Tokhunts R, Giambelli C,
Rodriguez-Blanco J, Long J, Lee E, Briegel KJ, Bejarano PA, Dmitrovsky E,
Capobianco AJ, Robbins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; Sylvester Cancer Center; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Braman Family Breast Cancer Institute, Miller School of
Medicine, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida 33136,
USA.

A number of Smoothened (SMO) pathway antagonists are currently undergoing
clinical trials as anticancer agents. These drugs are proposed to attenuate tumor
growth solely through inhibition of Hedgehog (HH), which is produced in tumor
cells but acts on tumor stromal cells. The pivotal argument underlying this model
is that the growth-inhibitory properties of SMO antagonists on HH-producing
cancer cells are due to their off-target effects. Here, we show that the
tumorigenic properties of such lung cancer cells depend on their intrinsic level 
of HH activity. Notably, reducing HH signaling in these tumor cells decreases HH 
target gene expression. Taken together, these results question the dogma that
autocrine HH signaling plays no role in HH-dependent cancers, and does so without
using SMO antagonists.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3809996
PMID: 21565978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 May 6;8(5):552-65. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.02.021.

Nerve-derived sonic hedgehog defines a niche for hair follicle stem cells capable
of becoming epidermal stem cells.

Brownell I(1), Guevara E, Bai CB, Loomis CA, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 May 6;8(5):459-60.

In adult skin, stem cells in the hair follicle bulge cyclically regenerate the
follicle, whereas a distinct stem cell population maintains the epidermis. The
degree to which all bulge cells have equal regenerative potential is not known.
We found that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) from neurons signals to a population of cells 
in the telogen bulge marked by the Hedgehog response gene Gli1. Gli1-expressing
bulge cells function as multipotent stem cells in their native environment and
repeatedly regenerate the anagen follicle. Shh-responding perineural bulge cells 
incorporate into healing skin wounds where, notably, they can change their
lineage into epidermal stem cells. The perineural niche (including Shh) is
dispensable for follicle contributions to acute wound healing and skin
homeostasis, but is necessary to maintain bulge cells capable of becoming
epidermal stem cells. Thus, nerves cultivate a microenvironment where Shh creates
a molecularly and phenotypically distinct population of hair follicle stem cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3089905
PMID: 21549329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Oral Oncol. 2011 Jun;47(6):504-9. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.03.027. Epub
2011 May 4.

HH/GLI signalling as a new therapeutic target for patients with oral squamous
cell carcinoma.

Yan M(1), Wang L, Zuo H, Zhang Z, Chen W, Mao L, Zhang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital, School 
of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology and Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, 639
Zhizaoju Road, Shanghai 200011, China.

Aberrant activation of HH/GLI has recently been reported in multiple cancer
types, yet its role in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has not been
investigated. In this study, we aimed to determine the role of HH/GLI in OSCC.
Expression of GLI1 and GLI2 was examined in OSCC samples from 136 patients by
immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinicopathology parameters and clinical
outcomes of the patients. Two HH/GLI specific small molecule inhibitors
cyclopamine and GANT61, were used to test the potential role of HH/GLI in OSCC.
We found that GLI2, one of the main transcriptional activators of HH/GLI
signalling, was expressed in 60 (44%) of the 136 OSCC samples and the expression 
was significantly associated with poor clinical outcomes. Only 44% of the
patients whose tumours expressed GLI2 survived at 5years after surgery compared
to 77% of those whose tumours lacked the GLI2 expression (P<0.0001). Both
cyclopamine and GANT61 effectively inhibited GLI expression, slowed cell growth, 
promoted G1 arrest, increased apoptosis and inhibited migration of OSCC cells.
Our results demonstrate that activation of HH/GLI pathway plays an important role
in OSCC progression. Together with the finding that expression of GLI2 is
strongly associated with a poor clinic outcome of OSCC patients, the data suggest
that a subset of OSCC patients may benefit from anti-HH/GLI therapies.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21536478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 13;6(4):e18638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018638.

A novel signaling pathway mediated by the nuclear targeting of C-terminal
fragments of mammalian Patched 1.

Kagawa H(1), Shino Y, Kobayashi D, Demizu S, Shimada M, Ariga H, Kawahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Patched 1 (Ptc1) is a polytopic receptor protein that is essential
for growth and differentiation. Its extracellular domains accept its ligand,
Sonic Hedgehog, while the function of its C-terminal intracellular domain is
largely obscure.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we stably expressed human Ptc1 protein in HeLa
cells and found that it is subjected to proteolytic cleavage at the C-terminus,
resulting in the generation of soluble C-terminal fragments. These fragments
accumulated in the nucleus, while the N-terminal region of Ptc1 remained in the
cytoplasmic membrane fractions. Using an anti-Ptc1 C-terminal domain antibody, we
provide conclusive evidence that C-terminal fragments of endogenous Ptc1
accumulate in the nucleus of C3H10T1/2 cells. Similar nuclear accumulation of
endogenous C-terminal fragments was observed not only in C3H10T1/2 cells but also
in mouse embryonic primary cells. Importantly, the C-terminal fragments of Ptc1
modulate transcriptional activity of Gli1.
CONCLUSIONS: Although Ptc1 protein was originally thought to be restricted to
cell membrane fractions, our findings suggest that its C-terminal fragments can
function as an alternative signal transducer that is directly transported to the 
cell nucleus.

PMCID: PMC3076429
PMID: 21533246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Hum Pathol. 2011 Nov;42(11):1643-52. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.023. Epub
2011 Apr 29.

Glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3, a hedgehog transcription factor, is
highly expressed in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells of classical Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Greaves WO(1), Kim JE, Singh RR, Drakos E, Kunkalla K, Sánchez-Espiridión B,
Garcia JF, Medeiros LJ, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The hedgehog signaling pathway has been shown to play a pathogenic role in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and anaplastic large cell lymphoma, but has not
been assessed in classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Glioma-associated oncogene
homologues 1, 2, and 3 are transcriptional effectors of the hedgehog pathway. In 
this study, we first used real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction to
investigate the expressions of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 in 3 classical Hodgkin
lymphoma cell lines. GLI1 and GLI2 were variably expressed, but GLI3 was highly
expressed in all cell lines. We then used immunohistochemistry to assess
glioma-associated oncogene homologues 1, 2, and 3 in 39 classical Hodgkin
lymphoma patient samples. Glioma-associated oncogene homologues 1 and 2 were
weakly to variably expressed in a subset of classical Hodgkin lymphoma patient
samples. In contrast, glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 showed strong,
uniform nuclear expression in virtually all Hodgkin/Reed-Stenberg cells. We then 
performed an immunohistochemical survey of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3
expression in 13 cases of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and 218
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Most other lymphoma types showed variable or no expression
of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3, with a minor subset of cases of
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, ALK-positive and ALK-negative
anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable with features
intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and classical Hodgkin lymphoma
showing a glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 staining pattern
indistinguishable from classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Our data provide a rationale
to further investigate the biologic significance of glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 3 in classical Hodgkin lymphoma biology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3165071
PMID: 21531006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Prostate. 2011 Dec;71(16):1711-22. doi: 10.1002/pros.21388. Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Active sonic hedgehog signaling between androgen independent human prostate
cancer cells and normal/benign but not cancer-associated prostate stromal cells.

Shigemura K(1), Huang WC, Li X, Zhau HE, Zhu G, Gotoh A, Fujisawa M, Xie J,
Marshall FF, Chung LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a pivotal role in
stromal-epithelial interaction during normal development but its role in
tumor-stromal interaction during carcinogenic progression is less well defined.
Since hormone refractory prostate cancer with bone metastasis is difficult to
treat, it is crucial to investigate how androgen independent (AI) human prostate 
cancer cells communicate with their associated stroma.
METHODS: Shh and its target transcription factor, Gli1 mRNA, were assessed by
RT-PCR and/or quantitative RT-PCR in co-cultured cell recombinants comprised of
AI C4-2 either with NPF (prostate fibroblasts from normal/benign prostate gland) 
or CPF (cancer-associated stromal fibroblasts) under Shh/cyclopamine (a hedgehog 
signaling inhibitor) treatment. Human bone marrow stromal (HS27A) cells were used
as controls. In vivo investigation was performed by checking serum PSA and
immunohistochemical staining for the apoptosis-associated M30 gene in mice
bearing chimeric C4-2/NPF tumors.
RESULTS: We found that (1) Shh has minimal growth-stimulating effects on prostate
cancer cells, but it stimulated the growth of NPF but not CPF; (2) active Shh
signaling was found between AI C4-2 cells and NPF but not CPF; and (3)
osteonectin (ON) is a Gli1 target gene in NPF and not in CPF, and ON
up-regulation in NPF can be blocked by cyclopamine
CONCLUSIONS: Based on co-culture and chimeric tumor models, active Shh-mediated
signaling was demonstrated between AI prostate cancer and NPF in a paracrine- and
tumor progression-dependent manner. Our study suggests that drugs like
cyclopamine that interfere with Shh signaling could be beneficial in preventing
AI progression in prostate cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3680511
PMID: 21520153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):166-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.047. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

A novel mutation of the PTCH1 gene activates the Shh/Gli signaling pathway in a
Chinese family with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.

Zhang T(1), Chen M, Lü Y, Xing Q, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China.

OBJECTIVE: Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is an autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by a predisposition to neoplasms and developmental
abnormalities. Mutation of the PTCH1 gene, which is considered to be responsible 
for NBCCS, was investigated in a Chinese NBCCS family in this study.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was isolated from blood samples of all eight living
individuals in this family. Mutation analysis of PTCH1 was done by amplified
polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing. Biophysical predictions of the
altered protein were made using various bioinformatics tools. To determine the
action of the mutated protein, the expression of Gli1 and Gli2 was investigated
by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: A novel PTCH1 mutation at 897G<U+2192>A in exon4 was identified in all four
affected members. This mutation was not found in any unaffected members of this
family or in 100 unrelated healthy Chinese people. The mutation causes amino acid
replacement 237E<U+2192>K in the first large extracellular loop of the PTCH1 protein
which is required for Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) binding. This mutation changes the
protein's biochemical properties and protein activity, resulting in subsequent
activation of transcription factors, Gli1 and Gli2, in the Shh/Gli signaling
pathway. Immunohistochemistry showed overexpression of Gli1 and Gli2 in the
keratocystic odontogenic tumor (KCOT) tissues.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21514272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Pathol. 2011 Jun;224(2):169-79. doi: 10.1002/path.2880. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Role of GLI2 in the growth of human osteosarcoma.

Nagao H(1), Ijiri K, Hirotsu M, Ishidou Y, Yamamoto T, Nagano S, Takizawa T,
Nakashima K, Komiya S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Japan.

The Hedgehog pathway functions as an organizer in embryonic development. Aberrant
activation of the Hedgehog pathway has been reported in various types of
malignant tumours. The GLI2 transcription factor is a key mediator of Hedgehog
pathway but its contribution to neoplasia is poorly understood. To establish the 
role of GLI2 in osteosarcoma, we examined its expression by real-time PCR using
biopsy tissues. To examine the function of GLI2, we evaluated the growth of
osteosarcoma cells and their cell cycle after GLI2 knockdown. To study the effect
of GLI2 activation, we examined mesenchymal stem cell growth and the cell cycle
after forced expression of GLI2. We found that GLI2 was aberrantly over-expressed
in human osteosarcoma biopsy specimens. GLI2 knockdown by RNA interferences
prevented osteosarcoma growth and anchorage-independent growth. Knockdown of GLI2
promoted the arrest of osteosarcoma cells in G(1) phase and was accompanied by
reduced protein expression of the cell cycle accelerators cyclin D1, SKP2 and
phosphorylated Rb. On the other hand, knockdown of GLI2 increased the expression 
of p21(cip1) . In addition, over-expression of GLI2 promoted mesenchymal stem
cell proliferation and accelerated their cell cycle progression. Finally,
evaluation of mouse xenograft models showed that GLI2 knockdown inhibited the
growth of osteosarcoma in nude mice. Our findings suggest that inhibition of GLI2
may represent an effective therapeutic approach for patients with osteosarcoma.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21506130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Br J Cancer. 2011 May 10;104(10):1575-86. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.133. Epub 2011
Apr 19.

Targeting GLI1 expression in human inflammatory breast cancer cells enhances
apoptosis and attenuates migration.

Thomas ZI(1), Gibson W, Sexton JZ, Aird KM, Ingram SM, Aldrich A, Lyerly HK, Devi
GR, Williams KP.

Author information: 
(1)Biomanufacturing Research Institute and Technology Enterprise, Durham, North
Carolina Central University, Durham, NC 27707, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast
cancer with distinct molecular profiles. Gene expression profiling previously
identified sonic hedgehog (SHH) as part of a gene signature that is
differentially regulated in IBC patients.
METHODS: The effects of reducing GLI1 levels on protein expression, cell
proliferation, apoptosis and migration were determined by immunoblots, MTT assay,
Annexin-V/PI assay and conventional and automated cell migration assays.
RESULTS: Evaluation of a panel of breast cancer cell lines revealed elevated GLI1
expression, typically a marker for hedgehog-pathway activation, in a
triple-negative, highly invasive IBC cell line, SUM149 and its isogenic-derived
counterpart rSUM149 that has acquired resistance to ErbB1/2 targeting strategies.
Downregulation of GLI1 expression in SUM149 and rSUM149 by small interfering RNA 
or a small molecule GLI1 inhibitor resulted in decreased proliferation and
increased apoptosis. Further, GLI1 suppression in these cell lines significantly 
inhibited cell migration as assessed by a wound-healing assay compared with
MCF-7, a non-invasive cell line with low GLI1 expression. A novel high-content
migration assay allowed us to quantify multiple effects of GLI1 silencing
including significant decreases in cell distance travelled and linearity of
movement.
CONCLUSION: Our data reveal a role for GLI1 in IBC cell proliferation, survival
and migration, which supports the feasibility of targeting GLI1 as a novel
therapeutic strategy for IBC patients.

PMCID: PMC3101910
PMID: 21505458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 11;6(4):e18434. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018434.

Identification of RegIV as a novel GLI1 target gene in human pancreatic cancer.

Wang F(1), Xu L, Guo C, Ke A, Hu G, Xu X, Mo W, Yang L, Huang Y, He S, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2011;6(4). doi:10.1371/annotation/e8ca8d86-aa97-4951-8359-f8943c1dd935.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: GLI1 is the key transcriptional factor in the Hedgehog
signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer. RegIV is associated with regeneration,
and cell growth, survival, adhesion and resistance to apoptosis. We aimed to
study RegIV expression in pancreatic cancer and its relationship to GLI1.
METHODS: GLI1 and RegIV expression were evaluated in tumor tissue and adjacent
normal tissues of pancreatic cancer patients and 5 pancreatic cancer cell lines
by qRT-PCR, Western blot, and immunohistochemistry (IHC), and the correlation
between them. The GLI1-shRNA lentiviral vector was constructed and transfected
into PANC-1, and lentiviral vector containing the GLI1 expression sequence was
constructed and transfected into BxPC-3. GLI1 and RegIV expression were evaluated
by qRT-PCR and Western blot. Finally we demonstrated RegIV to be the target of
GLI1 by chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSA).
RESULTS: The results of IHC and qRT-PCR showed that RegIV and GLI1 expression was
higher in pancreatic cancer tissues versus adjacent normal tissues (p<0.001).
RegIV expression correlated with GLI1 expression in these tissues (R<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.795,
p<0.0001). These results were verified for protein (R<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.939, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.018) and
mRNA expression (R<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.959, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.011) in 5 pancreatic cancer cell lines. RegIV
mRNA and protein expression was decreased (94.7±0.3%, 84.1±0.5%; respectively)
when GLI1 was knocked down (82.1±3.2%, 76.7±2.2%; respectively) by the RNAi
technique. GLI1 overexpression in mRNA and protein level (924.5±5.3%, 362.1±3.5%;
respectively) induced RegIV overexpression (729.1±4.3%, 339.0±3.7%;
respectively). Moreover, CHIP and EMSA assays showed GLI1 protein bound to RegIV 
promotor regions (GATCATCCA) in pancreatic cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: GLI1 promotes RegIV transcription by binding to the RegIV gene
promoter in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3073946
PMID: 21494603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Head Neck. 2012 Jan;34(1):104-12. doi: 10.1002/hed.21696. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Hh-Gli signaling pathway activity in oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Leovic D(1), Sabol M, Ozretic P, Musani V, Car D, Marjanovic K, Zubcic V, Sabol
I, Sikora M, Grce M, Glavas-Obrovac L, Levanat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Osijek, Croatia.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to examine the role of Hh-Gli signaling in 
oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The role of this signaling 
pathway in SCC formation has not yet been elucidated.
METHODS: Sixty-four tissue and blood samples were collected from 60 patients with
SCC, all tobacco and alcohol users. An additional six buccal mucosa tissue
samples were collected from nonsmokers and nondrinkers as control tissue.
RESULTS: Hedgehog-Gli pathway components were associated with clinical and
pathologic features. Broders' grade and N stage were associated with higher Ptch1
and lower Gli1 expression. Tumor stage was negatively associated with Smo
expression, and tumor size was positively associated with p16 expression. Ptch1
and Shh were frequently detected in the surrounding stroma. Ptch1 was found to be
correlated with p16 expression, as well as with survivin expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The signaling pathway is activated in SCC and inducible in vitro by 
Shh protein.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21484923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 31;6(3):e18330. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018330.

Hedgehog inhibition promotes a switch from Type II to Type I cell death receptor 
signaling in cancer cells.

Kurita S(1), Mott JL, Cazanave SC, Fingas CD, Guicciardi ME, Bronk SF, Roberts
LR, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Gores GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States of America.

TRAIL is a promising therapeutic agent for human malignancies. TRAIL often
requires mitochondrial dysfunction, referred to as the Type II death receptor
pathway, to promote cytotoxicity. However, numerous malignant cells are TRAIL
resistant due to inhibition of this mitochondrial pathway. Using
cholangiocarcinoma cells as a model of TRAIL resistance, we found that Hedgehog
signaling blockade sensitized these cancer cells to TRAIL cytotoxicity
independent of mitochondrial dysfunction, referred to as Type I death receptor
signaling. This switch in TRAIL requirement from Type II to Type I death receptor
signaling was demonstrated by the lack of functional dependence on Bid/Bim and
Bax/Bak, proapoptotic components of the mitochondrial pathway. Hedgehog signaling
modulated expression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP), which serves to
repress the Type I death receptor pathway. siRNA targeted knockdown of XIAP
mimics sensitization to mitochondria-independent TRAIL killing achieved by
Hedgehog inhibition. Regulation of XIAP expression by Hedgehog signaling is
mediated by the glioma-associated oncogene 2 (GLI2), a downstream transcription
factor of Hedgehog. In conclusion, these data provide additional mechanisms
modulating cell death by TRAIL and suggest Hedgehog inhibition as a therapeutic
approach for TRAIL-resistant neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC3069071
PMID: 21483830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Med Rep. 2010 Nov-Dec;3(6):965-70. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2010.375. Epub 2010 Sep
27.

Evaluation of glioma-associated oncogene 1 expression and its correlation with
the expression of sonic hedgehog, E-cadherin and S100a4 in human hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Zheng X(1), Yao Y, Xu Q, Tu K, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of the
Medical College of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to analyze the mRNA and protein expression of
glioma-associated oncogene 1 (Gli1) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its
correlation with sonic hedgehog (Shh), one of the ligands of hedgehog (Hh)
signaling, and two epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers, E-cadherin
and S100a4. We also investigated the potential crosstalk between Hh signaling and
EMT in HCC. Paired HCC and normal tumor-adjacent tissues were freshly collected
from 30 primary HCC patients. Gli1 expression at both the mRNA and protein level 
was examined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry. The protein expression of Shh, E-cadherin and S100a4 was
evaluated by immunohistochemistry to identify correlations with Gli1. The mRNA
and protein expression of Gli1 was significantly up-regulated in the HCC tumor
tissues compared to the normal tumor-adjacent tissues (P<0.01, respectively).
Gli1 protein expression in HCC was closely correlated with liver cirrhosis
(r=0.460, P=0.011<0.05), intrahepatic metastases (r=0.399, P=0.029<0.05), portal 
vein invasion (r=0.367, P=0.046<0.05), high Edmonson-Steiner classification
(r=0.391, P=0.032<0.05) and advanced TNM stage (r=0.416, P=0.022<0.05). In HCC
tissues, Gli1 protein expression was positively correlated with Shh (r=0.584,
P=0.001<0.05) and S100a4 (r=0.49, P=0.006<0.05), and negatively correlated with
E-cadherin (r=-0.439, P=0.015<0.05). Gli1 was found to be up-regulated in HCC
tissues and closely correlated with clinicopathological characteristics,
indicating the enhanced metastatic potential of HCC. Furthermore, the increased
expression of Gli1 in HCC cells may be attributed to Shh produced aberrantly by
the cells themselves. Finally, Gli1 may play an important role in HCC invasion
and metastasis by inducing EMT.

PMID: 21472341  [PubMed]


333. Neoplasia. 2011 Apr;13(4):374-85.

Identification and characterization of KCASH2 and KCASH3, 2 novel Cullin3
adaptors suppressing histone deacetylase and Hedgehog activity in
medulloblastoma.

De Smaele E(1), Di Marcotullio L, Moretti M, Pelloni M, Occhione MA, Infante P,
Cucchi D, Greco A, Pietrosanti L, Todorovic J, Coni S, Canettieri G, Ferretti E, 
Bei R, Maroder M, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Medulloblastoma is the most common pediatric malignant brain tumor, arising from 
aberrant cerebellar precursors' development, a process mainly controlled by
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. Histone deacetylase HDAC1 has been recently
shown to modulate Hh signaling, deacetylating its effectors Gli1/2 and enhancing 
their transcriptional activity. Therefore, HDAC may represent a potential
therapeutic target for Hh-dependent tumors, but still little information is
available on the physiological mechanisms of HDAC regulation. The putative tumor 
suppressor REN(KCTD11) acts through ubiquitination-dependent degradation of
HDAC1, thereby affecting Hh activity and medulloblastoma growth. We identify and 
characterize here two REN(KCTD11) homologues, defining a new family of proteins
named KCASH, as "KCTD containing, Cullin3 adaptor, suppressor of Hedgehog."
Indeed, the novel genes (KCASH2(KCTD21) and KCASH3(KCTD6)) share with REN(KCTD11)
a number of features, such as a BTB domain required for the formation of a
Cullin3 ubiquitin ligase complex and HDAC1 ubiquitination and degradation
capability, suppressing the acetylation-dependent Hh/Gli signaling. Expression of
KCASH2 and -3 is observed in cerebellum, whereas epigenetic silencing and allelic
deletion are observed in human medulloblastoma. Rescuing KCASHs expression
reduces the Hedgehog-dependent medulloblastoma growth, suggesting that loss of
members of this novel family of native HDAC inhibitors is crucial in sustaining
Hh pathway-mediated tumorigenesis. Accordingly, they might represent a promising 
class of endogenous "agents" through which this pathway may be targeted.

PMCID: PMC3071086
PMID: 21472142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2011 Sep;165(1):109-22. doi: 10.1007/s12010-011-9237-8. 
Epub 2011 Apr 6.

The binding of hepatitis B virus X protein to glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 1 and its biological characterization in vitro.

Jo BB(1), Jeong MS, Park SY, Cheong J, Jang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Jangjeon-dong, Geumjeong-gu, Busan, 609-735, South Korea.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (HBx) is a 17-kDa transcriptional coactivator
that plays a significant role in the regulation of genes involved in inflammation
and cell survival. It has been known to be involved in the development of liver
cancer and alteration of the cellular HBx level may influence the pathogenesis of
HBV-induced liver diseases. The transcription factor GLI1, a member of the
glioma-associated oncogene homologue (GLI) subfamily of Krüppel-like zinc finger 
proteins is involved in signal transduction within the hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway, which is involved in the development of many human malignancies. GLI
activation is important for cell proliferation and anti-apoptosis in various
cancers. To investigate whether the transcriptional coactivator HBx binds to the 
zinc finger transcription factor GLI1, recombinant HBx and GLI1 were isolated.
Expression and purification of the HBx and GLI1 proteins were successfully
performed in Escherichia coli. The binding of HBx to GLI1 was detected by surface
plasmon resonance spectroscopy (BIAcore), fluorescence measurement, and a
His-tagged pull-down experiment. After measuring the fluorescence emission
spectra of purified HBx and GLI1, it was found that the interaction of these
proteins is accompanied by significant conformational changes in one or both.
This study provides important clues for the structural identification of signal
transduction pathways involving the HBx and GLI1 proteins.

PMID: 21468632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2011 Jun;28(5):437-49. doi: 10.1007/s10585-011-9382-z. Epub 
2011 Mar 27.

Gli1 enhances migration and invasion via up-regulation of MMP-11 and promotes
metastasis in ERa negative breast cancer cell lines.

Kwon YJ(1), Hurst DR, Steg AD, Yuan K, Vaidya KS, Welch DR, Frost AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Gli1 is an established oncogene and its expression in Estrogen Receptor (ER) a
negative and triple negative breast cancers is predictive of a poor prognosis;
however, the biological functions regulated by Gli1 in breast cancer have not
been extensively evaluated. Herein, Gli1 was over-expressed or down-regulated (by
RNA interference and by expression of the repressor form of Gli3) in the ERa
negative, human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and SUM1315. Reduced
expression of Gli1 in these two cell lines resulted in a decrease in migration
and invasion. Gli1 over-expression increased the migration and invasion of
MDA-MB-231 cells with a corresponding increase in expression of MMP-11. Silencing
MMP-11 in MDA-MB-231 cells that over-expressed Gli1 abrogated the Gli1-induced
enhancement of migration and invasion. Sustained suppression of Gli1 expression
decreased growth of MDA-MB-231 in vitro by increasing apoptosis and decreasing
proliferation. In addition, silencing of Gli1 reduced the numbers and sizes of
pulmonary metastases of MDA-MB-231 in an in vivo experimental metastasis assay.
In summary, Gli1 promotes the growth, survival, migration, invasion and
metastasis of ERa negative breast cancer. Additionally, MMP-11 is up-regulated by
Gli1 and mediates the migration and invasion induced by Gli1 in MDA-MB-231.

PMCID: PMC3081062
PMID: 21442356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Dent Res. 2011 Apr;90(4):483-8. doi: 10.1177/0022034510391797.

Sonic hedgehog stimulates proliferation of human periodontal ligament stem cells.

Martínez C(1), Smith PC, Rodriguez JP, Palma V.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Center for Genomics of the Cell,
Las Palmeras 3425, Santiago, Chile.

Regulation of cell renewal in the periodontium is a critical cell function that
has not been clarified. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted signaling molecule
that plays a key role during development and adult tissue homeostasis. In the
present study, we have analyzed the role played by Shh in human periodontal
ligament stem cell (HPLSC) proliferation. HPLSC were isolated with anti-STRO-1
antibodies. Shh increased the expression of GLI1 and PTC-1 and selectively
stimulated cell proliferation in STRO-1(+) derived from adult periodontal
ligament. Shh components were localized to primary cilia in STRO-1(+) cells after
Shh stimulation. STRO-1(+) also expressed Shh, suggesting an autocrine-regulated 
phenomenon. Thus, we propose that Shh plays a critical role in the regulation of 
cell proliferation in STRO-1(+)/HPLSC.

PMID: 21441223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e17884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017884.

The p53 inhibitor MDM2 facilitates Sonic Hedgehog-mediated tumorigenesis and
influences cerebellar foliation.

Malek R(1), Matta J, Taylor N, Perry ME, Mendrysa SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, United States of America.

Disruption of cerebellar granular neuronal precursor (GNP) maturation can result 
in defects in motor coordination and learning, or in medulloblastoma, the most
common childhood brain tumor. The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathway is important for
GNP proliferation; however, the factors regulating the extent and timing of GNP
proliferation, as well as GNP differentiation and migration are poorly
understood. The p53 tumor suppressor has been shown to negatively regulate the
activity of the Shh effector, Gli1, in neural stem cells; however, the
contribution of p53 to the regulation of Shh signaling in GNPs during cerebellar 
development has not been determined. Here, we exploited a hypomorphic allele of
Mdm2 (Mdm2(puro)), which encodes a critical negative regulator of p53, to alter
the level of wild-type MDM2 and p53 in vivo. We report that mice with reduced
levels of MDM2 and increased levels of p53 have small cerebella with shortened
folia, reminiscent of deficient Shh signaling. Indeed, Shh signaling in
Mdm2-deficient GNPs is attenuated, concomitant with decreased expression of the
Shh transducers, Gli1 and Gli2. We also find that Shh stimulation of GNPs
promotes MDM2 accumulation and enhances phosphorylation at serine 166, a
modification known to increase MDM2-p53 binding. Significantly, loss of MDM2 in
Ptch1(+/-) mice, a model for Shh-mediated human medulloblastoma, impedes
cerebellar tumorigenesis. Together, these results place MDM2 at a major nexus
between the p53 and Shh signaling pathways in GNPs, with key roles in cerebellar 
development, GNP survival, cerebellar foliation, and MB tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3060880
PMID: 21437245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 May;4(5):744-51. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0285. Epub 2011 Mar 24.

Vitamin D3 inhibits hedgehog signaling and proliferation in murine Basal cell
carcinomas.

Tang JY(1), Xiao TZ, Oda Y, Chang KS, Shpall E, Wu A, So PL, Hebert J, Bikle D,
Epstein EH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Redwood
City, CA 94063-5334, USA. tangy@stanford.edu

Constitutive Hedgehog (HH) signaling underlies several human tumors, including
basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Recently, Bijlsma and colleagues reported a new
biologic function for vitamin D3 in suppressing HH signaling in an in vitro model
system. On the basis of that work, we have assessed effects of vitamin D3 on HH
signaling and proliferation of murine BCCs in vitro and in vivo. We find that
indeed in BCC cells, vitamin D3 blocks both proliferation and HH signaling as
assessed by mRNA expression of the HH target gene Gli1. These effects of vitamin 
D3 on Gli1 expression and on BCC cell proliferation are comparable to the effects
of cyclopamine, a known inhibitor of the HH pathway. These results are specific
for vitamin D3, because the precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol and the downstream
products 25-hydroxy vitamin D3 [25(OH)D] and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3
[1,25(OH)(2)D] are considerably less effective in reducing either Gli1 mRNA or
cellular proliferation. Moreover, these effects seem to be independent of the
vitamin D receptor (VDR) because short hairpin RNA knockdown of VDR does not
abrogate the anti-HH effects of D3 despite reducing expression of the VDR target 
gene 24-hydroxylase. Finally, topical vitamin D3 treatment of existing murine BCC
tumors significantly decreases Gli1 and Ki67 staining. Thus, topical vitamin D3
acting via its HH inhibiting effect may hold promise as an effective anti-BCC
agent.

PMCID: PMC3088781
PMID: 21436386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2011;30(4):244-51. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2011.555809. Epub 
2011 Mar 24.

Immunohistochemical characterization of sonic hedgehog and its downstream
signaling molecules during human penile development.

Shehata BM(1), Elmore JM, Bootwala Y, Steelman CK, Bare JB, Shoffeitt CJ, Wang R,
Zhau HE, He D, Zhu G, Chung LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine,
Childrens Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia 30322-1101, USA.
bshehat@emory.edu

Hypospadias is a common congenital anomalies, yet its molecular basis remains
unknown. Recent studies have linked perturbations in the Hedgehog signaling
pathway to hypospadias. However, the expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) has not
been reported during genital development. Immunohistochemical staining for Shh
and its receptors was applied to 10 human fetal penises ranging from 12 to 29
weeks gestation. The intensity of Shh staining was greatest in the urethral
epithelium at 14 weeks gestation, correlating with the time of urethral
tubularization. Results suggest a role for Shh in human male genital development.

PMID: 21434830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Med Oncol. 2012 Jun;29(2):1010-6. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-9899-7. Epub 2011 Mar
19.

Prognostic value of hedgehog signaling pathway in patients with colon cancer.

Xu M(1), Li X, Liu T, Leng A, Zhang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Xiangya Hospital, Central-South University,
Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.

Hedgehog signaling pathway plays an important role in normal mammalian
gastrointestinal development and is implicated in the oncogenesis of various
tumors. However, its correlation with progression and prognosis of colon cancer
has not been well documented. This study was designed to investigate expression
patterns of related proteins in hedgehog signaling pathway in colon cancer to
elucidate its prognostic value in this tumor. Using human colon cancer and their 
corresponding non-diseased colon from 228 patients' biopsies, the expression of
sonic hedgehog, its receptor Patched, and downstream transcription factor Gli1
was investigated by immunohistochemical staining to assess their association with
the clinicopathological characteristics of colon cancer. Disease-free survival
and overall survival were examined by Kaplan-Meier estimates and the log-rank
test. Prognostic factors were determined by multivariate Cox analysis. One
hundred and thirty-eight patients (59.6%) had sonic hedgehog-positive tumors and 
that the disease-free survival (43.5 vs. 73.3%, P < 0.001), and overall survival 
rates (50.7 vs. 88.9%, P < 0.001) of patients with sonic hedgehog-positive tumors
were much lower than those of patients with sonic hedgehog-negative tumors. In
addition, 163 patients (71.5%) had Patched-positive tumors, and the disease-free 
survival (41.7 vs. 76.9%, P < 0.001) and overall survival rates (55.2 vs. 80.0%, 
P = 0.002) of patients with Patched-positive tumors were also lower than those of
patients with Patched-negative tumors. Moreover, positive Gli1 expression had a
bad effect on the disease-free survival (41.9 vs. 73.2%, P < 0.001) and overall
survival rate of patients with colon cancer (50.0 vs. 89.3%, P < 0.001). In a
multivariate analysis, sonic hedgehog, Patched, and Gli1 status were indicators
for poor disease-free survival and overall survival. These results have shown
that the increasing expression of sonic hedgehog, Patched, and Gli1 are
indicators for a poor prognosis in patients with colon cancer. This is the first 
report describing about the relationship between hedgehog signaling pathway and
the prognosis of colon cancer.

PMID: 21424326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jun;50(6):397-408. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20864. Epub
2011 Mar 15.

High-resolution array CGH identifies common mechanisms that drive embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma pathogenesis.

Paulson V(1), Chandler G, Rakheja D, Galindo RL, Wilson K, Amatruda JF, Cameron
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA.

Pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma occurs as two biologically distinct histological
variants, embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS). To identify genomic changes that 
drive ERMS pathogenesis, we used a new array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) platform to examine a specific subset of ERMS tumors, those occurring in
children with clinically defined intermediate-risk disease. The aCGH platform
used has an average probe spacing ~1 kb, and can identify genomic changes with
single gene resolution. Our data suggest that these tumors share a common genomic
program that includes inactivation of a master regulator of the p53 and Rb
pathways, CDKN2A/B, and activation of FGFR4, Ras, and Hedgehog (Hh) signaling.
The CDKN2A/B tumor suppressor is deleted in most patient samples. FGFR4, which
encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, is activated in 20% of tumors, predominantly 
by amplification of mutant, activating FGFR4 alleles. Over 50% of patients had
low-level gains of a region containing the Hh-pathway transcription factor GLI1, 
and a gene expression pattern consistent with Hh-pathway activation. We also
identified intragenic deletions affecting NF1, a tumor suppressor and inhibitor
of Ras, in 15% of tumor samples. Deletion of NF1 and the presence of activating
Ras mutations (in 42% of patients) were mutually exclusive, suggesting NF1 loss
is an alternative and potentially common mechanism of Ras activation in ERMS. Our
data suggest that intermediate-risk ERMS is driven by a common set of genomic
defects, a finding that has important implications for the application of
targeted therapies to improve the treatment of children diagnosed with this
disease.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21412928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 4;6(3):e17687. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017687.

Sonic hedgehog pathway is essential for maintenance of cancer stem-like cells in 
human gastric cancer.

Song Z(1), Yue W, Wei B, Wang N, Li T, Guan L, Shi S, Zeng Q, Pei X, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, General Hospital of Chinese PLA, Beijing,
China.

Abnormal activation of the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway has been described in a
wide variety of human cancers and in cancer stem cells (CSCs), however, the role 
of SHH pathway in gastric CSCs has not been reported. In this study, we
investigated the possibility that abnormal activation of the SHH pathway
maintained the characteristics of gastric CSCs. First, we identified cancer
stem-like cells (CSLCs) from human gastric cancer cell lines (HGC-27, MGC-803 and
MKN-45) using tumorsphere culture. Compared with adherent cells, the floating
tumorsphere cells had more self-renewing capacity and chemoresistance. The cells 
expressing CSCs markers (CD44, CD24 and CD133) were also significantly more in
tumorsphere cells than in adherent cells. More importantly, in vivo xenograft
studies showed that tumors could be generated with 2 x 104 tumorsphere cells,
which was 100-fold less than those required for tumors seeding by adherent cells.
Next, RT-PCR and Western blot showed that the expression levels of Ptch and Gli1 
(SHH pathway target genes) were significantly higher in tumorsphere cells than in
adherent cells. The results of quantitative real-time PCR were similar to those
of RT-PCR and Western blot. Further analysis revealed that SHH pathway blocked by
cyclopamine or 5E1 caused a higher reduction in self-renewing capacity of HGC-27 
tumorsphere cells than that of adherent cells. We also found that SHH pathway
blocking strongly enhanced the efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs in HGC-27
tumorsphere cells in vitro and in vivo but had no significant effect in adherent 
cells. Finally, we isolated the tumorspheres from gastric cancer specimen, these 
cells also had chemoresistance and tumorigenic capacity, and SHH pathway
maintained the gastric CSLCs characteristics of tumorsphere cells from primary
tumor samples. In conclusion, our data suggested that SHH pathway was essential
for maintenance of CSLCs in human gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3048871
PMID: 21394208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Apr 15;11(8):765-8. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

A magnifying glass on glioblastoma stem cell signaling pathways.

Bell D(1), Miele L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson,
MS, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Apr 15;11(8):753-61.

PMID: 21386658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Neurooncol. 2011 Sep;104(3):697-704. doi: 10.1007/s11060-011-0552-2. Epub 2011 
Mar 5.

Role of sonic hedgehog signaling in migration of cell lines established from
CD133-positive malignant glioma cells.

Uchida H(1), Arita K, Yunoue S, Yonezawa H, Shinsato Y, Kawano H, Hirano H,
Hanaya R, Tokimura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1, Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima, 890-8520, Japan.

The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is essential for normal development
and embryogenic morphogenesis. In malignant neoplasms its inappropriate
activation correlates with tumorigenesis, proliferation, and migration. However, 
the role of SHH in infiltrative growth of glioblastoma remains to be elucidated. 
CD133 is a marker of tumor stem cells in glioblastoma, which are thought to play 
important roles in tumorigenesis, drug resistance, and tumor recurrence. We
investigated the role of the SHH signaling pathway in migration of glioblastoma
cell lines derived from CD133-positive cells. Two cell lines, GBM1 and GBM2, were
established from CD133-positive cells sorted on an automagnetic cell separator
from dispersed human glioblastoma cells. Both cell lines exhibited sphere-like
growth in serum-free medium containing growth factor. Expression of patched
(PTCH)-, a receptor of SHH, of smoothened (SMO)-, a 7 transmembrane receptor, and
of GLI1- and GLI2, PTCH cascade signal proteins, was evaluated by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The effects of
recombinant SHH in the medium, and of knockdown of SMO-, GLI1- or GLI2 messenger 
RNA (mRNA) on the migratory ability of neoplastic cells were evaluated by scratch
assays. RT-PCR revealed the presence of PTCH-, SMO-, GLI1-, and GLI2 mRNA in
these cells. Their migratory ability was significantly enhanced (P < 0.05) by
addition of recombinant SHH to the medium. Knockdown of SMO-, GLI1- or GLI2 mRNA 
resulted in significant decrease in the mobility of the neoplastic cells. Our
study suggests that the SHH pathway plays an important role in the migratory
ability of cells derived from CD133-positive human glioblastoma cells.

PMID: 21380601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011 Jul 1;80(3):851-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.01.003. Epub 2011 Mar 4.

Sonic hedgehog signaling protects human hepatocellular carcinoma cells against
ionizing radiation in an autocrine manner.

Chen YJ(1), Lin CP, Hsu ML, Shieh HR, Chao NK, Chao KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is critical to embryogenesis and
resistance to chemotherapy. We aimed to examine the role of Shh signaling in the 
response to radiation of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Response to ionizing radiation therapy (RT) was evaluated 
by clonogenic assay. Quantitative RT-polymerase chain reaction for patched-1
(PTCH-1) expression was performed. Cytosolic accumulation of Shh and nuclear
translocation of Gli-1 were assessed by immunofluorescence. Gli-1 knockdown was
done by RNA interference (RNAi). Immunoprecipitation was performed to detect Shh 
ligand in conditioned medium. Immunofluorescent stain for <U+03B3>-H2AX was used as an
index of DNA double strand breaks (DSB). Expression of proteins related to DNA
damage repair was assessed by Western blotting.
RESULTS: We found that Shh ligand could protect human HCC HA22T and Sk-Hep1 cells
against RT. In HA22T cells, Shh ligand activated the Shh signaling with
upregulation of Shh, PTCH-1, and Gli-1 expression. The nuclear translocation of
Gli-1 further supports the activation of Gli-1. The radioprotection by Shh ligand
was partly blocked by Shh antibody neutralization and was abolished by Gli-1
RNAi, suggesting a critical role of Shh signaling in radiation resistance.
Furthermore, we noted that soluble factors secreted into conditioned medium,
either constitutively or responding to radiation, by HA22T or Sk-Hep1 cells
protected subsequent culturing cells against RT. Immunoprecipitation shows the
presence of Shh peptide in conditioned medium. Intriguingly, antibody
neutralization of Shh ligand or knockdown of Gli-1 reversed the radioprotective
effect of conditioned medium. Furthermore, Shh ligand reduced the RT-induced
phosphorylation of checkpoint kinase 1 and impaired the repair of DNA DSB.
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of Shh signaling protects HCC cells against ionizing
radiation in an autocrine manner. Impairment of DNA damage repair might involve
mechanism of Shh-induced radioresistance. Targeting Shh signaling pathway may be 
a novel strategy to enhance the radioresponse of human HCC cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21377281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;17(8):2071-3. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0211.
Epub 2011 Mar 2.

Targeting the Hedgehog pathway in cancer: can the spines be smoothened?

Ailles L(1), Siu LL.

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Hospital, Ontario Cancer Institute, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;17(8):2502-11.
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;17(8):2512-20.

Aberrant Hedgehog (Hh) pathway signaling has been suggested to play a role in the
development of multiple solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. GDC-0449 is a 
novel first-in-human, first-in-class smoothened (SMO) inhibitor, which has
completed its phase I evaluation and achieved proof of concept in tumors with Hh 
pathway mutations.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21367749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Mar;127(3):1182-90. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3182043a07.

Role of Indian hedgehog signaling in palatal osteogenesis.

Levi B(1), James AW, Nelson ER, Brugmann SA, Sorkin M, Manu A, Longaker MT.

Author information: 
(1)Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery,
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Division, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, Calif., USA. benlevimd@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Cleft lip-cleft palate is a common congenital disability and
represents a large biomedical burden. Through the use of animal models, the
molecular underpinnings of cleft palate are becoming increasingly clear. Indian
hedgehog (Ihh) has been shown to be associated with craniofacial development and 
to be active in the palatine bone. The authors hypothesize that Indian hedgehog
activity plays a role in osteogenesis within the secondary palate and that
defects in this pathway may inhibit osteogenesis of the secondary palate.
METHODS: Palates were isolated from wild-type mice during the period of palate
development (embryonic days 9.5 to 17.5). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction was used for detecting gene expression during osteogenic differentiation
and cellular differentiation (Shh, Ihh, Ptc1, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, Runx2, Alp, and
Col1a1). Next, palates were analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin, aniline blue,
pentachrome, and in situ hybridization to assess osteogenesis of the palatal
shelf and expression of hedgehog pathway genes. Finally, the palates of Indian
hedgehog-null mice were analyzed to determine the effect of genetic deficiency on
palatal development osteogenesis.
RESULTS: Increased Indian hedgehog and osteogenic signaling coincided with
ossification and fusion of the palate in wild-type mice. This included a fivefold
to 150-fold peak in expression of hedgehog elements, including Ihh, at embryonic 
day 15.5 as compared with embryonic day 9.5. Contrarily, loss of Indian hedgehog 
by genetic knockout (Ihh-/-) resulted in decreased secondary palate ossification.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors' results suggest a role for hedgehog signaling during
palatal ossification. The hedgehog pathway is activated during palatal fusion,
and deletion of Indian hedgehog leads to diminished ossification of the secondary
hard palate.

PMCID: PMC3078688
PMID: 21364421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Apr 1;29(10):1326-34. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.3295. Epub 2011
Feb 28.

Glioma-associated oncogene family zinc finger 1 expression and metastasis in
patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma treated with radiation
therapy (RTOG 9003).

Chung CH(1), Dignam JJ, Hammond ME, Klimowicz AC, Petrillo SK, Magliocco A,
Jordan R, Trotti A, Spencer S, Cooper JS, Le QT, Ang KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650
Orleans St, CRB-1 Room 344, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA. cchung11@jhmi.edu

PURPOSE: Glioma-associated oncogene family zinc finger 1 (GLI1) expression was
assessed to determine a potential role of hedgehog (Hh) signaling in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Additional proteins known to be modulated
by Hh signaling, including beta-catenin (CTNNB1) and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), were also assessed to determine the correlation among these
distinct signaling pathways.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Nuclear GLI1 and CTNNB1 expression levels were determined
in tumors from patients enrolled on Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 9003,
a radiation fractionation trial. The results were also correlated with previously
determined EGFR expression. The expression levels were evaluated in relation to
three end points: time to metastasis (TTM), time to disease progression (TDP),
and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: Among 1,068 eligible patients, data on GLI1, CTNNB1, and EGFR were
available in 339, 164, and 300 patients, respectively. Although CTNNB1 expression
did not differentiate prognosis, GLI1 was associated with poorer outcomes,
adjusted for age, TNM stages, and Karnofsky performance score, and the
significant influence persisted in a multivariable analysis (quartile 4 [Q4] v Q1
to Q3: TTM hazard ratio [HR], 2.7; 95% CI, 1.5 to 4.9; TDP HR, 1.6; 95% CI, 1.1
to 2.5; OS HR, 1.9; 95% CI, 1.4 to 2.7). The significance of GLI1 persisted in a 
multivariable analysis that included EGFR expression levels.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that Hh signaling may play an important role in
metastasis and that GLI1 could serve as a marker in HNSCC, but the regulatory
mechanisms and oncogenic significance need further investigation. Risk
classification based on this analysis needs a validation in independent cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3084000
PMID: 21357786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1873-87. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0282. Epub 2011
Apr 5.

Purmorphamine increases DARPP-32 differentiation in human striatal neural stem
cells through the Hedgehog pathway.

El-Akabawy G(1), Medina LM, Jeffries A, Price J, Modo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry,
London, UK.

Transplantation of neural stem cells (NSCs) is a promising therapeutic approach
for Huntington's disease (HD). HD is characterized by a progressive loss of
medium-sized spiny neurons (MSNs) in the striatum. DARPP-32 (dopamine and cyclic 
AMP-regulated phosphoprotein, 32<U+2009>kDa) is expressed in 98% of these MSNs. To
establish an effective cell therapy for HD, the differentiation of human NSCs
into MSNs is essential. Enhancing differentiation of NSCs is therefore an
important aspect to optimize transplant efficacy. A comparison of 5
differentiation protocols indicated that the Hedgehog agonist purmorphamine
(1<U+2009>µM) most significantly increased the neuronal differentiation of a human
striatal NSC line (STROC05). This 3-fold increase in neurons was associated with 
a dramatic reduction in proliferation as well as a decrease in astrocytic
differentiation. A synergistic effect between purmorphamine and cell density even
further increased neuronal differentiation from 20% to 30% within 7 days. Upon
long-term differentiation (21 days), this combined differentiation protocol
tripled the number of DARPP-32 cells (7%) and almost doubled the proportion of
calbindin cells. However, there was no effect on calretinin cells. Differential
expression of positional specification markers (DLX2, MASH1, MEIS2, GSH2, and
NKX2.1) further confirmed the striatal identity of these differentiated cells.
Purmorphamine resulted in a significant upregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway (GLI1 expression). Cyclopamine, an Hh inhibitor, blocked this
effect, indicating that purmorphamine specifically acts through this pathway to
increase neuronal differentiation. These results demonstrate that small synthetic
molecules can play a pivotal role in directing the differentiation of NSCs to
optimize their therapeutic potential in HD.

PMID: 21345011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cancer Sci. 2011 Jun;102(6):1144-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.01912.x. Epub 
2011 Mar 15.

Hypoxia activates the hedgehog signaling pathway in a ligand-independent manner
by upregulation of Smo transcription in pancreatic cancer.

Onishi H(1), Kai M, Odate S, Iwasaki H, Morifuji Y, Ogino T, Morisaki T,
Nakashima Y, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. ohnishi@surg1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is activated in various types of cancer
including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. It has been shown that extremely low 
oxygen tension (below 1% O2) is found in tumor tissue including pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cells (PDAC) and increases the invasiveness of PDAC. To
investigate the contribution of the Hh pathway to hypoxia-induced invasiveness,
we examined how hypoxia affects Hh pathway activation and the invasiveness of
PDAC. In the present study, three human PDAC lines were cultured under normoxic
(20% O2) or hypoxic (1% O2) conditions. Hypoxia upregulated the transcription of 
Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Smoothened (Smo), Gli1 and matrix metalloproteinase9 (MMP9)
and increased the invasiveness of PDAC. Significantly, neither the addition of
recombinant Shh (rhShh) nor the silencing of Shh affected the transcription of
these genes and the invasiveness of PDAC. On the other hand, silencing of Smo
decreased the transcription of Gli1 and MMP9 and PDAC invasiveness. Silencing of 
Gli1 or MMP9 decreased PDAC invasiveness. These results suggest that hypoxia
activates the Hh pathway of PDAC by increasing the transcription of Smo in a
ligand-independent manner and increases PDAC invasiveness.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21338440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Apr 15;11(8):753-61. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

ß-catenin and Gli1 are prognostic markers in glioblastoma.

Rossi M(1), Magnoni L, Miracco C, Mori E, Tosi P, Pirtoli L, Tini P, Oliveri G,
Cosci E, Bakker A.

Author information: 
(1)Siena Biotech S.p.A., Italy. mrossi@sienabiotech.it

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Apr 15;11(8):765-8.

Glioblastomas (GBMs), the most common primary malignancies of the central nervous
system, are highly aggressive and heterogeneous, and remain a dramatic
therapeutic challenge. Markers mirroring the complex molecular profile of GBMs
that are predictive of patient outcomes are needed to define novel multi-targeted
treatment strategies. Resistance to current GBM therapies is partly due to a
subpopulation of stem-like and other self-renewing cells (hereafter called glioma
stem-like cancer cells, GSCC), which are therefore of key interest as therapeutic
entry points. Wnt and Hedgehog are among the main pathways involved in GSCC
renewal. ß-catenin and Gli1 are markers of Wnt and Hedgehog activation
respectively and both pathways are known to be altered in gliomas. To date, there
are no investigations of Gli1 protein expression in GBM tissue, and recently a
high expression of ß-catenin has been found to have a poor prognostic impact in
GBM patients in a study. We have therefore quantified the positivity for
ß-catenin, Gli1, as well as Ki-67, p53, and EGFR proteins on
immunohistochemically-stained GBM sections from 106 patients in an investigation 
for potential predictive biomarkers. Correlation between these markers and
survival was evaluated by pair-wise Pearson correlation coefficient and by
bi-dimensional hierarchical clustering, followed by survival estimations using
linear regression models and classification trees. We demonstrated that both
ß-catenin and, for the first time, Gli1 proteins are highly predictive markers of
short survival, being found in 75 and 90% of the highly predictive trees,
respectively, whereas Ki-67, p53 and EGFR were under 30% and thus, not considered
as predictive. Our results indicate a role of ß-catenin and Gli1 in GBM malignant
behaviour, and suggest that inhibiting members of Wnt and Hedgehog pathways could
be a valuable therapeutic strategy for GBM patients.

PMID: 21321483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 8;108(10):4099-104. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1014489108. Epub 2011 Feb 14.

Wounding enhances epidermal tumorigenesis by recruiting hair follicle
keratinocytes.

Kasper M(1), Jaks V, Are A, Bergström Å, Schwäger A, Svärd J, Teglund S, Barker
N, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biosciences and Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska
Institutet, Novum, 141 83 Huddinge, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 3;109(14):5548. Svärd, Jessica [added];
Teglund, Stephan [added].

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Apr;11(4):235.

Chronic wounds and acute trauma constitute well-established risk factors for
development of epithelial-derived skin tumors, although the underlying mechanisms
are largely unknown. Basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) are the most common skin
cancers displaying a number of features reminiscent of hair follicle (HF)-derived
cells and are dependent on deregulated Hedgehog (Hh)/GLI signaling. Here we show,
in a mouse model conditionally expressing GLI1 and in a model with homozygous
inactivation of Ptch1, mimicking the situation in human BCCs, that the wound
environment accelerates the initiation frequency and growth of BCC-like lesions. 
Lineage tracing reveals that both oncogene activation and wounding induce
emigration of keratinocytes residing in the lower bulge and the nonpermanent part
of the HFs toward the interfollicular epidermis (IFE). However, only oncogene
activation in combination with a wound environment enables the participation of
such cells in the initiation of BCC-like lesions at the HF openings and in the
IFE. We conclude that, in addition to the direct enhancement of BCC growth, the
tumor-promoting effect of the wound environment is due to recruitment of
tumor-initiating cells originating from the neighboring HFs, establishing a link 
between epidermal wounds and skin cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3054016
PMID: 21321199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Development. 2011 Mar;138(6):1207-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.054114. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Multiple developmental programs are altered by loss of Zic1 and Zic4 to cause
Dandy-Walker malformation cerebellar pathogenesis.

Blank MC(1), Grinberg I, Aryee E, Laliberte C, Chizhikov VV, Henkelman RM, Millen
KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

Heterozygous deletions encompassing the ZIC1;ZIC4 locus have been identified in a
subset of individuals with the common cerebellar birth defect Dandy-Walker
malformation (DWM). Deletion of Zic1 and Zic4 in mice produces both cerebellar
size and foliation defects similar to human DWM, confirming a requirement for
these genes in cerebellar development and providing a model to delineate the
developmental basis of this clinically important congenital malformation. Here,
we show that reduced cerebellar size in Zic1 and Zic4 mutants results from
decreased postnatal granule cell progenitor proliferation. Through genetic and
molecular analyses, we show that Zic1 and Zic4 have Shh-dependent function
promoting proliferation of granule cell progenitors. Expression of the
Shh-downstream genes Ptch1, Gli1 and Mycn was downregulated in Zic1/4 mutants,
although Shh production and Purkinje cell gene expression were normal. Reduction 
of Shh dose on the Zic1(+/-);Zic4(+/-) background also resulted in cerebellar
size reductions and gene expression changes comparable with those observed in
Zic1(-/-);Zic4(-/-) mice. Zic1 and Zic4 are additionally required to pattern
anterior vermis foliation. Zic mutant folial patterning abnormalities correlated 
with disrupted cerebellar anlage gene expression and Purkinje cell topography
during late embryonic stages; however, this phenotype was Shh independent. In
Zic1(+/-);Zic4(+/-);Shh(+/-), we observed normal cerebellar anlage patterning and
foliation. Furthermore, cerebellar patterning was normal in both Gli2-cko and
Smo-cko mutant mice, where all Shh function was removed from the developing
cerebellum. Thus, our data demonstrate that Zic1 and Zic4 have both Shh-dependent
and -independent roles during cerebellar development and that multiple
developmental disruptions underlie Zic1/4-related DWM.

PMCID: PMC3042874
PMID: 21307096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;17(8):2502-11. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2745.
Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Phase I trial of hedgehog pathway inhibitor vismodegib (GDC-0449) in patients
with refractory, locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors.

LoRusso PM(1), Rudin CM, Reddy JC, Tibes R, Weiss GJ, Borad MJ, Hann CL, Brahmer 
JR, Chang I, Darbonne WC, Graham RA, Zerivitz KL, Low JA, Von Hoff DD.

Author information: 
(1)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan; Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;17(8):2071-3.

PURPOSE: The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, a key regulator of cell growth and 
differentiation during development is implicated in pathogenesis of certain
cancers. Vismodegib (GDC-0449) is a small-molecule inhibitor of smoothened, a key
component of Hh signaling. This phase I trial assessed GDC-0449 treatment in
patients with solid tumors refractory to current therapies or for which no
standard therapy existed.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Sixty-eight patients received GDC-0449 at 150 mg/d (n = 41),
270 mg/d (n = 23), or 540 mg/d (n = 4). Adverse events, tumor responses,
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamic down-modulation of GLI1 expression in
noninvolved skin were assessed.
RESULTS: Thirty-three of 68 patients had advanced basal cell carcinoma (BCC), 8
had pancreatic cancer, 1 had medulloblastoma; 17 other types of cancer were also 
represented. GDC-0449 was generally well-tolerated. Six patients (8.8%)
experienced 7 grade 4 events (hyponatremia, fatigue, pyelonephritis, presyncope, 
resectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and paranoia with hyperglycemia), and 27.9%
of patients experienced a grade 3 event [most commonly hyponatremia (10.3%),
abdominal pain (7.4%), and fatigue (5.9%)]. No maximum tolerated dose was
reached. The recommended phase II dose was 150 mg/d, based on achievement of
maximal plasma concentration and pharmacodynamic response at this dose. Tumor
responses were observed in 20 patients (19 with BCC and 1 unconfirmed response in
medulloblastoma), 14 patients had stable disease as best response, and 28 had
progressive disease. Evidence of GLI1 down-modulation was observed in noninvolved
skin.
CONCLUSIONS: GDC-0449 has an acceptable safety profile and encouraging anti-tumor
activity in advanced BCC and medulloblastoma. Further study in these and other
cancer types is warranted.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21300762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Pediatr Surg. 2011 Feb;46(2):320-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2010.11.010.

Hedgehog signal inhibitor forskolin suppresses cell proliferation and tumor
growth of human rhabdomyosarcoma xenograft.

Yamanaka H(1), Oue T, Uehara S, Fukuzawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: We have previously reported that the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling 
pathway is activated in pediatric malignancies. In this study, we examined the
effect of the Hh signal inhibitor forskolin on the growth of rhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS) in vivo and in vitro and thereby elucidated the possibility of considering 
Hh signaling pathway as a therapeutic target for RMS.
METHODS: We evaluated the messenger RNA expressions of Hh signal mediators in 3
human RMS cell lines using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
method. The effect of forskolin on the tumor cell proliferation was investigated 
using WST-1 assay (Dojindo Co, Kumamoto, Japan). We inoculated 10(7) tumor cells 
into the back of nude mice to create RMS xenograft tumor models. Forskolin was
subcutaneously administered in the region around the tumor, and the effect on the
tumor growth was evaluated.
RESULTS: The messenger RNA expression of glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1,
the marker of Hh signaling activation, was expressed at various levels in RMS
cell lines. The proliferation of RMS cells was inhibited in a dose-dependent
fashion by forskolin. Similarly, in the xenograft model, tumor growth was also
significantly reduced by forskolin treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the Hh signaling pathway plays an
important role in the tumorigenesis of RMS and that this pathway can be
considered to be a potential molecular target of new treatment strategies for
RMS.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21292081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 8;286(14):11960-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.193458. Epub 2011 
Feb 2.

Structural analysis of the cancer-specific promoter in mesothelin and in other
genes overexpressed in cancers.

Ren YR(1), Patel K, Paun BC, Kern SE.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Mesothelin (MSLN) may be the most "dramatic" of the tumor markers, being strongly
overexpressed in nearly one-third of human malignancies. The biochemical cause is
unclear. We previously ascribed this cancer-specific overexpression to an
element, Canscript, residing around 50 bp 5' of the transcription start site in
cancer (Hucl, T., Brody, J. R., Gallmeier, E., Iacobuzio-Donahue, C. A.,
Farrance, I. K., and Kern, S. E. (2007) Cancer Res. 67, 9055-9065). Herein, we
found a Canscript promoter activity elevated over 100-fold in cancer cells. In
addition to a highly conserved TEAD1 (TEA domain family member 1)-binding MCAT
motif, nucleotide substitution revealed the consensus core sequence (WCYCCACCC)
of an SP1-like motif in Canscript. The unknown transcription factor binding to
the SP1-like motif may hold the key for the cancer specificity of Canscript. SP1,
GLI1, and RUNX1, -2, and -3 appeared unlikely to be the direct transcription
factors acting at the SP1-like motif, but KLF6 had some features of such a
candidate. YAP1, a TEAD1-binding protein, appeared necessary, but not sufficient,
for Canscript activity; knockdown of YAP1 by small interfering RNAs greatly
reduced MSLN levels in MSLN-overexpressing cells, but overexpressing YAP1 in
MSLN-negative cells did not induce MSLN expression. Cansript-like sequences were 
found in other genes up-regulated in pancreatic cancer; reporters driven by the
sequences from FXYD3, MUC1, and TIMP1 had activities more than 2 times that of
the control. This suggested that the cause of MSLN overexpression might also
contribute mechanistically to the overexpression of other tumor markers.

PMCID: PMC3069398
PMID: 21288909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):116-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.025. Epub 2011
Jan 27.

Altered differentiation and paracrine stimulation of mammary epithelial cell
proliferation by conditionally activated Smoothened.

Visbal AP(1), LaMarca HL, Villanueva H, Toneff MJ, Li Y, Rosen JM, Lewis MT.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling network is critical for patterning and organogenesis 
in mammals, and has been implicated in a variety of cancers. Smoothened (Smo),
the gene encoding the principal signal transducer, is overexpressed frequently in
breast cancer, and constitutive activation in MMTV-SmoM2 transgenic mice caused
alterations in mammary gland morphology, increased proliferation, and changes in 
stem/progenitor cell number. Both in transgenic mice and in clinical specimens,
proliferative cells did not usually express detectable Smo, suggesting the
hypothesis that Smo functioned in a non-cell autonomous manner to stimulate
proliferation. Here, we employed a genetically tagged mouse model carrying a
Cre-recombinase-dependent conditional allele of constitutively active Smo (SmoM2)
to test this hypothesis. MMTV-Cre- or adenoviral-Cre-mediated SmoM2 expression in
the luminal epithelium, but not in the myoepithelium, was required for the
hyper-proliferative phenotypes. High levels of proliferation were observed in
cells adjacent or in close-proximity to Smo expressing cells demonstrating that
SmoM2 expressing cells were stimulating proliferation via a paracrine or
juxtacrine mechanism. In contrast, Smo expression altered luminal cell
differentiation in a cell-autonomous manner. SmoM2 expressing cells, purified by 
fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) via the genetic fluorescent tag,
expressed high levels of Ptch2, Gli1, Gli2, Jag2 and Dll-1, and lower levels of
Notch4 and Hes6, in comparison to wildtype cells. These studies provide insight
into the mechanism of Smo activation in the mammary gland and its possible roles 
in breast tumorigenesis. In addition, these results also have potential
implications for the interpretation of proliferative phenotypes commonly observed
in other organs as a consequence of hedgehog signaling activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3057274
PMID: 21276786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Apr 10;336(1-2):133-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.01.015.
Epub 2011 Jan 21.

Endogenous biotin as a marker of adrenocortical cells with steroidogenic
potential.

Paul A(1), Laufer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY 10032, USA. ajp2142@columbia.edu

Interpretation of adrenal cortex phenotypes is greatly facilitated by
simultaneous examination of multiple markers at single cell resolution. However, 
the availability of multiple appropriate antibodies can be rate limiting, while
their cognate antigens are often subject to variable accessibility. Specific
markers not subject to these constraints thus have obvious utility. Here we
report that endogenous biotin, when detected in fixed, frozen tissue sections
using fluorescent streptavidin, is a specific marker of apparently all cells with
steroidogenic potential in the murine adrenal cortex. While streptavidin stains
presteroidogenic and mature cortical cells, it does not label the adrenal
capsule, medulla or vascular endothelium. Developmental profiles reveal adrenal
endogenous biotin labeling from E13.5 through adulthood. Comparisons with zonal
markers, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis-remodeled tissue, transgenic
Shh-nLacZ or Gli1-nLacZ animals, and Shh mutant embryos further demonstrate the
utility of this approach. Fluorescent streptavidin applied using a simple
one-step staining protocol thus provides a potent counterstain for use in adrenal
analyses.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3063516
PMID: 21256921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 16;30:8. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-30-8.

Activation of the Hedgehog pathway in chronic myelogeneous leukemia patients.

Long B(1), Zhu H, Zhu C, Liu T, Meng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Key lab of Hematology of Sichuan Province, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, 37 Guoxue xiang St., Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in regulation of many
tissues development and oncogenesis. Recently, Hh signaling has been identified
as a required functional pathway for leukemia stem cells(LSCs), and loss of this 
pathway impairs leukemia progression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the expression of Hedgehog
signaling molecules in Chronic Myelogeneous Leukemia (CML) patients and normal
people by semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and to correlate mRNA 
expression to patients' clinical data.
RESULTS: Here, we showed that Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Smoothened (Smo), and Gli1
genes of Hh signaling were significantly upregulated in CML patients when
compared with normal people (P < 0.001). The levels of Shh, Smo mRNA in chronic
phase of CML patients were obviously lower than that in blast crisis (p < 0.05). 
There were no significant differences of Shh, Ptch1, Smo, Gli1 mRNA expression
found when comparing CML patients of chronic phase(CP) with imatinib(IM) treated 
or not(p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that activation of the Hh pathway maybe
associated with CML progression. Treatment of CML with imatinib, a selective
inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has no significant influence 
on the inhibition of Hh pathway of CML-CP patients.

PMCID: PMC3032744
PMID: 21235817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e15900. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015900.

Coordinated translocation of mammalian Gli proteins and suppressor of fused to
the primary cilium.

Zeng H(1), Jia J, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Intracellular transduction of Hedgehog (Hh) signals in mammals requires
functional primary cilia. The Hh signaling effectors, the Gli family of
transcription factors, and their negative regulator, Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), 
accumulate at the tips of cilia; however, the molecular mechanism regulating this
localization remains elusive. In the current study, we show that the ciliary
localization of mammalian Gli proteins depends on both their N-terminal domains
and a central region lying C-terminal to the zinc-finger DNA-binding domains.
Invertebrate Gli homologs Ci and Tra1, when over-expressed in ciliated mouse
fibroblasts, fail to localize to the cilia, suggesting the lack of a
vertebrate-specific structural feature required for ciliary localization. We
further show that activation of protein kinase A (PKA) efficiently inhibits
ciliary localization of Gli2 and Gli3, but only moderately affects the ciliary
localization of Gli1. Interestingly, variants of Gli2 mimicking the
phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated states of Gli2 are both localized to the
cilia, and their ciliary localizations are subjected to the inhibitory effect of 
PKA activation, suggesting a likely indirect mechanism underlying the roles of
PKA in Gli ciliary localization. Finally, we show that ciliary localization of
Sufu is dependent on ciliary-localized Gli proteins, and is inhibited by PKA
activation, suggesting a coordinated mechanism for the ciliary translocation of
Sufu and Gli proteins.

PMCID: PMC3012114
PMID: 21209912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):894-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088997. Epub 2011 
Jan 5.

Redundant and differential roles of transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 in the
development of mouse fetal Leydig cells.

Barsoum I(1), Yao HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, 
IL, USA.

Appearance of mouse fetal Leydig cells requires activation of the Hedgehog
pathway. Upon binding to the membrane-bound receptor patched, Hedgehog ligands
induce intracellular responses via a combined effect of Gli transcription
factors. Szczepny et al. (Biol Reprod 2009; 80:258-263) found that Gli1, one of
the three Gli transcription factors, is present in the fetal testis and that its 
expression is suppressed by the Hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine. In this study, we
investigated the involvement of the Gli1 and Gli2 factors in mouse fetal Leydig
cell differentiation. The Gli1 and Gli2 transcription factors showed an
overlapping expression pattern in the testis interstitium at the time when fetal 
Leydig cells appear. Despite their similar expression, Gli1 and Gli2 patterns
were differentially regulated. Initial Gli1 and Gli2 expression depends upon an
active Hedgehog pathway; however, maintenance of only Gli1, but not Gli2,
expression requires activation of the pathway. Inactivation of either the Gli1 or
Gli2 gene did not affect fetal Leydig cell development and testis morphology,
suggesting a functional redundancy. When the transcriptional activity of both
GLI1 and GLI2 was suppressed by a selective inhibitor, GANT61, in cultured fetal 
testes before the appearance of fetal Leydig cells, Gli1 and Gli2 expression and 
steroidogenic marker activity were completely abolished. However at later stages 
when Leydig cells were already present, GANT61 treatment inhibited Gli1
expression but had no effects on Gli2 expression and fetal Leydig cell
appearance. Our results reveal overlapping and redundant Gli1 and Gli2 roles in
fetal Leydig cell differentiation and a novel regulation of Gli2 expression in
the fetal testis.

PMCID: PMC4574634
PMID: 21209421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Jan 15;21(2):718-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.11.126. 
Epub 2010 Dec 5.

New Hedgehog/GLI signaling inhibitors from Excoecaria agallocha.

Rifai Y(1), Arai MA, Sadhu SK, Ahmed F, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, 
Japan.

The inhibition of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has emerged as an
anti-cancer strategy. Three flavonoid glycosides including 2 new compounds (1-2) 
were isolated from Excoecaria agallocha as Hedgehog/GLI1-mediated transcriptional
inhibitors and exhibited cytotoxicity against human pancreatic (PANC1) and
prostate (DU145) cancer cells. Our data revealed that compound 1 clearly
inhibited the expression of GLI-related proteins (PTCH and BCL-2) and blocked the
translocation of GLI1 transcription factors into the nucleus in PANC1. Deleting
the Smoothened (Smo) function in PANC1 treated with 1 led to downregulation of
the mRNA expression of Ptch. This study describes the first Hh signaling
inhibitor which blocks GLI1 movement into the nucleus without interfering with
Smo.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21190854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Clin Invest. 2011 Jan;121(1):148-60. doi: 10.1172/JCI42874. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Arsenic trioxide inhibits human cancer cell growth and tumor development in mice 
by blocking Hedgehog/GLI pathway.

Beauchamp EM(1), Ringer L, Bulut G, Sajwan KP, Hall MD, Lee YC, Peaceman D,
Ozdemirli M, Rodriguez O, Macdonald TJ, Albanese C, Toretsky JA, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, DC, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Jan;121(1):14-6.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is activated in some human cancers, including
medulloblastoma. The glioma-associated oncogene homolog (GLI) transcription
factors are critical mediators of the activated Hh pathway, and their expression 
may be elevated in some tumors independent of upstream Hh signaling. Thus,
therapies targeting GLI transcription factors may benefit a wide spectrum of
patients with mutations at different nodal points of the Hh pathway. In this
study, we present evidence that arsenic trioxide (ATO) suppresses human cancer
cell growth and tumor development in mice by inhibiting GLI1. Mechanistically,
ATO directly bound to GLI1 protein, inhibited its transcriptional activity, and
decreased expression of endogenous GLI target genes. Consistent with this, ATO
inhibited the growth of human cancer cell lines that depended on upregulated GLI 
expression in vitro and in vivo in a xenograft model of Ewing sarcoma.
Furthermore, ATO improved survival of a clinically relevant spontaneous mouse
model of medulloblastoma with activated Hh pathway signaling. Our results
establish ATO as a Hh pathway inhibitor acting at the level of GLI1 both in vitro
and in vivo. These results warrant the clinical investigation of ATO for tumors
with activated Hh/GLI signaling, in particular patients who develop resistance to
current therapies targeting the Hh pathway upstream of GLI.

PMCID: PMC3007144
PMID: 21183792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Clin Invest. 2011 Jan;121(1):14-6. doi: 10.1172/JCI45692. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Arsenic: a potentially useful poison for Hedgehog-driven cancers.

Raju GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
10065, USA. prr9001@med.cornell.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Jan;121(1):148-60.

Dysregulated Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated in a growing number of
human cancers. To date, most antagonists of this signaling pathway that have been
developed target the Hh receptor Smoothened. However, these are predicted to have
minimal effect when the pathway is activated as a result of dysregulation
downstream of this receptor. In this issue of the JCI, Beauchamp and colleagues
provide preclinical evidence that arsenic trioxide, a drug FDA approved for the
treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia, inhibits the growth of Ewing sarcoma
and medulloblastoma cells by targeting GLI family zinc finger (GLI) proteins,
which are Hh signaling pathway components downstream of Smoothened.

PMCID: PMC3007169
PMID: 21183780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 21;404(3):809-15. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.065. Epub 2010 Dec 21.

GLI1, a crucial mediator of sonic hedgehog signaling in prostate cancer,
functions as a negative modulator for androgen receptor.

Chen G(1), Goto Y, Sakamoto R, Tanaka K, Matsubara E, Nakamura M, Zheng H, Lu J, 
Takayanagi R, Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling, acting in a combinatorial manner with androgen
signaling, is essential for prostate patterning and development. Recently,
elevated activation of SHH signaling has been shown to play important roles in
proliferation, progression and metastasis of prostate cancer. In this report, we 
demonstrate for the first time, that GLI1, which has been shown to play a central
role in SHH signaling in prostate cancer, can act as a co-repressor to
substantially block androgen receptor (AR)-mediated transactivation, at least in 
part, by directly interacting with AR. Our observations suggest that the SHH-GLI 
pathway might be one of determinants governing the transition of prostate cancer 
from anandrogen-dependent to an androgen-independent state by compensating, or
even superseding androgen signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21172305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 15;16(24):6060-70. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1624.

The Notch target Hes1 directly modulates Gli1 expression and Hedgehog signaling: 
a potential mechanism of therapeutic resistance.

Schreck KC(1), Taylor P, Marchionni L, Gopalakrishnan V, Bar EE, Gaiano N,
Eberhart CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

PURPOSE: Multiple developmental pathways including Notch, Hedgehog, and Wnt are
active in malignant brain tumors such as medulloblastoma and glioblastoma (GBM). 
This raises the possibility that tumors might compensate for therapy directed
against one pathway by upregulating a different one. We investigated whether
brain tumors show resistance to therapies against Notch, and whether targeting
multiple pathways simultaneously would kill brain tumor cells more effectively
than monotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used GBM neurosphere lines to investigate the effects of 
a gamma-secretase inhibitor (MRK-003) on tumor growth, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation to study the regulation of other genes by Notch targets. We
also evaluated the effect of combined therapy with a Hedgehog inhibitor
(cyclopamine) in GBM and medulloblastoma lines, and in primary human GBM
cultures.
RESULTS: GBM cells are at least partially resistant to long-term MRK-003
treatment, despite ongoing Notch pathway suppression, and show concomitant
upregulation of Wnt and Hedgehog activity. The Notch target Hes1, a repressive
transcription factor, bound the Gli1 first intron, and may inhibit its
expression. Similar results were observed in a melanoma-derived cell line.
Targeting Notch and Hedgehog simultaneously induced apoptosis, decreased cell
growth, and inhibited colony-forming ability more dramatically than monotherapy. 
Low-passage neurospheres isolated from freshly resected human GBMs were also
highly susceptible to coinhibition of the two pathways, indicating that targeting
multiple developmental pathways can be more effective than monotherapy at
eliminating GBM-derived cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Notch may directly suppress Hedgehog via Hes1 mediated inhibition of
Gli1 transcription, and targeting both pathways simultaneously may be more
effective at eliminating GBMs cells.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3059501
PMID: 21169257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Eur J Med Res. 2010 Nov 25;15(11):468-74.

Prognostic value of hedgehog signal component expressions in hepatoblastoma
patients.

Li YC(1), Deng YH, Guo ZH, Zhang MM, Zhu J, Pu CL, Xiang CP, Guo CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, 22 Zhongshan Rd., Chongqing, 400014, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Activation of hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been implicated in the
development of human malignancies. Hh as well as related downstream target genes 
has been extensively studied in many kinds of malignant tumours for clinical
diagnostic or prognostic utilities. This study aimed at investigating whether Hh 
molecules provides a molecular marker of hepatoblastoma malignancy.
METHODS: We obtained tissue sections from 32 patients with hepatoblastoma as well
as cholestasis and normal control. Immunohistochemical analysis were performed to
determine Hh signal components in human hepatoblastoma. The prognostic
significance of single expression of Hh signal components were evaluated using
Cox proportional hazards regression models and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for
statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Expression of Hh signal components showed an increase in hepatoblastoma 
compared with cholestasis and normal tissues. There was a positive correlation
between Smo or Gli1 expression and tumor clinicopathological features, such as
histological type, tumor grade, tumor size and clinical stage. Both Smo or Gli1
protein high expression was significantly associated with poor prognosis by
univariate analyses and multivariate analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal Hh signaling activation plays important roles in the
malignant potential of hepatoblastoma. Gli1 expression is an independent
prognostic marker.

PMCID: PMC3352655
PMID: 21159571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. BMC Cancer. 2010 Dec 9;10:676. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-676.

Pituitary adenylyl cyclase activating polypeptide inhibits gli1 gene expression
and proliferation in primary medulloblastoma derived tumorsphere cultures.

Cohen JR(1), Resnick DZ, Niewiadomski P, Dong H, Liau LM, Waschek JA.

Author information: 
(1)Semel Institute/Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David
Geffen, School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA 90095 USA.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (HH) signaling is critical for the expansion of granule
neuron precursors (GNPs) within the external granular layer (EGL) during
cerebellar development. Aberrant HH signaling within GNPs is thought to give rise
to medulloblastoma (MB) - the most commonly-observed form of malignant pediatric 
brain tumor. Evidence in both invertebrates and vertebrates indicates that cyclic
AMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) antagonizes HH signalling. Receptors
specific for the neuropeptide pituitary adenylyl cyclase activating polypeptide
(PACAP, gene name ADCYAP1) are expressed in GNPs. PACAP has been shown to protect
GNPs from apoptosis in vitro, and to interact with HH signaling to regulate GNP
proliferation. PACAP/ptch1 double mutant mice exhibit an increased incidence of
MB compared to ptch1 mice, indicating that PACAP may regulate HH pathway-mediated
MB pathogenesis.
METHODS: Primary MB tumorsphere cultures were prepared from thirteen
ptch1+/-/p53+/- double mutant mice and treated with the smoothened (SMO) agonist 
purmorphamine, the SMO antagonist SANT-1, the neuropeptide PACAP, the PKA
activator forskolin, and the PKA inhibitor H89. Gene expression of gli1 and
[3H]-thymidine incorporation were assessed to determine drug effects on HH
pathway activity and proliferation, respectively. PKA activity was determined in 
cell extracts by Western blotting using a phospho-PKA substrate antibody.
RESULTS: Primary tumor cells cultured for 1-week under serum-free conditions grew
as tumorspheres and were found to express PAC1 receptor transcripts. Gli1 gene
expression was significantly reduced by SANT-1, PACAP and forskolin, but was
unaffected by purmorphamine. The attenuation of gli1 gene expression by PACAP was
reversed by the PKA inhibitor H89, which also blocked PKA activation. Treatment
of tumorsphere cultures with PACAP, forskolin, and SANT-1 for 24 or 48 hours
reduced proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Primary tumorspheres derived from ptch1+/-/p53+/- mice exhibit
constitutive HH pathway activity. PACAP antagonizes HH signalling in these cells 
in a manner blocked by the PKA antagonist H89. PACAP and pharmacological
activation of PKA also inhibited proliferation. Our data suggests that regulation
of HH signaling by PACAP/PKA signaling may provide an alternative to SMO
inhibition for the treatment of MB.

PMCID: PMC3016295
PMID: 21143927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Nat Med. 2010 Dec;16(12):1374-6. doi: 10.1038/nm1210-1374.

Crippling SWI-SNF makes tumors GLI-ful.

Reiter JF.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2010 Dec;16(12):1429-33.

PMID: 21135845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 1;71(3):1092-102. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2315. Epub
2010 Dec 6.

Hedgehog signaling drives cellular survival in human colon carcinoma cells.

Mazumdar T(1), DeVecchio J, Shi T, Jones J, Agyeman A, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (HH) signaling is implicated in many human
cancers. Classical HH signaling is characterized by Smoothened (Smo)-dependent
activation of Gli1 and Gli2, which transcriptionally regulate target genes. A
small molecule inhibitor of Gli1 and Gli2, GANT61, was used to block HH signaling
in human colon carcinoma cell lines that express HH signaling components. GANT61 
administration induced robust cytotoxicity in 5 of 6 cell lines and moderate
cytotoxicity in the remaining 1 cell line. In comparison, the classical Smo
inhibitor, cyclopamine, induced modest cytotoxicity. Further, GANT61 treatment
abolished the clonogenicity of all six human colon carcinoma cell lines. Analysis
of the molecular mechanisms of GANT61-induced cytotoxicity in HT29 cells showed
increased Fas expression and decreased expression of PDGFRa, which also regulates
Fas. Furthermore, DR5 expression was increased whereas Bcl-2 (direct target of
Gli2) was downregulated following GANT61 treatment. Suppression of Gli1 by shRNA 
mimicked the changes in gene expression observed in GANT61-treated cells.
Overexpression of dominant-negative FADD (to abrogate Fas/DR5-mediated death
receptor signaling) and/or Bcl-2 (to block mitochondria-mediated apoptosis)
partially rescued GANT61-induced cytotoxicity in HT29 cells. Thus, activated GLI 
genes repress DR5 and Fas expressions while upregulating Bcl-2 and PDGFRa
expressions to inhibit Fas and facilitate cell survival. Collectively, these
results highlight the importance of Gli activation downstream of Smo as a
therapeutic target in models of human colon carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3032813
PMID: 21135115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Pediatr Surg. 2010 Dec;45(12):2299-304. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2010.08.020.

Hedgehog signaling pathway in neuroblastoma differentiation.

Souzaki R(1), Tajiri T, Souzaki M, Kinoshita Y, Tanaka S, Kohashi K, Oda Y,
Katano M, Taguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. ryotas@pedsurg.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is activated in some adult cancers. 
On the other hand, the Hh signaling pathway plays an important role in the
development of the neural crest in embryos. The aim of this study is to show the 
activation of Hh signaling pathway in neuroblastoma (NB), a pediatric malignancy 
arising from neural crest cells, and to reveal the meaning of the Hh signaling
pathway in NB development.
METHODS: This study analyzed the expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), GLI1, and
Patched 1 (Ptch1), transactivators of Hh signaling pathway, by
immunohistochemistry in 82 NB and 10 ganglioneuroblastoma cases. All 92 cases
were evaluated for the status of MYCN amplification.
RESULTS: Of the 92 cases, 67 (73%) were positive for Shh, 62 cases (67%) were
positive for GLI1, and 73 cases (79%) were positive for Ptch1. Only 2 (10%) of
the 20 cases with MYCN amplification were positive for Shh and GLI1, and 4 cases 
(20%) were positive for Ptch1 (MYCN amplification vs no MYCN amplification, P <U+2266>
.01). The percentage of GLI1-positive cells in the cases with INSS stage 1
without MYCN amplification was significantly higher than that with INSS stage 4. 
Of 72 cases without MYCN amplification, 60 were GLI1-positive. Twelve cases were 
GLI1-negative, and the prognosis of the GLI1-positive cases was significantly
better than that of the GLI1-negative cases (P = .015).
CONCLUSIONS: Most of NBs without MYCN amplification were positive for Shh, GLI1, 
and Ptch1. In the cases without MYCN amplification, the high expression of GLI1
was significantly associated with early clinical stage and a good prognosis of
the patients. In contrast to adult cancers, the activation of the Hh signaling
pathway in NB may be associated with the differentiation of the NB.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21129534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4749-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.165951. Epub 2010 
Dec 2.

Identification of nuclear localization, DNA binding, and transactivating
mechanisms of Kruppel-like zinc finger protein Gli-similar 2 (Glis2).

Vasanth S(1), ZeRuth G, Kang HS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, Laboratory of
Respiratory Biology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Gli-similar 1-3 (Glis1-3) constitute a subfamily of Krüppel-like zinc finger (ZF)
transcription factors that are closely related to the Gli protein family.
Mutations in GLIS2 are linked to nephronophthisis, a chronic kidney disease
characterized by renal fibrosis and atrophy in children and young adults.
Currently, very little information exists about the mechanism of action of Glis2,
its target genes, or the signaling pathways that regulate its activity. In this
study, we show that a region within ZF3 is required for the nuclear localization 
of Glis2. Analysis of Glis2 DNA binding demonstrated that Glis2 binds effectively
to the consensus Glis binding sequence (GlisBS) (G/C)TGGGGGGT(A/C). Although
Glis2 was unable to induce transactivation of a GlisBS-dependent reporter, it
effectively inhibited the GlisBS-mediated transactivation by Gli1. Mutations that
disrupt the tetrahedral configuration of each ZF within Glis2 abolished Glis2
binding to GlisBS and also abrogated its inhibition of Gli1-mediated
transactivation. In contrast, Glis2 was able to activate the murine insulin-2
(Ins2) promoter by binding directly to two GlisBS elements located at -263 and
-99 within the Ins2 promoter. Phosphomimetic mutation of Ser(245) inhibited the
binding of Glis2 to GlisBS and dramatically affected its transactivation of the
Ins2 promoter and its ability to inhibit GlisBS-dependent transactivation by
Gli1. In this study, we demonstrate that Glis2 can function as a transcriptional 
activator and that post-translational modification within its DNA-binding domain 
can regulate its transcriptional activity. This control may play a critical role 
in the Glis2-dependent regulation of target genes and renal function.

PMCID: PMC3039324
PMID: 21127075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2011 Mar;41(3):386-93. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyq217. Epub 2010 Dec 
1.

Correlation of hedgehog signal activation with chemoradiotherapy sensitivity and 
survival in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas.

Zhu W(1), You Z, Li T, Yu C, Tao G, Hu M, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, First Hospital of Nanjing Medical University,
Huaian, Jiangsu 223200, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the significance of hedgehog signaling pathway in
chemoradiotherapy sensitivity and its effect on the prognosis of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.
METHODS: In the present study, we used the method of immunohistochemistry to
examine the expression status of two hedgehog components, PTCH1 and
glioma-associated oncogene GLI-1, in 100 pre-treated biopsy specimens of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients treated with definitive
chemoradiotherapy.
RESULTS: We find that high levels of PTCH1 and GLI-1 were detected in 76.0 and
72.0% of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, respectively. Significant
associations of high PTCH1 and GLI-1 expression with large tumor size (both P =
0.01), locoregional progression (P= 0.001 and 0.003, respectively) and the lack
of complete response to chemoradiotherapy (P= 0.008 and 0.01, respectively) were 
observed. Univariate analysis revealed that high PTCH1 and GLI-1 expression was
associated with poor locoregional progression-free survival, distant
progression-free survival and overall survival. Furthermore, esophageal squamous 
cell carcinoma patients with high PTCH1 and GLI-1 expression have the shorter
survival time than the subgroups with negative and low PTCH1 and GLI-1
expression. In multivariate analysis, PTCH1 and GLI-1 expression status were both
evaluated as independent prognostic factors for locoregional progression-free
survival, distant progression-free survival and overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest an important role for the activation of
hedgehog signaling in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma progression and that
PTCH1 and GLI-1 expression may be significantly associated with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma resistance to chemoradiotherapy.

PMID: 21127038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Curr Genomics. 2010 Jun;11(4):238-45. doi: 10.2174/138920210791233108.

The Human Glioma-Associated Oncogene Homolog 1 (GLI1) Family of Transcription
Factors in Gene Regulation and Diseases.

Zhu H(1), Lo HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Sciences, Duke University School
of Medicine.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is critically important for embryogenesis and
other cellular processes in which GLI transcription factors mediate the terminal 
effects of the pathway. GLI1, in particular, plays a significant role in human
cancers. Consequently, GLI1 and its upstream positive regulator Smoothened (SMO) 
are important targets of anti-cancer therapy and several SMO-targeted small
molecule inhibitors are being evaluated clinically. Emerging exciting evidence
reveals a high level of complexity that lies within the GLI1-mediated pathway.
For example, a recent study provided evidence linking the polymorphic GLI1
variants Q1100/E1100 to chronic inflammatory bowel diseases. Two recent reports
uncovered the existence of two novel human GLI1 isoforms that differ structurally
and functionally from the wild-type GLI1 identified over two decades ago.
Interestingly, although both are products of alternative splicing, GLI1<U+2206>N and
tGLI1 (truncated GLI1) isoforms are predominantly expressed in normal and
malignant tissues, respectively. In addition to these important discoveries, gene
expression profiling studies have identified a number of novel wild-type GLI1 and
tGLI1 target genes, linking wild-type GLI1 to tumor progression and therapeutic
resistance, and tGLI1 to tumor invasion and migration. In light of these new
insights, this review will provide a comprehensive overview on GLI1 polymorphisms
and the three members of the GLI1 family of proteins, and their impacts on human 
diseases, including, cancers.

PMCID: PMC2930663
PMID: 21119888  [PubMed]


375. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Feb;50(2):95-112. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20835.

Evaluation of well-differentiated/de-differentiated liposarcomas by
high-resolution oligonucleotide array-based comparative genomic hybridization.

Tap WD(1), Eilber FC, Ginther C, Dry SM, Reese N, Barzan-Smith K, Chen HW, Wu H, 
Eilber FR, Slamon DJ, Anderson L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
wtap@mednet.ucla.edu

Well-differentiated/de-differentiated liposarcomas (WDLS/DDLS) encompass an
intriguing disease model in which a temporal intersection occurs between the
malignant transformation of mesenchymal cells and the process of adipogenesis.
Deciphering the molecular events that trigger and are characteristic of the
intersection of these oncogenic and normal processes is critical to affect the
often morbid and lethal consequences of malignant tumors of fat. High-resolution 
genome-wide oligonucleotide array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) 
with matched gene expression analyses was performed on seven lipomas, one
hibernoma, and 38 WD and DDLS to define and compare the genomic events associated
with these tumors. WD and DDLS had complex karyotypes. On average, WDLS had 11.1 
and DDLS had 22.7 chromosomal copy number aberrations. All of the liposarcomas
had 12q13-q15 amplifications with varying peaks at CDK4 (12q14.1), HMGA2
(12q14.3), and MDM2 (12q15); 24% of the DDLS and no WDLS had 1p32.2 (JUN)
amplifications; 33% WDLS and 35% DDLS had 1q24.3 amplifications involving DNM3
and miR-214/miR-199a2; 24% of the liposarcomas had 6q23-q24 amplifications
(including MAP3K5). Amplifications in GLI1 (12q13.3), JUN, and MAP3K5 (6q23.3)
were mutually exclusive and occurred predominately in the DDLS. 6q amplifications
occurred primarily in retroperitoneal tumors and females represented the majority
of those patients who developed fatty tumors prior to the age of 50 years old.
This detailed genetic mapping provides insight into the heterogeneity of WD and
DDLS and the chromosomal and genetic abnormalities that are present in and
distinguish these mesenchymal malignancies.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21117066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 29;10:118. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-118.

Balanced Shh signaling is required for proper formation and maintenance of dorsal
telencephalic midline structures.

Himmelstein DS(1), Bi C, Clark BS, Bai B, Kohtz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics, Children's Memorial
Research Center and Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The rostral telencephalic dorsal midline is an organizing center
critical for the formation of the future cortex and hippocampus. While the
intersection of WNTs, BMPs, and FGFs establishes boundaries within this critical 
center, a direct role of Shh signaling in this region remains controversial. In
this paper we show that both increased and decreased Shh signaling directly
affects boundary formation within the telencephalic dorsal midline.
RESULTS: Viral over-expression of Shh in the embryonic telencephalon prevents
formation of the cortical hem and choroid plexus, while expanding the roof plate.
In a transgenic model where cholesterol-lacking ShhN is expressed from one allele
(ShhN/+), genes expressed in all three domains, cortical hem, choroid plexus and 
roof plate expand. In Gli1/2 -/- mutant brains, where Shh signaling is reduced,
the roof plate expands, again at the expense of cortical hem and plexus. Cell
autonomous activation of Shh signaling in the dorsal midline through Gdf7-driven 
activated Smoothened expression results in expansion of the Wnt3a-expressing
cortical hem into the plexus domain. In addition, developmental stage determines 
dorsal midline responsiveness to Shh.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these data demonstrate that balanced Shh signaling is
critical for maintaining regional boundaries within the dorsal midline
telencephalic organizing center.

PMCID: PMC3018372
PMID: 21114856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Aug;38(6):3615-22. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0473-8. Epub 2010
Nov 26.

Protection from lipopolysaccharide-induced pulmonary microvascular endothelial
cell injury by activation of hedgehog signaling pathway.

Yang Y(1), Li Q, Deng Z, Zhang Z, Xu J, Qian G, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400037, China.

Pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (PMVECs) are critically involved in the
pathogenesis of acute lung injury. Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a fundamental
role in embryonic development as well as adult morphogenesis and carcinogenesis. 
As the priming protein of hedgehog signaling pathway, sonic hedgehog (Shh) may
recently be advantage for decreasing endothelial injury and promoting the repair 
of endothelial barrier function. To investigate the expression and role of
hedgehog signal pathway in PMVECs injured by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), cells were
divided into six groups: control group, LPS group, rhShh group, LPS+rhShh group, 
rhShh+cyclopamine group, and LPS+rhShh+cyclopamine group. Real time RT-PCR and
Western blotting were used to detect the mRNA and protein expression of hedgehog 
signal molecules including Shh, Patched-1 (Ptc-1) and Gli1 in nucleus. The
activity of PMVECs was examined by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. In this
study, we found that Shh, Ptch1, and Gli1 were expressed in rat PMVECs and their 
expression decreased when cells were treated by LPS. In the other hand, LPS
inhibited the activity of rat PMVECs and caused the cells injury. Activation of
Hedgehog signaling pathway by Shh could elevate the activity of PMVECs with
pretreatment by LPS. Therefore, hedgehog signaling pathway should play a
protective role on injury PMVECs by LPS.

PMID: 21110116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 Feb;121(2):229-39. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0780-0. Epub
2010 Nov 24.

Preponderance of sonic hedgehog pathway activation characterizes adult
medulloblastoma.

Al-Halabi H(1), Nantel A, Klekner A, Guiot MC, Albrecht S, Hauser P, Garami M,
Bognar L, Kavan P, Gerges N, Shirinian M, Roberge D, Muanza T, Jabado N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Montreal General Hospital, McGill University
Health Centre, Canada.

Medulloblastoma (MB) represents approximately 4% of adult brain tumours, and as
such is a poorly studied disease. Although many adult MB are treated using
paediatric MB protocols, the reported outcomes are inferior to those observed in 
children. It remains unclear whether biologic differences underlie these clinical
observations. We investigated the molecular characteristics of 31 adult MB.
Twelve and 19 adult MB were respectively examined using
Affymetrix-HG-U133-plus-2.0-genechips and immunohistochemical analyses. 26/31
(84%) of adult MB examined by gene expression and/or immunohistochemical analysis
showed evidence of sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway activation. A comparison of adult
and paediatric MB showed that most adult tumours cluster within the SHH-active
subgroup of paediatric MB. The preponderance of SHH activity in adult MB tumours 
was also shown by positive SFRP1 immunostaining in 16/19 adult paraffin-embedded 
adult MB tumour blocks. A smaller proportion of adult tumours exhibited evidence 
of WNT pathway activation, as confirmed by nuclear ß-catenin staining (9.7%;
3/31). Notably, we found PTCH1 gene mutation in 4/8 samples tested. Similar to
children, adult MB has abnormalities in developmental signalling pathways
including SHH and WNT. Importantly, we found a preponderance of SHH pathway
activation amongst MB tumours in adults. This SHH signature does not appear to
correlate with a long-term favourable outcome. Differences in molecular profiles 
exist between adult and paediatric SHH-driven MB and further investigations are
needed to better characterize age-related molecular profiles in this subgroup.

PMID: 21107850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Apr 10;336(1-2):117-22. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.11.010.
Epub 2010 Nov 20.

Localization of Sonic hedgehog secreting and receiving cells in the developing
and adult rat adrenal cortex.

Guasti L(1), Paul A, Laufer E, King P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the
London, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ,
UK. l.guasti@qmul.ac.uk

Sonic hedgehog signaling was recently demonstrated to play an important role in
murine adrenal cortex development. The organization of the rat adrenal differs
from that of the mouse, with the zona glomerulosa and zona fasciculata separated 
by an undifferentiated zone in the rat, but not in the mouse. In the present
study we aimed to determine the mRNA expression patterns of Sonic hedgehog and
the hedgehog signaling pathway components Patched-1 and Gli1 in the developing
and adult rat adrenal. Sonic hedgehog expression was detected at the periphery of
the cortex in cells lacking CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 expression, while
signal-receiving cells were localized in the overlying capsule mesenchyme. Using 
combined in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry we found that the cells
expressing Sonic hedgehog lie between the CYP11B2 and CYP11B1 layers, and thus
Sonic hedgehog expression defines one cell population of the undifferentiated
zone.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3063526
PMID: 21094676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cancer Sci. 2011 Feb;102(2):373-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01779.x. Epub
2010 Nov 22.

Hedgehog signaling pathway mediates the progression of non-invasive breast cancer
to invasive breast cancer.

Souzaki M(1), Kubo M, Kai M, Kameda C, Tanaka H, Taguchi T, Tanaka M, Onishi H,
Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The purpose of this study is to clarify the contribution of the Hedgehog
signaling pathway (Hh pathway) to the progression from ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). A total of 149 surgically resected
mammary disease specimens and 12 sentinel lymph nodes with micro-metastasis
(Ly-met) were studied. The degree of Hh pathway activation was estimated from the
Gli1 nuclear staining ratio (%Gli1 nuclear translocation) in cancer cells. The
invasiveness of breast cancer cells was determined using Matrigel assays. A
serial increase of %Gli1 nuclear translocation to IDC from non-neoplastic
diseases was confirmed. In tumor specimens, %Gli1 nuclear translocation
correlated with the invasiveness of each type of mammary disease and also
correlated with invasion-related histopathological parameters. The %Gli1 nuclear 
translocation in lymph nodes with micro-metastasis was similar to that in primary
sites and higher than that in DCIS with microinvasion and DCIS. Blockade of the
Hh pathway decreased the invasiveness of breast cancer cells. In IDC, %Gli1
nuclear translocation correlated with the expression of estrogen receptor-a.
Estrogen increased %Gli1 nuclear translocation and the invasiveness of estrogen
receptor-a-positive cells. The Hh pathway mediates progression from a
non-invasive phenotype to an invasive phenotype and %Gli1 nuclear translocation
may be useful as a predictive marker for evaluating the ability of invasiveness.

© 2010 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21091847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Hedgehog signalling in T-cell development: a non-redundant role for Gli1.

Bommhardt U.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52.

PMID: 21088480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 27;5(10):e13690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013690.

Disturbed expression of splicing factors in renal cancer affects alternative
splicing of apoptosis regulators, oncogenes, and tumor suppressors.

Piekielko-Witkowska A(1), Wiszomirska H, Wojcicka A, Poplawski P, Boguslawska J, 
Tanski Z, Nauman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Medical Centre of
Postgraduate Education, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common type of
renal cancer. One of the processes disturbed in this cancer type is alternative
splicing, although phenomena underlying these disturbances remain unknown.
Alternative splicing consists of selective removal of introns and joining of
residual exons of the primary transcript, to produce mRNA molecules of different 
sequence. Splicing aberrations may lead to tumoral transformation due to
synthesis of impaired splice variants with oncogenic potential. In this paper we 
hypothesized that disturbed alternative splicing in ccRCC may result from
improper expression of splicing factors, mediators of splicing reactions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using real-time PCR and Western-blot analysis we 
analyzed expression of seven splicing factors belonging to SR proteins family
(SF2/ASF, SC35, SRp20, SRp75, SRp40, SRp55 and 9G8), and one non-SR factor, hnRNP
A1 (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1) in 38 pairs of tumor-control
ccRCC samples. Moreover, we analyzed splicing patterns of five genes involved in 
carcinogenesis and partially regulated by analyzed splicing factors: RON,
CEACAM1, Rac1, Caspase-9, and GLI1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We found that the mRNA expression of splicing factors
was disturbed in tumors when compared to paired controls, similarly as levels of 
SF2/ASF and hnRNP A1 proteins. The correlation coefficients between expression
levels of specific splicing factors were increased in tumor samples. Moreover,
alternative splicing of five analyzed genes was also disturbed in ccRCC samples
and splicing pattern of two of them, Caspase-9 and CEACAM1 correlated with
expression of SF2/ASF in tumors. We conclude that disturbed expression of
splicing factors in ccRCC may possibly lead to impaired alternative splicing of
genes regulating tumor growth and this way contribute to the process of
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2972751
PMID: 21082031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Nat Med. 2010 Dec;16(12):1429-33. doi: 10.1038/nm.2251. Epub 2010 Nov 14.

Loss of the tumor suppressor Snf5 leads to aberrant activation of the
Hedgehog-Gli pathway.

Jagani Z(1), Mora-Blanco EL, Sansam CG, McKenna ES, Wilson B, Chen D, Klekota J, 
Tamayo P, Nguyen PT, Tolstorukov M, Park PJ, Cho YJ, Hsiao K, Buonamici S,
Pomeroy SL, Mesirov JP, Ruffner H, Bouwmeester T, Luchansky SJ, Murtie J,
Kelleher JF, Warmuth M, Sellers WR, Roberts CW, Dorsch M.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2010 Dec;16(12):1374-6.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway can drive tumorigenesis. To
investigate the mechanism by which glioma-associated oncogene family zinc
finger-1 (GLI1), a crucial effector of Hh signaling, regulates Hh pathway
activation, we searched for GLI1-interacting proteins. We report that the
chromatin remodeling protein SNF5 (encoded by SMARCB1, hereafter called SNF5),
which is inactivated in human malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs), interacts with
GLI1. We show that Snf5 localizes to Gli1-regulated promoters and that loss of
Snf5 leads to activation of the Hh-Gli pathway. Conversely, re-expression of SNF5
in MRT cells represses GLI1. Consistent with this, we show the presence of a
Hh-Gli-activated gene expression profile in primary MRTs and show that GLI1
drives the growth of SNF5-deficient MRT cells in vitro and in vivo. Therefore,
our studies reveal that SNF5 is a key mediator of Hh signaling and that aberrant 
activation of GLI1 is a previously undescribed targetable mechanism contributing 
to the growth of MRT cells.

PMCID: PMC3859448
PMID: 21076395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2010 Oct;30(5):659-65. doi:
10.1007/s11596-010-0560-z. Epub 2010 Nov 10.

Blockade of the sonic hedgehog signalling pathway inhibits choroidal
neovascularization in a laser-induced rat model.

He H(1), Zhang H, Li B, Li G, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China. helotus626@sina.com

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling has recently been shown to be involved in the
pathological angiogenesis in response to tissue hypoxia and ischemic injury.
Hypoxia/ischemia is considered to play an important role in the development of
choroidal neovascularization (CNV). This study was aimed to examine the effect of
blockade of the Shh signaling pathway on CNV and the underlying mechanism. A
total of 64 male Brown-Norway (BN) rats were used in this study. One eye of each 
rat underwent laser photocoagulation. The other eye served as normal control.
After the laser treatment, the 64 rats were divided into four groups (n=16 in
each group): Blank control group, in which no intravitreal administration was
given; cyclopamine group, recombinant Shh N-terminals protein (rShh) group and
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) group, in which cyclopamine (a Shh inhibitor),
rShh (a Shh activator) and PBS were intravitreally injected into the
laser-treated eyes respectively every other day for a total of four intravitreal 
injections immediately after the laser treatment. Fourteen days after the
intravitreal administration, the changes of CNV-related variables, including
positive CNV lesion percentage, CNV membrane area and CNV membrane thickness,
were evaluated by fluorescein angiography, indocyanine green angiography and
pathological examinations. The mRNA and protein expression of PTCH1, Gli1,
HIF-1(a), VEGF and DLL4 in each group on 14 days of CNV model was detected by
real-time quantitative PCR and western blot analysis, and the relationship
between the Shh cascade and the HIF-1(a)-VEGF-DLL4 cascade in CNV was analyzed.
The results showed that the CNV membrane area and the CNV membrane thickness were
decreased by 62.5% and 41.9% in the cyclopamine group and increased by 85.7% and 
64.3% in the rShh group in comparison to those in the blank control group (P<0.01
for each). There was no significant difference in the CNV membrane area and
thickness between the blank control group and PBS group (P=0.102 and P=0.063,
respectively). Real-time quantitative PCR revealed a 5.23-, 4.14-, 2.97-, 2.78-
and 2.39-fold up-regulation of the mRNA expression of PTCH1, Gli1, HIF-1(a), VEGF
and DLL4 genes in the laser-treated eyes compared with the normal control eyes in
the control group. In the cyclopamine group, the mRNA and protein expression of
Gli1, HIF-1(a), VEGF and DLL4 was significantly down-regulated (P<0.05 for each) 
while the expression of PTCH1 showed no significant changes at the mRNA (P=0.293)
and protein level (P=0.304). The mRNA expression and protein expression (P=0.001 
and P=0.021, respectively) of PTCH1, Gli1, HIF-1(a), VEGF and DLL4 was
significantly increased in the rShh group when compared with the control group.
The expression level of these genes was related to the severity of the CNV. It
was concluded that intravitreal administration of cyclopamine can effectively
inhibit the formation of laser-induced experimental CNV by down-regulating the
expression of the HIF-1(a)-VEGF-DLL4 cascade in CNV. The Shh signaling pathway as
an upstream signaling pathway of HIF-1(a)-VEGF-DLL4 cascade is implicated in the 
development of experimental CNV.

PMID: 21063852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. BMC Cancer. 2010 Nov 8;10:614. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-614.

Regulation of sonic hedgehog-GLI1 downstream target genes PTCH1, Cyclin D2,
Plakoglobin, PAX6 and NKX2.2 and their epigenetic status in medulloblastoma and
astrocytoma.

Shahi MH(1), Afzal M, Sinha S, Eberhart CG, Rey JA, Fan X, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Biology Unit-CIFA, University of Navarra School of Sciences,
Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is critical for cell
growth and differentiation. Impairment of this pathway can result in both birth
defects and cancer. Despite its importance in cancer development, the Shh pathway
has not been thoroughly investigated in tumorigenesis of brain tumors. In this
study, we sought to understand the regulatory roles of GLI1, the immediate
downstream activator of the Shh signaling pathway on its downstream target genes 
PTCH1, Cyclin D2, Plakoglobin, NKX2.2 and PAX6 in medulloblastoma and astrocytic 
tumors.
METHODS: We silenced GLI1 expression in medulloblastoma and astrocytic cell lines
by transfection of siRNA against GLI1. Subsequently, we performed RT-PCR and
quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) to assay the expression of downstream
target genes PTCH1, Cyclin D2, Plakoglobin, NKX2.2 and PAX6. We also attempted to
correlate the pattern of expression of GLI1 and its regulated genes in 14 cell
lines and 41 primary medulloblastoma and astrocytoma tumor samples. We also
assessed the methylation status of the Cyclin D2 and PTCH1 promoters in these 14 
cell lines and 58 primary tumor samples.
RESULTS: Silencing expression of GLI1 resulted up-regulation of all target genes 
in the medulloblastoma cell line, while only PTCH1 was up-regulated in
astrocytoma. We also observed methylation of the cyclin D2 promoter in a
significant number of astrocytoma cell lines (63%) and primary astrocytoma tumor 
samples (32%), but not at all in any medulloblastoma samples. PTCH1 promoter
methylation was less frequently observed than Cyclin D2 promoter methylation in
astrocytomas, and not at all in medulloblastomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate different regulatory mechanisms of Shh-GLI1 
signaling. These differences vary according to the downstream target gene
affected, the origin of the tissue, as well as epigenetic regulation of some of
these genes.

PMCID: PMC2989332
PMID: 21059263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hepatogastroenterology. 2010 Jul-Aug;57(101):891-8.

The effect of differentiating and apoptotic agents on notch signalling pathway in
hepatoblastoma.

Aktas S(1), Zadeoglulari Z, Erçetin P, Olgun N.

Author information: 
(1)Dokuz Eylul University Institute of Oncology, Izmir Turkey.
safiyeaktas@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Notch expression is not yet determined in hepatoblastoma. In
this study the effect of chemotherapeutics (cisplatin, doxorubicin, cytosin
arabinoside); differentiating agent (13 cis-retinoic acid) and apoptotic agents
(5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, arsenic trioxide) on notch expression in hepatoblastoma 
were evaluated.
METHODOLOGY: After HepG2 cell line was cultured and the agents and their
combinations were applied for 24 hour in pre-optimized 50% lethal doses, RNA
isolation and cDNA converting, expression of 84 custom array genes of notch
signaling pathway (SABiosciences, PAT059F-24) was determined by Real Time PCR.
The methylation status of 6 genes that showed more than 5 fold changes compared
with control group were explored by Methylation qPCR Assay. High expressed genes 
are HDAC1, NFKB1, CHUK, CDKN1A, and CBL. Low expressed genes are DLL1, CD44,
FZD2, GLI1, IL17B, LMO2, NOTCH1, LOR, PAX5, PT-CRA, SH2D1A, and WISP1. The genes 
searched for methylation (DLL1, HEY1, DTX1, HDAC1, NOTCH2 and JAG1) were not
found to be related with methylation.
RESULTS: The high expressed genes are related with cell proliferation. The main
signaling genes that are closed to notch in signaling pathway are low expressed
in hepatoblastoma. The agents do not show prominent effect of gene expression in 
many genes and methylation is not the reason of expression changes. The use of
retinoic acid in the control of minimal residual disease of hepatoblastoma should
be discussed. 5 aza "cytidin" the demethylating agent is not advised in treatment
according to our results.
CONCLUSION: Cisplatin as main chemotherapeutic agent treatment is shown to change
gene expression levels in notch signalling pathway in hepatoblastoma.

PMID: 21033247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 16;107(46):19921-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1007256107. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Inositol hexakisphosphate kinase-2 acts as an effector of the vertebrate Hedgehog
pathway.

Sarmah B(1), Wente SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-8240, USA.

Inositol phosphate (IP) kinases constitute an emerging class of cellular kinases 
linked to multiple cellular activities. Here, we report a previously
uncharacterized cellular function in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling for the IP kinase
designated inositol hexakisphosphate kinase-2 (IP6K2) that produces diphosphoryl 
inositol phosphates (PP-IPs). In zebrafish embryos, IP6K2 activity was required
for normal development of craniofacial structures, somites, and neural crest
cells. ip6k2 depletion in both zebrafish and mammalian cells also inhibited Hh
target gene expression. Inhibiting IP(6) kinase activity using
N(2)-(m-(trifluoromethy)lbenzyl) N(6)-(p-nitrobenzyl)purine (TNP) resulted in
altered Hh signal transduction. In zebrafish, restoring IP6K2 levels with
exogenous ip6k2 mRNA reversed the effects of IP6K2 depletion. Furthermore,
overexpression of ip6k2 in mammalian cells enhanced the Hh pathway response,
suggesting IP6K2 is a positive regulator of Hh signaling. Perturbations from
IP6K2 depletion or TNP were reversed by overexpressing smoM2, gli1, or ip6k2.
Moreover, the inhibitory effect of cyclopamine was reversed by overexpressing
ip6k2. This identified roles for the inositol kinase pathway in early vertebrate 
development and tissue morphogenesis, and in Hh signaling. We propose that IP6K2 
activity is required at the level or downstream of Smoothened but upstream of the
transcription activator Gli1.

PMCID: PMC2993352
PMID: 20980661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Oncogene. 2011 Feb 10;30(6):714-23. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.459. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

GLI1 facilitates the migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells through
MUC5AC-mediated attenuation of E-cadherin.

Inaguma S(1), Kasai K, Ikeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

The Krüppel-like zinc-finger protein GLI1 functions as a downstream transcription
factor of Hedgehog signaling and plays a pivotal role in the cellular
proliferation of many types of tumors, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA). PDA develops from dysplastic lesions called pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanIN) through a multistep carcinogenesis process that changes its
cellular characteristics, including a mucin expression profile. Increased
expression of a gel-forming mucin, MUC5AC, was previously revealed as a major
biomarker for the poor prognosis of PDA patients, but the molecular mechanisms
responsible for its expression and correlation with poor prognosis are not fully 
understood. Here we show that MUC5AC is a direct transcriptional target of GLI1
in PDA cells. Overexpression of GLI1 enhanced MUC5AC expression, and a double
knockdown of GLI1 and GLI2 suppressed endogenous MUC5AC expression in PDA cells. 
Luciferase reporter assays revealed that GLI1 and GLI2 can activate the MUC5AC
promoter through its conserved CACCC-box-like cis-regulatory elements. We also
found that GLI1-upregulated MUC5AC was expressed in the intercellular junction
between cultured PDA cells and interfered with the membrane localization of
E-cadherin, leading to decreased E-cadherin-dependent cell-cell adhesion and
promoting the migration and invasion of PDA cells. Consistently, GLI1 induced the
nuclear accumulation and target gene expression of ß-catenin in a
MUC5AC-dependent manner. Finally, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that GLI1
expression statistically correlated with MUC5AC expression and also with altered 
subcellular localization of E-cadherin and ß-catenin in PanIN lesions and PDA.
This evidence revealed a new aspect of GLI1 function in modulating
E-cadherin/ß-catenin-regulated cancer cell properties through the expression of a
gel-forming mucin.

PMID: 20972463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mol Med. 2011 Jan-Feb;17(1-2):103-12. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00062. Epub 2010
Oct 15.

Inhibition of Sonic hedgehog and Notch pathways enhances sensitivity of CD133(+) 
glioma stem cells to temozolomide therapy.

Ulasov IV(1), Nandi S, Dey M, Sonabend AM, Lesniak MS.

Author information: 
(1)The Brain Tumor Cancer Center, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Malignant gliomas are currently treated with temozolomide (TMZ), but often
exhibit resistance to this agent. CD133(+) cancer stem cells, a population
believed to contribute to the tumor's chemoresistance, bear the activation of
Notch and Sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathways. In this study, we examined whether
inhibition of both pathways enhances the efficacy of TMZ monotherapy in the
context of glioma stem cells. Transcriptional analysis of Notch and SHH pathways 
in CD133(+)-enriched glioma cell populations showed the activity of these
pathways. CD133(+) cells were less susceptible to TMZ treatment than the unsorted
glioma counterparts. Interestingly, Notch and SHH pathway transcriptional
activity in CD133(+) glioma cells was further enhanced by TMZ exposure, which led
to NOTCH 1, NCOR2, and GLI1 upregulation (6.64-, 3.73-, and 2.79-fold,
respectively) and CFLAR downregulation (4.22-fold). The therapeutic effect of TMZ
was enhanced by Notch and SHH pathway pharmacological antagonism with GSI-1 and
cyclopamine. More importantly, simultaneous treatment involving TMZ with both of 
these compounds led to a significant increase in CD133(+) glioma cytotoxicity
than treatment with any of these agents alone (P < 0.05). In conclusion, CD133(+)
glioma cells overexpress genes involved in Notch and SHH pathways. These pathways
contribute to the chemoresistant phenotype of CD133(+) glioma cells, as their
antagonism leads to an additive effect when used in combination with TMZ.

PMCID: PMC3022974
PMID: 20957337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 1;5(10). pii: e13054. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013054.

cDNA microarray gene expression profiling of hedgehog signaling pathway
inhibition in human colon cancer cells.

Shi T(1), Mazumdar T, Devecchio J, Duan ZH, Agyeman A, Aziz M, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays a critical role in normal cellular
processes, in normal mammalian gastrointestinal development and differentiation, 
and in oncogenesis and maintenance of the malignant phenotype in a variety of
human cancers. Increasing evidence further implicates the involvement of HH
signaling in oncogenesis and metastatic behavior of colon cancers. However,
genomic approaches to elucidate the role of HH signaling in cancers in general
are lacking, and data derived on HH signaling in colon cancer is extremely
limited.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify unique downstream targets of the GLI 
genes, the transcriptional regulators of HH signaling, in the context of colon
carcinoma, we employed a small molecule inhibitor of both GLI1 and GLI2, GANT61, 
in two human colon cancer cell lines, HT29 and GC3/c1. Cell cycle analysis
demonstrated accumulation of GANT61-treated cells at the G1/S boundary. cDNA
microarray gene expression profiling of 18,401 genes identified Differentially
Expressed Genes (DEGs) both common and unique to HT29 and GC3/c1. Analyses using 
GenomeStudio (statistics), Matlab (heat map), Ingenuity (canonical pathway
analysis), or by qRT-PCR, identified p21(Cip1) (CDKN1A) and p15(Ink4b) (CDKN2B), 
which play a role in the G1/S checkpoint, as up-regulated genes at the G1/S
boundary. Genes that determine further cell cycle progression at G1/S including
E2F2, CYCLIN E2 (CCNE2), CDC25A and CDK2, and genes that regulate passage of
cells through G2/M (CYCLIN A2 [CCNA2], CDC25C, CYCLIN B2 [CCNB2], CDC20 and CDC2 
[CDK1], were down-regulated. In addition, novel genes involved in stress
response, DNA damage response, DNA replication and DNA repair were identified
following inhibition of HH signaling.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study identifies genes that are involved in
HH-dependent cellular proliferation in colon cancer cells, and following its
inhibition, genes that regulate cell cycle progression and events downstream of
the G1/S boundary.

PMCID: PMC2948497
PMID: 20957031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Neurooncol. 2011 Jul;103(3):459-67. doi: 10.1007/s11060-010-0431-2. Epub 2010
Oct 16.

Expression of Gli1 and PARP1 in medulloblastoma: an immunohistochemical study of 
65 cases.

Pizem J(1), Popovic M, Cör A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Institute of Pathology, University of Ljubljana, 1000
Ljubljana, Slovenia. joze.pizem@mf.uni-lj.si

Activation of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signalling pathway, which is involved in
the formation of a significant proportion of medulloblastomas, is characterised
by up-regulation and nuclear localisation of downstream transcription factor
Gli1. Our aim was to analyse Gli1 expression by immunohistochemistry in a large
group of medulloblastomas, to assess possible correlations with WNT (wingless)
pathway activation and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) expression,
previously shown to be associated with SHH pathway activation in a mouse model of
medulloblastoma. We analysed expression and localisation of Gli1, ß-catenin and
PARP1 by immunohistochemistry in a series of 65 consecutive medulloblastomas.
Gli1 was positive in 40 (61.5%) medulloblastomas, as revealed by either strong
(21 cases) or mild (19 cases) nuclear reaction in more than 50% of tumour cells. 
Nuclear positivity for PARP1 was noted in all 65 cases, ranging from 46% to 100% 
(mean 80%) but was not correlated with Gli1 positivity. Gli1 was positive in 9 of
11 cases with nuclear localisation of ß-catenin, signifying concurrent activation
of SHH and WNT pathways. Overall survival of patients with strong nuclear
reaction to Gli1 was better compared with patients with Gli1-negative
medulloblastomas. Immunohistochemical detection of Gli1 could be useful in
identifying medulloblastomas with SHH pathway activation. As revealed by nuclear 
reaction to Gli1, the SHH pathway is activated in approximately 60% of
medulloblastomas. In some medulloblastomas, both SHH and WNT appear to be
activated. PARP1 is highly expressed in medulloblastomas. It might be useful as a
target to increase the effectiveness of current treatment modalities.

PMID: 20953661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Dec 1;10(11):1182-90. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

CD44+ CD133+ population exhibits cancer stem cell-like characteristics in human
gallbladder carcinoma.

Shi C(1), Tian R, Wang M, Wang X, Jiang J, Zhang Z, Li X, He Z, Gong W, Qin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biliary-pancreatic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Affiliated to
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Dec 1;10(11):1191-3.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs)/tumor-initiating cells have been defined as a subset of 
tumor cells responsible for initiating and sustaining tumor development. Emerging
evidence strongly supports the existence of CSCs in various solid tumors, but
they have not yet been identified in human gallbladder carcinomas (GBC). In this 
study, we identified CSCs in primary GBC and in the cell line GBC-SD using the
cell surface markers CD44 and CD133. The percentages of CD44+CD133+ cells were
1.76-3.05% in primary tumors and 40.29% in GBC-SD cells. These cells showed stem 
cell properties, including self-renewal, differentiation potential, and high
tumorigenicity. In vitro culture experiments revealed that CD44+CD133+ GBC cells 
possessed a higher spheroid-colony forming ability in serum-free media than other
subpopulations. When injected into nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficient mice, these cells formed new tumors and generated CD44+CD133+,
CD44-, and CD133- progeny. CD44+CD133+ cells also showed a high degree of
chemoresistance, possibly due to upregulation of the breast cancer resistance
protein (ABCG2) and the transcription factor Gli1 in these highly tumorigenic
cells. These results suggest that the CD44+CD133+ population exhibited CSC-like
characteristics and may thus provide a novel approach to the diagnosis and
treatment of GBC.

PMID: 20948317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. EMBO Mol Med. 2010 Nov;2(11):440-57. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201000098.

Loss of WNT-TCF addiction and enhancement of HH-GLI1 signalling define the
metastatic transition of human colon carcinomas.

Varnat F(1), Siegl-Cachedenier I, Malerba M, Gervaz P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Previous studies demonstrate the initiation of colon cancers through deregulation
of WNT-TCF signalling. An accepted but untested extension of this finding is that
incurable metastatic colon carcinomas (CCs) universally remain WNT-TCF-dependent,
prompting the search for WNT-TCF inhibitors. CCs and their stem cells also
require Hedgehog (HH)-GLI1 activity, but how these pathways interact is unclear. 
Here we define coincident high-to-low WNT-TCF and low-to-high HH-GLI transitions 
in patient CCs, most strikingly in their CD133(+) stem cells, that mark the
development of metastases. We find that enhanced HH-GLI mimics this transition,
driving also an embryonic stem (ES)-like stemness signature and that GLI1 can be 
regulated by multiple CC oncogenes. The data support a model in which the
metastatic transition involves the acquisition or enhancement of a more primitive
ES-like phenotype, and the downregulation of the early WNT-TCF programme, driven 
by oncogene-regulated high GLI1 activity. Consistently, TCF blockade does not
generally inhibit tumour growth; instead, it, like enhanced HH-GLI, promotes
metastatic growth in vivo. Treatments for metastatic disease should therefore
block HH-GLI1 but not WNT-TCF activities.

PMCID: PMC3394505
PMID: 20941789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Non-redundant role for the transcription factor Gli1 at multiple stages of
thymocyte development.

Drakopoulou E(1), Outram SV, Rowbotham NJ, Ross SE, Furmanski AL, Saldana JI,
Hager-Theodorides AL, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428-9.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway influences multiple stages of murine T-cell
development. Hh signaling mediates transcriptional changes by the activity of the
Gli family of transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Both Gli2 and Gli3 are 
essential for mouse development and can be processed to function as
transcriptional repressors or transcriptional activators, whereas Gli1, itself a 
transcriptional target of Hh pathway activation, can only function as a
transcriptional activator and is not essential for mouse development.
Gli1-deficient mice are healthy and appear normal and nonredundant functions for 
Gli1 have been difficult to identify. Here we show that Gli1 is non-redundant in 
the regulation of T-cell development in the thymus, at multiple developmental
stages. Analysis of Gli1-deficient embryonic mouse thymus shows a role for Gli1
to promote the differentiation of CD4<U+207B>CD8<U+207B> double negative (DN) thymocytes before
pre- TCR signal transduction, and a negative regulatory function after pre-TCR
signaling. In addition, introduction of a Class I-restricted transgenic TCR into 
the adult Gli1-deficient and embryonic Gli2-deficient thymus showed that both
Gli1 and Gli2 influence its selection to the CD8 lineage.

PMCID: PMC3055198
PMID: 20935514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Neurosurgery. 2010 Oct;67(4):998-1019; discussion 1019. doi:
10.1227/NEU.0b013e3181ec7b71.

Global gene expression profiling and tissue microarray reveal novel candidate
genes and down-regulation of the tumor suppressor gene CAV1 in sporadic
vestibular schwannomas.

Aarhus M(1), Bruland O, Sætran HA, Mork SJ, Lund-Johansen M, Knappskog PM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway. mads.aarhus@helse-bergen.no

BACKGROUND: The vestibular nerve is the predilection site for schwannomas. Few
transcriptomic studies have been performed on solely sporadic vestibular
schwannomas (VSs).
OBJECTIVE: To detect genes with altered expression levels in sporadic VSs.
METHODS: We studied 25 VSs and 3 tibial nerves (controls) with the ABI 1700
microarray platform. Significance analysis of microarrays was performed to
explore differential gene expression. Selected genes were validated with
quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. A tissue microarray
was constructed for immunohistochemistry. Neurofibromatosis type II cDNA was
sequenced for mutations.
RESULTS: The VSs formed 2 clusters based on the total expression of 23,055 genes.
Tumor size, previous Gamma Knife surgery, neurofibromatosis type II mutations,
and cystic tumors were distributed equally in both. Significance analysis of
microarrays detected 1650 differentially expressed genes. On the top 500 list,
several cancer-related genes with an unrecognized role in VSs were
down-regulated: CAV1, TGFB3, VCAM1, GLI1, GLI2, PRKAR2B, EPHA4, and FZD1.
Immunohistochemistry showed no CAV1 expression in the VSs. The ERK pathway was
the central core in the network linking the differentially expressed genes. The
previously reported VS candidate genes SPARC, PLAT, and FGF1 were up-regulated.
Nineteen of 25 VSs had NF2 mutations.
CONCLUSION: Using microarray technology, we identified novel genes and pathways
with a putative role in VSs, confirmed previous candidate genes, and found
cancer-related genes with no reported role in VSs. Among these, down-regulation
of CAV1 at both the mRNA and protein levels is of particular interest because
this tumor suppressor normally is expressed in Schwann cells.

PMID: 20881564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Dec;95(12):5330-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-0637. Epub 
2010 Sep 29.

Indian Hedgehog and its targets in human endometrium: menstrual cycle expression 
and response to CDB-2914.

Wei Q(1), Levens ED, Stefansson L, Nieman LK.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Building 10, CRC, Room 1-3140, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

CONTEXT: Progesterone is critical for secretory endometrial differentiation in
women, but its downstream mediators are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate endometrial expression of Indian
Hedgehog (IHH) and genes involved in its signaling [smoothened (SMO), patched-1
(PTCH1), glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), and GLI2] during the
menstrual cycle and the effects of the selective progesterone receptor modulator 
CDB-2914 on its expression.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Comparisons between normally cycling volunteers and women
with symptomatic fibroids who received CDB-2914 or placebo were made at a
clinical research center.
PATIENTS AND INTERVENTIONS: Endometrial biopsy was performed on 34 volunteers, 17
additional women with fibroids.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Endometrial expression of IHH, SMO, PTCH1, GLI1, and GLI2 
by in situ hybridization and/or RT-PCR and IHH, GLI1, and PTCH1
immunohistochemistry were evaluated.
RESULTS: RT-PCR showed expression of IHH, SMO, PTCH1, GLI1, and GLI2, with
significant increases in IHH (5.2-fold) and GLI1 (3.6-fold) in endometrium
exposed to CDB-2914 compared with placebo. In situ hybridization showed IHH mRNA 
expression in glands and stroma that was stronger in secretory samples. Among
volunteers, IHH and GLI1 immunohistochemistry scores were higher in the secretory
than proliferative phase in the nuclei and cytoplasm of glands and stroma
(P=0.0002-0.04). Compared with follicular-phase controls, women exposed to
CDB-2914 showed increased IHH expression in all compartments except stromal
cytoplasm (P=0.0199-0.0423); GLI1 was up-regulated in glandular nuclei and
cytoplasm compared with both volunteers and women receiving placebo (P=0.0416).
CONCLUSIONS: The temporal increase in endometrial IHH and GLI1 during the
secretory phase, and their modulation by CDB-2914, suggests progestin regulation 
and a potential role in endometrial differentiation and implantation.

PMCID: PMC2999967
PMID: 20881264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Oncol Rep. 2010 Nov;24(5):1225-32.

Differential expression of hedgehog signaling components and Snail/E-cadherin in 
human brain tumors.

Chou CH(1), Lieu AS, Wu CH, Chang LK, Loh JK, Lin RC, Chen WJ, Liao HD, Fu WS,
Chang CS, Lin CC, Hsu CM, Chio CC, Howng SL, Hong YR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.

The hedgehog (Hh) transcription factor Gli induces transformation of epithelial
cells via induction of Snail, a repressor of E-cadherin. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition is also a determinant of the progression of tumorigenesis, following
down-regulation of E-cadherin. However, the role of Hh signaling components and
Snail/E-cadherin in brain tumors is not yet fully understood. We analyzed the
expression of Hh signaling components and Snail/E-cadherin in 69 brain tumors by 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The data showed that
overexpression of Smo (35/69), Ptch (50/69), Gli1 (56/69), Gli2 (29/69) and N-myc
(39/69) might contribute to brain tumorigenesis. Our results also indicated that 
Snail and E-cadherin showed opposing expression in malignant tumors (high grade
astrocytoma and metastasis). Snail and E-cadherin showed less correlation in
benign brain tumors. We further investigated mutations of Gli2 and Snail by
RT-PCR and direct sequencing. No mutation was observed on Gli2 but several
sporadic mutations on Snail were found, including S96G, S111L, S111L/S119Y and
one nonsense mutation at codon 158 (Y158*). An in vitro E-cadherin promoter assay
showed that S96G, S111L, S111L/S119Y Snail mutants were decreased by 15, 25 and
50%, respectively, whereas Y158* was increased by 40% compared to wild-type.
Furthermore, our data showed that wild-type Snail and S96G, S111L, S111L/S119Y
translocated to the nucleus, while the Y158* mutant failed to translocate to the 
nucleus. Taken together, our results demonstrate that Hh signaling components,
the expression and mutations of Snail and the expression of E-cadherin may play
an important role in human brain tumorigenesis.

PMID: 20878114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Nov 15;20(22):6748-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.08.134. Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Second generation 2-pyridyl biphenyl amide inhibitors of the hedgehog pathway.

Castanedo GM(1), Wang S, Robarge KD, Blackwood E, Burdick D, Chang C, Dijkgraaf
GJ, Gould S, Gunzner J, Guichert O, Halladay J, Khojasteh C, Lee L, Marsters JC
Jr, Murray L, Peterson D, Plise E, Salphati L, de Sauvage FJ, Wong S, Sutherlin
DP.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech, 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, United States.

Potent and efficacious inhibitors of the hedgehog pathway for the treatment of
cancer have been prepared using the 2-pyridyl biphenyl amide scaffold common to
the clinical lead GDC-0449. Analogs with polar groups in the para-position of the
aryl amide ring optimized potency, had minimal CYP inhibition, and possessed good
exposure in rats. Compounds 9d and 14f potently inhibited hedgehog signaling as
measured by Gli1 mRNA and were found to be equivalent or more potent than
GDC-0449, respectively, when studied in a Ptch(+/-) medulloblastoma allograft
model, that is, highly dependent on hedgehog signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20875741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biopolymers. 2011 Jan;95(1):24-30. doi: 10.1002/bip.21544.

A structure-activity relationship study of small-molecule inhibitors of
GLI1-mediated transcription.

Actis M(1), Connelly MC, Mayasundari A, Punchihewa C, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry Center, Departments of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, 
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105,
USA.

We have previously reported ketoprofen amide compounds as inhibitors of
GLI1-mediated transcription, an essential down-stream element of the Hedgehog
(Hh) pathway. These compounds inhibited Gli-luciferase reporter in C3H10T1/2
cells that were exogenously transfected with GLI1 and in Rh30 cells that
endogenously overexpress GLI1. Here we have designed new derivatives of these
compounds aiming to explore the structure-activation relationship (SAR). By
replacing the ketone carbonyl group of the ketoprofen moiety with an ether,
amide, sulfonamide, or sulfone, we found several new compounds that are
equipotent to the ketoprofen amide compounds. Among them, sulfone 30 inhibited
Gli-luciferase reporter in C3H10T1/2 cells that were exogenously transfected with
GLI1 and in Rh30 cells that endogenously overexpress GLI1.

2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20872873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Aug 26;6(8). pii: e1000908. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000908.

Computational prediction and experimental verification of new MAP kinase docking 
sites and substrates including Gli transcription factors.

Whisenant TC(1), Ho DT, Benz RW, Rogers JS, Kaake RM, Gordon EA, Huang L, Baldi
P, Bardwell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

In order to fully understand protein kinase networks, new methods are needed to
identify regulators and substrates of kinases, especially for weakly expressed
proteins. Here we have developed a hybrid computational search algorithm that
combines machine learning and expert knowledge to identify kinase docking sites, 
and used this algorithm to search the human genome for novel MAP kinase
substrates and regulators focused on the JNK family of MAP kinases. Predictions
were tested by peptide array followed by rigorous biochemical verification with
in vitro binding and kinase assays on wild-type and mutant proteins. Using this
procedure, we found new 'D-site' class docking sites in previously known JNK
substrates (hnRNP-K, PPM1J/PP2Czeta), as well as new JNK-interacting proteins
(MLL4, NEIL1). Finally, we identified new D-site-dependent MAPK substrates,
including the hedgehog-regulated transcription factors Gli1 and Gli3, suggesting 
that a direct connection between MAP kinase and hedgehog signaling may occur at
the level of these key regulators. These results demonstrate that a genome-wide
search for MAP kinase docking sites can be used to find new docking sites and
substrates.

PMCID: PMC2928751
PMID: 20865152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Lancet Oncol. 2010 Nov;11(11):1057-65. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(10)70206-0. Epub
2010 Sep 21.

Mechanisms of peripheral neuropathy associated with bortezomib and vincristine in
patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: a prospective analysis of data
from the HOVON-65/GMMG-HD4 trial.

Broyl A(1), Corthals SL, Jongen JL, van der Holt B, Kuiper R, de Knegt Y, van
Duin M, el Jarari L, Bertsch U, Lokhorst HM, Durie BG, Goldschmidt H, Sonneveld
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
a.broyl@erasmusmc.nl

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2011 Feb;12(2):120-1; author reply 121.
    Lancet Oncol. 2010 Nov;11(11):1014-6.

BACKGROUND: Bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy is a dose-limiting toxicity 
in patients with multiple myeloma, often requiring adjustment of treatment and
affecting quality of life. We investigated the molecular profiles of early-onset 
(within one treatment cycle) versus late-onset (after two or three treatment
cycles) bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy and compared them with those of 
vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy during the induction phase of a
prospective phase 3 trial.
METHODS: In the induction phase of the HOVON-65/GMMG-HD4 trial, patients (aged
18-65 years) with newly diagnosed Salmon and Durie stage 2 or 3 multiple myeloma 
were randomly assigned to three cycles of bortezomib-based or vincristine-based
induction treatment. We analysed the gene expression profiles and
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of pretreatment samples of myeloma plasma 
cells and peripheral blood, respectively. This study is registered, number
ISRCTN64455289.
FINDINGS: We analysed gene expression profiles of myeloma plasma cells from 329
(39%) of 833 patients at diagnosis, and SNPs in DNA samples from 369 (44%)
patients. Early-onset bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy was noted in 20
(8%) patients, and 63 (25%) developed the late-onset type. Early-onset and
late-onset vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy was noted in 11 (4%) and 17 
(7%) patients, respectively. Significant genes in myeloma plasma cells from
patients that were associated with early-onset bortezomib-induced peripheral
neuropathy were the enzyme coding genes RHOBTB2 (upregulated by 1·59 times;
p=4·5×10(-5)), involved in drug-induced apoptosis, CPT1C (1·44 times;
p=2·9×10(-7)), involved in mitochondrial dysfunction, and SOX8 (1·68 times;
p=4·28×10(-13)), involved in development of peripheral nervous system.
Significant SNPs in the same patients included those located in the apoptosis
gene caspase 9 (odds ratio [OR] 3·59, 95% CI 1·59-8·14; p=2·9×10(-3)), ALOX12
(3·50, 1·47-8·32; p=3·8×10(-3)), and IGF1R (0·22, 0·07-0·77; p=8·3×10(-3)). In
late-onset bortezomib-induced peripheral neuropathy, the significant genes were
SOD2 (upregulated by 1·18 times; p=9·6×10(-3)) and MYO5A (1·93 times;
p=3·2×10(-2)), involved in development and function of the nervous system.
Significant SNPs were noted in inflammatory genes MBL2 (OR 0·49, 95% CI
0·26-0·94; p=3·0×10(-2)) and PPARD (0·35, 0·15-0·83; p=9·1×10(-3)), and DNA
repair genes ERCC4 (2·74, 1·56-4·84; p=1·0×10(-3)) and ERCC3 (1·26, 0·75-2·12;
p=3·3×10(-3)). By contrast, early-onset vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy
was characterised by upregulation of genes involved in cell cycle and
proliferation, including AURKA (3·31 times; p=1·04×10(-2)) and MKI67 (3·66 times;
p=1·82×10(-3)), and the presence of SNPs in genes involved in these processes-eg,
GLI1 (rs2228224 [0·13, 0·02-0·97, p=1·18×10(-2)] and rs2242578 [0·14, 0·02-1·12, 
p=3·00×10(-2)]). Late-onset vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy was
associated with the presence of SNPs in genes involved in absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion-eg, rs1413239 in DPYD (3·29, 1·47-7·37,
5·40×10(-3)) and rs3887412 in ABCC1 (3·36, 1·47-7·67, p=5·70×10(-3)).
INTERPRETATION: Our results strongly suggest an interaction between
myeloma-related factors and the patient's genetic background in the development
of treatment-induced peripheral neuropathy, with different molecular pathways
being implicated in bortezomib-induced and vincristine-induced peripheral
neuropathy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20864405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Apr;226(4):1118-27. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22433.

Hedgehog/GLI1 regulates IGF dependent malignant behaviors in glioma stem cells.

Hsieh A(1), Ellsworth R, Hsieh D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

A population of tumorigenic, chemoresistant, and radioresistant cancer stem cells
is postulated to contribute to the aggressive and fatal clinical course of
glioblastomas. Activation of the Hedgehog (HH) pathway and increased expression
of its downstream effector GLI1 are driving factors of glioma tumorigenicity and 
glioma stem cell (GSC) biology. In this study, we describe a dependence of
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling on active HH/GLI1 in GSCs. Insulin
receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) was identified as a target of the GLI1 transcription 
factor and inhibition of GLI1 was sufficient to obstruct IRS1 protein expression 
and IGF-I induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation. Suppression
of GLI1 activity decreased the responsiveness of GSCs to IGF-I stimulation and
constrained IGF-I dependent GSC proliferation, clonogenicity, invasion, and
angiogenesis. In addition, blockade of the HH/GLI1 and IGF pathways countered the
intrinsic and acquired resistance of GSCs to temozolomide. These results provide 
further insight into the oncogenic mechanisms of the HH pathway in glioblastoma
and demonstrate a cooperative signaling axis between the HH/GLI1 and IGF pathways
to propagate malignant GSC phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20857406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Pathology. 2010;42(6):553-9. doi: 10.3109/00313025.2010.508785.

Opposite expression patterns of Sonic hedgehog and Indian hedgehog are associated
with aberrant methylation status of their promoters in colorectal cancers.

Fu X(1), Yang X, Li J, Tian X, Cai J, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Digestive Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.

AIMS: Activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway in colorectal cancers
(CRCs) is controversial, and its regulation mechanism remains to be elucidated.
In the present study we attempted to clarify the regulatory mechanism of the
expression of Hh ligands during colorectal carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry
were used to characterise expressions of the SHH, IHH and GLI1 genes in 36 CRCs, 
and the findings compared to 21 hyperplastic polyps and 32 colorectal adenomas.
In addition, the methylation status of the SHH and IHH promoters in these samples
were investigated.
RESULTS: Expressions of SHH and GLI1 proteins were increased significantly in
CRCs compared with those in hyperplastic polyps and colorectal adenomas (p<0.01
for both). In contrast, IHH was almost lost in both colorectal adenomas and CRCs.
Furthermore, DNA methylation analysis revealed that the frequency of SHH
methylation in CRCs (20.6%) was significantly lower than that in colorectal
adenomas (72.4%, p<0.001) and hyperplastic polyps (64.7%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). IHH
promoter methylation was frequently observed in colorectal adenomas (55.2%,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004) and CRCs (70.6%, p<0.001) compared with that in hyperplastic polyps
(11.8%).
CONCLUSION: SHH hypomethylation could lead to the SHH dependent activation of Hh 
pathway in CRCs. On the other hand, down-regulation of IHH expression as a result
of hypermethylation, may be an early event in colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20854074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Orthop Surg Res. 2010 Sep 16;5:69. doi: 10.1186/1749-799X-5-69.

Morphology of the medial collateral ligament of the knee.

Liu F(1), Yue B, Gadikota HR, Kozanek M, Liu W, Gill TJ, Rubash HE, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Orthopaedic Department, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 02114 Boston, USA. GLI1@PARTNERS.ORG.

BACKGROUND: Quantitative knowledge on the anatomy of the medial collateral
ligament (MCL) is important for treatment of MCL injury and for MCL release
during total knee arthroplasty (TKA). The objective of this study was to
quantitatively determine the morphology of the MCL of human knees.
METHODS: 10 cadaveric human knees were dissected to investigate the MCL anatomy. 
The specimens were fixed in full extension and this position was maintained
during the dissection and morphometric measurements. The outlines of the
insertion sites of the superficial MCL (sMCL) and deep MCL (dMCL) were digitized 
using a 3D digitizing system.
RESULTS: The insertion areas of the superficial MCL (sMCL) were 348.6 ± 42.8 mm2 
and 79.7 ± 17.6 mm2 on the tibia and femur, respectively. The insertion areas of 
the deep MCL (dMCL) were 63.6 ± 13.4 mm2 and 71.9 ± 14.8 mm2 on the tibia and
femur, respectively. The distances from the centroids of the tibial and femoral
insertions of the sMCL to the tibial and femoral joint line were 62.4 ± 5.5 mm
and 31.1 ± 4.6 mm, respectively. The distances from the centroids of dMCL in the 
tibial insertion and the femoral insertion to the tibial and femoral joint line
were 6.5 ± 1.3 mm and 20.5 ± 4.2 mm, respectively. The distal portion of the dMCL
(meniscotibial ligament - MTL) was approximately 1.7 times wider than the
proximal portion of the dMCL (meniscofemoral ligament - MFL), whereas the MFL was
approximately 3 times longer than the MTL.
CONCLUSIONS: The morphologic data on the MCL may provide useful information for
improving treatments of MCL-related pathology and performing MCL release during
TKA.

PMCID: PMC2954927
PMID: 20846377  [PubMed]


405. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2010 Aug;29(170):141-3.

[The role of sonic hedgehog pathway in skin carcinogenesis].

[Article in Polish]

Lesiak A(1), Sysa-Jedrzejowska A, Narbutt J.

Author information: 
(1)Uniwersytet Medyczny w Lodzi, Katedra i Klinika Dermatologii i Wenerologii.
lesiak_ola@interia.pl

Non melanoma skin cancers (NMSC) involving basal (BCC)--and squamosus cell
carcinomas (SCC) and are the most frequent skin cancers in Caucasians.
Ultraviolet radiation is the main environmental risk factor for NMSC development.
The aim of this paper is to review the latest opinions concerning the role of
sonic hedgehog pathway in non-melanoma skin cancers development. Experimental
data indicate that sonic hedgehog pathway might be involved in skin
carcinogenesis. Under physiological conditions sonic hedgehog pathway is
responsible for normal embryogenesis, regeneration of damaged tissues and for
regulation of cell proliferation. It was revealed that UVR caused inactivated
mutation in PATCHED gene encoding Ptch1 protein. These events lead to
deregulation of sonic hedgehog pathway trough activation of Smo protein and Gli
transcriptional factors what stimulates cell proliferation and in consequence
NMSC development. Literature data indicate that understanding of molecular
background of skin cancers might be a reason for introduction of new therapeutic 
approaches including sonic hedgehog pathway inhibitors.

PMID: 20842831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Dec;1803(12):1359-67. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.09.002. Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Activation of the sonic hedgehog signaling controls human pulmonary arterial
smooth muscle cell proliferation in response to hypoxia.

Wang G(1), Zhang Z, Xu Z, Yin H, Bai L, Ma Z, Decoster MA, Qian G, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Xinqiao Hospital of the Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400037, P.R. China; Department of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

The hedgehog signal pathway plays a crucial role in the angiogenesis and vascular
remodeling. However, the function of this pathway in the pulmonary vascular
smooth cell proliferation in response to hypoxia remains unknown. In this study, 
we have demonstrated that the main components of the hedgehog pathway, including 
sonic hedgehog (SHH), patched1 (PTCH1), smoothened (SMO), GLI and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1) are expressed in the human pulmonary arterial
smooth muscle cells (HPASMCs). Interestingly, hypoxia significantly enhanced the 
expression of SHH and HIF1, facilitated the translocation of GLI1 into the
nuclei, and promoted the proliferation of HPASMCs. Furthermore, direct activation
of the SHH pathway through incubation with the purified recombinant human SHH or 
with purmorphamine and SAG, two Smo agonists, also enhanced the proliferation of 
HPASMCs. Importantly, the treatment with anti-SHH and anti-HIF1 antibodies or
cyclopamine, a specific SMO inhibitor, markedly inhibited the nuclear
translocation of GLI1 and cell proliferation in the HPASMCs induced by hypoxia
and activation of the SHH pathway. Moreover, the treatment with cyclopamine
increased apoptosis in the hypoxic HPASMCs. These data strongly demonstrate for
the first time that the SHH signaling plays a crucial role in the regulation of
HPASMC growth in response to hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC2956789
PMID: 20840857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jul 15;129(2):275-84. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25673. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Cross-signaling among phosphinositide-3 kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase 
and sonic hedgehog pathways exists in esophageal cancer.

Wei L(1), Xu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Changzheng Hospital, The
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is essential for the development of tissues
and organs. Hyperactive Hh signaling has been implicated in many gastric cancers,
including esophageal cancer. However, the interaction between the Hh pathway and 
other potential signaling pathways in primary esophageal tumorigenesis has not
been well investigated. In our study, we found that esophageal cancer cells
expressed Hh signaling molecules and that the hyperexpression of Hh target genes 
was related to protein kinase B (AKT) activation but not extracellular
signal-regulated kinase activation. We analyzed the relationship between Gli1 or 
p-AKT expression and clinicopathological features in esophageal carcinoma samples
and found that Gli1 expression was associated with lymph vessel invasion (p =
0.016), blood vessel invasion (p = 0.006) and a poor prognosis (p = 0.003), and
p-AKT expression was associated with blood vessel invasion (p = 0.031) and a poor
prognosis (p = 0.031). We also studied the relationship between Hh and
phosphinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT or mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathways in both TE-1 and TE-10 cell lines. We found that the PI3K/AKT 
pathway played a critical role in Hh signaling after stimulation with epidermal
growth factor, Gß<U+03B3> and N-Shh. Conversely, PI3K/AKT and MAPK signaling cooperated 
with the Shh pathway to promote esophageal cancer cell survival and
proliferation. The results from esophageal cancer cells shed light on the
significance of Hh signaling in esophageal tumor formation and the crosstalk of
the Hh pathway with other basic signaling pathways, which is consistent with that
observed in human tumor samples.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20839260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Tumour Biol. 2011 Feb;32(1):113-27. doi: 10.1007/s13277-010-0105-x. Epub 2010 Sep
10.

Expression and epigenetic modulation of sonic hedgehog-GLI1 pathway genes in
neuroblastoma cell lines and tumors.

Shahi MH(1), Schiapparelli P, Afzal M, Sinha S, Rey JA, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Biology Unit-CIFA, University of Navarra School of Sciences,
Pamplona, Spain.

It is well known that sonic hedgehog signaling pathway plays a vital role during 
early embryonic development. It is also responsible for stem cell renewal and
development of several cancers like colorectal and breast carcinoma and major
brain tumors as medulloblastoma and glioblastoma. The role of sonic hedgehog
signaling in the development of neuroblastoma has not been thoroughly
investigated. In this study, we attempted to determine the expression of Bmi-1
stem cell marker and of Shh pathway downstream target genes glioma-associated
oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), protein patched homolog 1 (PTCH1), Cyclin D2,
plakoglobin (<U+03B3> catenin), NK2 homeobox 2 (NKX2.2), paired box gene 6 (PAX6),
secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), and hedgehog interacting protein
(HHIP) in 11 neuroblastoma cell lines and 41 neuroblastoma samples. Also,
inhibition of the pathway was performed genetically by GLI1 knockdown siRNA or
chemically by cyclopamine. After inhibition, low transcript expression was
detected in downstream target genes like PTCH1, in the cell lines. We further
preformed promoter methylation studies of Cyclin D2, PTCH1, HHIP, and SFRP1 genes
by melting curve analysis-based methylation assay (MCA-Meth) and
methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Results revealed no methylation in Cyclin D2 gene
promoter in neuroblastoma samples or in cell lines; one cell line (MHH-NB-11)
showed PTCH1 methylation; 3/11 (27%) cell lines and 9/41 (22%) neuroblastoma
samples showed HHIP methylation; and 3/11 (27%) cell lines and 11/41 (27%)
samples showed SFRP1 methylation. Taken together, our results suggest the
possibility of two levels of control of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway:
transcriptional and epigenetic, which might offer new therapeutic possibilities
to modulate the pathway and try to suppress tumor growth.

PMID: 20830616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Histochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;134(4):327-35. doi: 10.1007/s00418-010-0738-2. Epub
2010 Sep 7.

Expression of SHH signaling pathway components in the developing human lung.

Zhang M(1), Wang H, Teng H, Shi J, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Neurobiology, College of
Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Qishan Campus, Fuzhou, 350108 Fujian,
People's Republic of China.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) cascade is crucial for the patterning of the early lung 
morphogenesis in mice, but its role in the developing human lung remains to be
determined. In the present study, the expression patterns of SHH signaling
pathway components, including SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 were examined 
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, and compared with the
equivalent patterns in mice. Our results showed that, as in mice, SHH was
expressed in the epithelium of the developing human lung. However, SHH receptors 
(PTCH1 and SMO) and SHH signaling effectors (GLI1-3) were strongly detected in
the human lung epithelium, but weakly in the mesenchyme, slightly different from 
their expressions in mice. Furthermore, the expression levels of SHH signaling
pathway genes in human lung, but not that of GLI1, were subsequently
downregulated at the canalicular stage evaluated by real-time PCR, coincident
with a decline in the developing murine lung. In conclusion, in spite of slight
differences, the considerable similarities of gene expression in human and mice
suggest that conserved molecular networks regulate mammalian lung development.

PMID: 20821230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Oncogene. 2010 Dec 2;29(48):6323-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.368. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Activation of the hedgehog pathway confers a poor prognosis in embryonal and
fusion gene-negative alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

Zibat A(1), Missiaglia E, Rosenberger A, Pritchard-Jones K, Shipley J, Hahn H,
Fulda S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children and
comprises two major histological subtypes: alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) and
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS). Seventy-five percent of ARMS harbor reciprocal
chromosomal translocations leading to fusion genes of the forkhead transcription 
factor FOXO1 and PAX3 or PAX7. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been implied in
tumor formation and progression of various cancers including RMS. However,
whether Hh pathway activation presents a general feature of RMS or whether it is 
restricted to specific subgroups has not yet been addressed. Here, we report that
marker genes of active Hh signaling, that is, Patched1 (Ptch1), Gli1, Gli3 and
Myf5, are expressed at significantly higher levels in ERMS and fusion
gene-negative ARMS compared with fusion gene-positive ARMS in two distinct
cohorts of RMS patients. Consistently, Gli1 expression correlates with Ptch1
expression in ERMS and fusion gene-negative ARMS, but not in fusion gene-positive
ARMS. In addition, expression levels of MyoD1 are significantly lower in ERMS and
fusion gene-negative ARMS, pointing to an inverse association of Hh activation
and early muscle differentiation. Moreover, Myf5 is identified as a novel
excellent class predictor for RMS by receiver operating characteristic analysis. 
Importantly, high expression of Ptch1 or low MyoD1 expression significantly
correlate with reduced cumulative survival in fusion gene-negative RMS
underscoring the clinical relevance of these findings. By showing that Hh
signaling is preferentially activated in specific subgroups of RMS, our study has
important implications for molecular targeted therapies, such as small molecule
Hh inhibitors, in RMS.

PMID: 20818440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Oncogene. 2011 Jan 6;30(1):65-76. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.394. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Numb activates the E3 ligase Itch to control Gli1 function through a novel
degradation signal.

Di Marcotullio L(1), Greco A, Mazzà D, Canettieri G, Pietrosanti L, Infante P,
Coni S, Moretti M, De Smaele E, Ferretti E, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog pathway regulates tissue patterning and cell proliferation. Gli1
transcription factor is the major effector of Hedgehog signaling and its
deregulation is often associated to medulloblastoma formation. Proteolytic
processes represent a critical mechanism by which this pathway is turned off.
Here, we characterize the regulation of an ubiquitin-mediated mechanism of Gli1
degradation, promoted by the coordinated action of the E3 ligase Itch and the
adaptor protein Numb. We show that Numb activates the catalytic activity of Itch,
releasing it from an inhibitory intramolecular interaction between its homologous
to E6-AP C-terminus and WW domains. The consequent activation of Itch, together
with the recruitment of Gli1 through direct binding with Numb, allows Gli1 to
enter into the complex, resulting in Gli1 ubiquitination and degradation. This
process is mediated by a novel Itch-dependent degron, composed of a combination
of two PPXYs and a phospho-serine/proline motifs, localized in Gli1 C-terminal
region, indicating the role of two different WW docking sites in Gli1
ubiquitination. Remarkably, Gli1 protein mutated in these modules is no longer
regulated by Itch and Numb, and determines enhanced Gli1-dependent
medulloblastoma growth, migration and invasion abilities, as well as in vitro
transforming activity. Our data reveal a novel mechanism of regulation of Gli1
stability and function, which influences Hedgehog/Gli1 oncogenic potential.

PMID: 20818436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Nov 1;10(9):893-902. doi: 10.4161/cbt.10.9.13252. Epub
2010 Nov 1.

Gli3 mediates cell survival and sensitivity to cyclopamine in pancreatic cancer.

Steg A(1), Amm HM, Novak Z, Frost AR, Johnson MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Activation of the hedgehog (HH) pathway plays a critical role in the development 
and continued growth of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC). Cyclopamine, a HH
pathway inhibitor, has been shown to suppress PAC cell proliferation in vitro and
in vivo. However, the molecular basis of response to cyclopamine has not been
fully elucidated nor have genes that predict sensitivity to this compound been
identified. To better understand these features of HH pathway inhibition, we
evaluated the biological and molecular effects of cyclopamine in vitro. The
viability of 9 human PAC cell lines following cyclopamine exposure was determined
using MTS assay. Proliferation and induction of apoptosis in treated cells were
examined by bromo-deoxyuridine incorporation, caspase activation, and
mitochondrial membrane potential. Gene expression before and after cyclopamine
treatment was determined using Taqman real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RTQ-PCR) and Taqman low-density array (TLDA). Among the cell lines
examined, cyclopamine IC50 values ranged from 8.79 to >30 µM. Response to
cyclopamine included reduced cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis with
and without mitochondrial membrane depolarization. Regression analysis revealed
that GLI3 expression significantly correlated with cyclopamine resistance (r =
0.80; p = 0.0102). Knockdown of GLI3 using siRNAs increased sensitivity to
cyclopamine. In addition, GLI3 siRNAs decreased PAC cell viability and reduced
expression of genes involved in HH signaling (Patched 1 and GLI1) and cell
proliferation, similar to cyclopamine. These effects were not observed in PAC
cells with undetectable GLI3 expression. These data suggest that Gli3 mediates
cell survival and sensitivity to cyclopamine in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3230294
PMID: 20814245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Stem Cells. 2010 Oct;28(10):1805-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.510.

Gli1 is an inducing factor in generating floor plate progenitor cells from human 
embryonic stem cells.

Denham M(1), Thompson LH, Leung J, Pébay A, Björklund A, Dottori M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
mark.denham@unimelb.edu.au

Generation of mesencephalic dopamine (mesDA) neurons from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) requires several stages of signaling from various extrinsic and
intrinsic factors. To date, most methods incorporate exogenous treatment of Sonic
hedgehog (SHH) to derive mesDA neurons. However, we and others have shown that
this approach is inefficient for generating FOXA2+ cells, the precursors of mesDA
neurons. As mesDA neurons are derived from the ventral floor plate (FP) regions
of the embryonic neural tube, we sought to develop a system to derive FP cells
from hESC. We show that forced expression of the transcription factor GLI1 in
hESC at the earliest stage of neural induction, resulted in their commitment to
FP lineage. The GLI1+ cells coexpressed FP markers, FOXA2 and Corin, and
displayed exocrine SHH activity by ventrally patterning the surrounding neural
progenitors. This system results in 63% FOXA2+ cells at the neural progenitor
stage of hESC differentiation. The GLI1-transduced cells were also able to
differentiate to neurons expressing tyrosine hydroxylase. This study demonstrates
that GLI1 is a determinant of FP specification in hESC and describes a highly
robust and efficient in vitro model system that mimics the ventral neural tube
organizer.

PMCID: PMC2996857
PMID: 20799336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec 1;111(5):1199-209. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22846.

Hedgehog signaling and osteogenic differentiation in multipotent bone marrow
stromal cells are inhibited by oxidative stress.

Kim WK(1), Meliton V, Bourquard N, Hahn TJ, Parhami F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California 90095, USA.

Oxidative stress may play a major role in age-related osteoporosis in part by
inhibiting osteoblast generation from osteoprogenitors cells. In the present
study, we hypothesized that oxidative stress may inhibit the osteogenic
differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells (MSC) in part by inhibiting the
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, which is essential for bone development and
maintenance and induces osteogenic differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells. To
test this hypothesis, we examined the effects of oxidative stress on Sonic Hh
(Shh)-induced osteogenic differentiation and signaling in M2-10B4 (M2) MSC,
C3H10T1/2 embryonic fibroblasts, and mouse primary MSC. Treatment of cells with
H(2)O(2) inhibited Shh-induced osteogenic differentiation determined by the
inhibition of Shh-induced expression of osteogenic differentiation markers
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osterix (OSX), and bone sialoprotein (BSP). Similar
effects were found when oxidative stress was induced by xanthine/xanthine oxidase
(XXO) or minimally oxidized LDL (MM-LDL). H(2)O(2) , XXO, and MM-LDL treatment
inhibited Shh-induced expression of the Hh target genes Gli1 and Patched1 as well
as Gli-dependent transcriptional activity in M2 cells. H(2)O(2) treatment also
inhibited Hh signaling induced by the direct activation of Smoothened by
purmorphamine (PM), but not by Gli1 overexpression. This suggests that oxidative 
stress may inhibit Hh signaling upstream of Gli activation and Gli-induced gene
expression. These findings demonstrate for the first time that oxidative stress
inhibits Hh signaling associated with osteogenic differentiation. Inhibition of
Hh signaling-mediated osteogenic differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells may in 
part explain the inhibitory effects of oxidative stress on osteoblast
development, differentiation, and maintenance in aging.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20717924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Sep;9(9):2450-7. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0530. Epub
2010 Aug 17.

More than markers: biological significance of cancer stem cell-defining
molecules.

Keysar SB(1), Jimeno A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Small populations within an increasing array of solid tumors, labeled cancer stem
cells (CSC) or tumor-initiating cells (TIC), have the ability to differentiate,
self-renew, and replicate the original tumor in vivo. To date, these cells have
been distinguished from the bulk-tumor population by the expression pattern of
cell-surface proteins (e.g., CD24, CD44, CD133) and cellular activities, such as 
the efflux of Hoechst dye or aldehyde dehydrogenase activity. Recent data have
shown that these markers are inducible by exposure to anticancer agents; this
finding highlights not only the potential fluidity of the CSC compartment, but
also the functionality of these markers. The involvement of CD44 in invasion,
adhesion, and metastasis, or the role of CD24 in modulation of src, FAK, and GLI1
are examples of these relevant roles. Instead of looking solely at the marker
expression in these populations, we hope to clarify the biologically significant 
roles these markers and activities play in tumor progression, metastases, and as 
possible targets for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3618879
PMID: 20716638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Theriogenology. 2010 Oct 15;74(7):1149-60. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.05.016.

Sonic Hedgehog improves in vitro development of porcine parthenotes and handmade 
cloned embryos.

Nguyen NT(1), Lin DP, Siriboon C, Lo NW, Ju JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, National Chung Hsing University, 250 Kuokuang
Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan, ROC.

This study investigated the expression of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway 
and its effect on porcine parthenogenetic (PA) embryo development. The Shh
receptor Patched (Ptc1) and co-receptor Smoothened (Smo) were expressed at
various stages of PA porcine embryos, at both mRNA and protein levels.
Furthermore, the transcriptional activator Gli1 mRNA was first present in the
2-cell stage embryos, and was readily detected at the 4-cell stage and beyond.
Culture medium supplemented with 0.5 µg/mL Shh optimized blastocyst rates (58.6
vs. 41.1%; P < 0.05) and the total number of cells per blastocyst (56.4 vs. 45.6 
cells; P < 0.05); however, this response was prevented by simultaneous addition
of 1 mM cyclopamine (an Shh inhibitor). Moreover, blastocysts that developed in
medium containing 0.5 µg/mL Shh had lower apoptotic indices and reduced DNA
damage (evaluated by TUNEL and comet assays, respectively). Based on Western-blot
analysis, expression of phosphorylated Akt protein in Shh-treated blastocysts was
higher than that of the control group (1.22- vs. 0.66-fold, P < 0.05), and less
total PARP-1/2 protein was accumulated (0.7-fold, P < 0.05) in treated
blastocysts compared to untreated controls. Furthermore, supplementation of Shh
(1 µg/mL) also supported development of handmade cloned embryos (50.3 vs. 26.8%; 
P < 0.05) with reduced apoptotic rates (2.8 vs. 6.3%; P < 0.05). We inferred that
the Shh signaling pathway existed in porcine PA embryos and we concluded that Shh
supplementation improved the quality and developmental competence of early PA
embryos, at least in part, by increasing cell proliferation and reducing
apoptosis of the developing embryos.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20663544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cancer Res. 2010 Sep 1;70(17):6787-96. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0197. Epub
2010 Jul 20.

Combinatorial chemoprevention reveals a novel smoothened-independent role of GLI1
in esophageal carcinogenesis.

Rizvi S(1), Demars CJ, Comba A, Gainullin VG, Rizvi Z, Almada LL, Wang K, Lomberk
G, Fernández-Zapico ME, Buttar NS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Schulze Center for Novel
Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Reflux-induced injury promotes esophageal adenocarcinoma, one of the most rapidly
increasing, highly lethal cancers in Western countries. Here, we investigate the 
efficacy of a combinatorial chemoprevention strategy for esophageal
adenocarcinoma and characterize the underlying molecular mechanisms.
Specifically, our approach involves the use of ursodeoxycholic acid (Urso) due to
its ability to decrease injury-inducing bile salts in combination with Aspirin to
mitigate the consequences of injury. We find that Urso-Aspirin combination
reduces the risk of adenocarcinoma in vivo in animals with reflux, decreases the 
proliferation of esophageal adenocarcinoma cells, and downregulates a key cell
cycle regulator, CDK2. Mechanistically, using cell growth, luciferase reporter,
expression, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we identify GLI1, a
Hedgehog-regulated transcription factor, as a novel target of Urso-Aspirin
combination. We show that GLI1 is upregulated during esophageal carcinogenesis,
and GLI1 can bind to the CDK2 promoter and activate its expression. Although the 
Urso-Aspirin combination downregulates GLI1, the GLI1 overexpression not only
abrogates the effect of this combination on proliferation but it also restores
CDK-2 expression. These findings support that the chemopreventive effect of the
Urso-Aspirin combination occurs, at least in part, through a novel
GLI1-CDK2-dependent mechanism. To further understand the regulation of CDK2 by
GLI1, both pharmacologic and RNAi-mediated approaches show that GLI1 is a
transcriptional activator of CDK2, and this regulation occurs independent of
Smoothened, the central transducer of the Hedgehog canonical pathway.
Collectively, these results identify a novel GLI1-to-CDK2 pathway in esophageal
carcinogenesis, which is a bona fide target for effective combinatorial
chemoprevention with Urso and Aspirin.

PMCID: PMC2954590
PMID: 20647328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 24;285(39):30079-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133991. Epub
2010 Jul 19.

Dual function of UNC-51-like kinase 3 (Ulk3) in the Sonic hedgehog signaling
pathway.

Maloverjan A(1), Piirsoo M, Kasak L, Peil L, Østerlund T, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tallinn
University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway controls a variety of developmental
processes and is implicated in tissue homeostasis maintenance and neurogenesis in
adults. Recently, we identified Ulk3 as an active kinase able to positively
regulate Gli proteins, mediators of the Shh signaling in mammals. Here, we
provide several lines of evidence that Ulk3 participates in the transduction of
the Shh signal also independently of its kinase activity. We demonstrate that
Ulk3 through its kinase domain interacts with Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), a
protein required for negative regulation of Gli proteins. Sufu blocks Ulk3
autophosphorylation and abolishes its ability to phosphorylate and positively
regulate Gli proteins. We show that Shh signaling destabilizes the Sufu-Ulk3
complex and induces the release of Ulk3. We demonstrate that the Sufu-Ulk3
complex, when co-expressed with Gli2, promotes generation of the Gli2 repressor
form, and that reduction of the Ulk3 mRNA level in Shh-responsive cells results
in higher potency of the cells to transmit the Shh signal. Our data suggests a
dual function of Ulk3 in the Shh signal transduction pathway and propose an
additional way of regulating Gli proteins by Sufu, through binding to and
suppression of Ulk3.

PMCID: PMC2943318
PMID: 20643644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 20;107(29):12907-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000979107. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Sonic hedgehog in temporal control of somite formation.

Resende TP(1), Ferreira M, Teillet MA, Tavares AT, Andrade RP, Palmeirim I.

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute, School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.

Vertebrate embryo somite formation is temporally controlled by the cyclic
expression of somitogenesis clock genes in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM). The
somitogenesis clock is believed to be an intrinsic property of this tissue,
operating independently of embryonic midline structures and the signaling
molecules produced therein, namely Sonic hedgehog (Shh). This work revisits the
notochord signaling contribution to temporal control of PSM segmentation by
assessing the rate and number of somites formed and somitogenesis molecular clock
gene expression oscillations upon notochord ablation. The absence of the
notochord causes a delay in somite formation, accompanied by an increase in the
period of molecular clock oscillations. Shh is the notochord-derived signal
responsible for this effect, as these alterations are recapitulated by Shh
signaling inhibitors and rescued by an external Shh supply. We have characterized
chick smoothened expression pattern and have found that the PSM expresses both
patched1 and smoothened Shh signal transducers. Upon notochord ablation,
patched1, gli1, and fgf8 are down-regulated, whereas gli2 and gli3 are
overexpressed. Strikingly, notochord-deprived PSM segmentation rate recovers over
time, concomitant with raldh2 overexpression. Accordingly, exogenous RA
supplement rescues notochord ablation effects on somite formation. A model is
presented in which Shh and RA pathways converge to inhibit PSM Gli activity,
ensuring timely somite formation. Altogether, our data provide evidence that a
balance between different pathways ensures the robustness of timely somite
formation and that notochord-derived Shh is a component of the molecular network 
regulating the pace of the somitogenesis clock.

PMCID: PMC2919945
PMID: 20615943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Bioorg Med Chem. 2010 Jul 1;18(13):4801-11. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.05.001. Epub 
2010 May 7.

Amide conjugates of ketoprofen and indole as inhibitors of Gli1-mediated
transcription in the Hedgehog pathway.

Mahindroo N(1), Connelly MC, Punchihewa C, Yang L, Yan B, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

We have previously reported small-molecule inhibitors of Gli1-mediated
transcription, an essential down-stream element of the Hh pathway. We created new
derivatives of the previous compounds aiming to improve the druggable properties.
The new compounds, amide conjugates of ketoprofen and indole, showed inhibitory
activity and membrane permeability, while also improving the microsome stability.
Among them, 33 and 42 inhibited Gli-luciferase reporter in C3H10T1/2 cells that
were exogenously transfected with Gli1 with 2.6 µM and 1.6 µM of IC50,
respectively, and in Rh30 cells that endogenously overexpress Gli1, and were
selective to Gli1 over Gli2.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2952073
PMID: 20605720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Sep 27;482(2):81-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.06.068. Epub
2010 Jul 1.

Smoothened agonist augments proliferation and survival of neural cells.

Bragina O(1), Sergejeva S, Serg M, Zarkovsky T, Maloverjan A, Kogerman P,
Zarkovsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia.

Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway is important in developmental processes like
dorsoventral neural tube patterning, neural stem cell proliferation and neuronal 
and glial cell survival. Shh is also implicated in the regulation of the adult
hippocampal neurogenesis. Recently, nonpeptidyl Smoothened activators of the Shh 
pathway have been identified. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effects of chlorobenzothiophene-containing molecule, Smo agonist (SAG), which has
been shown to activate Shh signaling pathway, in neurogenesis and neuronal
survival in in vitro and in vivo models. Our in vitro experiments showed that SAG
induces increased expression of Gli1 mRNA, transcriptional target and mediator of
Shh signal. In vitro experiments also demonstrated that SAG in low-nanomolar
concentrations induces proliferation of neuronal and glial precursors without
affecting the differentiation pattern of newly produced cells. In contrast to
Shh, SAG did not induce neurotoxicity in neuronal cultures. The SAG and Shh
treatment also promoted the survival of newly generated neural cells in the
dentate gyrus after their intracerebroventricular administration to adult rats.
We propose that SAG and similar compounds represent attractive molecules to be
developed for treatment of disorders where stimulation of the generation and
survival of new neural cells would be beneficial.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20600593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2646-58. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.131. Epub 2010 Jun 25.

Hedgehog controls neural stem cells through p53-independent regulation of Nanog.

Po A(1), Ferretti E, Miele E, De Smaele E, Paganelli A, Canettieri G, Coni S, Di 
Marcotullio L, Biffoni M, Massimi L, Di Rocco C, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2475-6.

Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has a pivotal function in development and tumorigenesis,
processes sustained by stem cells (SCs). The transcription factor Nanog controls 
stemness acting as a key determinant of both embryonic SC self-renewal and
differentiated somatic cells reprogramming to pluripotency, in concert with the
loss of the oncosuppressor p53. How Nanog is regulated by microenvironmental
signals in postnatal SC niches has been poorly investigated. Here, we show that
Nanog is highly expressed in SCs from postnatal cerebellum and medulloblastoma,
and acts as a critical mediator of Hh-driven self-renewal. Indeed, the downstream
effectors of Hh activity, Gli1 and Gli2, bind to Nanog-specific cis-regulatory
sequences both in mouse and human SCs. Loss of p53, a key event promoting cell
stemness, activates Hh signalling, thereby contributing to Nanog upregulation.
Conversely, Hh downregulates p53 but does not require p53 to control Nanog. Our
data reveal a mechanism for the function of Hh in the control of stemness that
represents a crucial component of an integrated circuitry determining cell fate
decision and involved in the maintenance of cancer SCs.

PMCID: PMC2928686
PMID: 20581804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2659-74. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.137. Epub 2010 Jun 25.

NANOG regulates glioma stem cells and is essential in vivo acting in a
cross-functional network with GLI1 and p53.

Zbinden M(1), Duquet A, Lorente-Trigos A, Ngwabyt SN, Borges I, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2475-6.

A cohort of genes associated with embryonic stem (ES) cell behaviour, including
NANOG, are expressed in a number of human cancers. They form an ES-like signature
we first described in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a highly invasive and
incurable brain tumour. We have also shown that HEDGEHOG-GLI (HH-GLI) signalling 
is required for GBM growth, stem cell expansion and the expression of this
(ES)-like stemness signature. Here, we address the function of NANOG in human
GBMs and its relationship with HH-GLI activity. We find that NANOG modulates
gliomasphere clonogenicity, CD133(+) stem cell cell behavior and proliferation,
and is regulated by HH-GLI signalling. However, GLI1 also requires NANOG activity
forming a positive loop, which is negatively controlled by p53 and vice versa.
NANOG is essential for GBM tumourigenicity in orthotopic xenografts and it is
epistatic to HH-GLI activity. Our data establish NANOG as a novel HH-GLI mediator
essential for GBMs. We propose that this function is conserved and that tumour
growth and stem cell behaviour rely on the status of a functional GLI1-NANOG-p53 
network.

PMCID: PMC2928692
PMID: 20581802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Aug 1;110(5):1155-64. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22630.

Transcriptional suppression of mir-29b-1/mir-29a promoter by c-Myc, hedgehog, and
NF-kappaB.

Mott JL(1), Kurita S, Cazanave SC, Bronk SF, Werneburg NW, Fernandez-Zapico ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. mott.justin@mayo.edu

MicroRNAs regulate pathways contributing to oncogenesis, and thus the mechanisms 
causing dysregulation of microRNA expression in cancer are of significant
interest. Mature mir-29b levels are decreased in malignant cells, and this
alteration promotes the malignant phenotype, including apoptosis resistance.
However, the mechanism responsible for mir-29b suppression is unknown. Here, we
examined mir-29 expression from chromosome 7q32 using cholangiocarcinoma cells as
a model for mir-29b downregulation. Using 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends,
the transcriptional start site was identified for this microRNA locus.
Computational analysis revealed the presence of two putative E-box (Myc-binding) 
sites, a Gli-binding site, and four NF-kappaB-binding sites in the region
flanking the transcriptional start site. Promoter activity in cholangiocarcinoma 
cells was repressed by transfection with c-Myc, consistent with reports in other 
cell types. Treatment with the hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine, which blocks
smoothened signaling, increased the activity of the promoter and expression of
mature mir-29b. Mutagenesis analysis and gel shift data are consistent with a
direct binding of Gli to the mir-29 promoter. Finally, activation of NF-kappaB
signaling, via ligation of Toll-like receptors, also repressed mir-29b expression
and promoter function. Of note, activation of hedgehog, Toll-like receptor, and
c-Myc signaling protected cholangiocytes from TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Thus, in
addition to c-Myc, mir-29 expression can be suppressed by hedgehog signaling and 
inflammatory pathways, both commonly activated in the genesis of human
malignancies.

Published 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2922950
PMID: 20564213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Oncogene. 2010 Aug 26;29(34):4848-58. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.235. Epub 2010 Jun
21.

GLI3-dependent repression of DR4 mediates hedgehog antagonism of TRAIL-induced
apoptosis.

Kurita S(1), Mott JL, Almada LL, Bronk SF, Werneburg NW, Sun SY, Roberts LR,
Fernandez-Zapico ME, Gores GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) induces apoptosis
through its cognate receptors death receptor 4 (DR4) and death receptor 5 (DR5), 
preferentially in malignant cells. However, many malignant cells remain resistant
to TRAIL cytotoxicity by poorly characterized mechanisms. Here, using
cholangiocarcinoma cells, as a model for TRAIL resistance, we identified a role
for the oncogenic Hedgehog (Hh)-GLI pathway in the regulation of TRAIL
cytotoxicity. Blockade of Hh using pharmacological and genetic tools sensitizes
the cells to TRAIL cytotoxicity. Restoration of apoptosis sensitivity coincided
with upregulation of DR4 expression, while expression of other death effector
proteins remained unaltered. Knockdown of DR4 mimics Hh-mediated resistance to
TRAIL cytotoxicity. Hh regulates the expression of DR4 by modulating the activity
of its promoter. Luciferase, chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression assays 
show that the transcription factor GLI3 binds to the DR4 promoter and Hh requires
an intact GLI3-repression activity to silence DR4 expression. Finally, small
interfering RNA (siRNA)-targeted knockdown of GLI3, but not GLI1 or GLI2,
restores DR4 expression and TRAIL sensitivity, indicating that the Hh effect is
exclusively mediated by this transcription factor. In conclusion, these data
provide evidence of a regulatory mechanism, which modulates TRAIL signaling in
cancer cells and suggest new therapeutic approaches for TRAIL-resistant
neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2928864
PMID: 20562908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Oral Dis. 2010 Nov;16(8):818-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2010.01697.x.

Immunohistochemical expression of SHH, PTC, SMO and GLI1 in glandular odontogenic
cysts and dentigerous cysts.

Zhang L(1), Sun ZJ, Chen XM, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) and Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine, Ministry of Education,
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
Department of Oral Pathology, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate expression of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling
pathway components in glandular odontogenic cysts (GOCs), and dentigerous cysts
(DCs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for SHH, patched (PTC),
smoothened (SMO), and the transcriptional factor GLI1 were investigated in the 12
GOCs specimens and 20 DCs.
RESULTS: In GOCs and DCs, immunoreactivity for SHH, PTC, SMO, and GLI1 were
detected in the epithelial cytoplasm. Each of the genes of the SHH signaling
pathway was expressed in similar patterns in the epithelial lining of the cysts. 
The expression of SHH, PTC, SMO, and GLI1 was significantly higher in epithelia
than that of subepithelial fibroblasts (P < 0.01). No statistical difference
among the labeling index of the epithelial lining among the different cyst types 
could be revealed.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that the proteins of the SHH signaling pathway 
are predominantly located within the epithelial components of GOCs and DCs. SHH
signaling pathway may play a role in epithelial lining formation.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20561215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Sep;78(3):486-96. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.066431. Epub 2010 Jun 
17.

Antipsychotic drugs regulate hedgehog signaling by modulation of
7-dehydrocholesterol reductase levels.

Lauth M(1), Rohnalter V, Bergström A, Kooshesh M, Svenningsson P, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, Philipps University,
Marburg, Germany. matthias.lauth@imt.uni-marburg.de

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr;79(4):793.

Recently we identified GANT61, a small-molecule antagonist of Gli transcription
factors, which are the final effectors of the mammalian Hedgehog (HH) signaling
pathway. Here we describe a diamine substructure of GANT61 that carries the
biological activity and show that this part of the molecule is structurally
related to trans-1,4-bis(2-chlorobenzaminomethyl)cyclohexane dihydrochloride
(AY9944), an inhibitor of the enzymatic activity and transcriptional inducer of
7-dehydrocholesterol-reductase (Dhcr7, EC 1.3.1.21). Treatment of cells with the 
GANT61 diamine, AY9944, or overexpression of DHCR7 results in the attenuation of 
Smoothened-dependent and -independent HH signaling. Whereas GANT61 function is
independent of Dhcr7, AY9944 does require up-regulation of endogenous Dhcr7. In
line with these findings, Dhcr7-modulating antipsychotic (clozapine,
chlorpromazine, haloperidol) and antidepressant (imipramine) drugs regulate HH
signaling in vitro and in vivo. Modulation of HH signaling may represent a
hitherto undiscovered biological (side) effect of therapeutics used to treat
schizophrenia and depression.

PMID: 20558592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2010 Jun;30(3):271-7. doi:
10.1007/s11596-010-0342-7. Epub 2010 Jun 17.

Activation of Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in S-type neuroblastoma cell
lines.

Zhou Y(1), Dai R, Mao L, Xia Y, Yao Y, Yang X, Hu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, 430022. talent62@hotmail.com

The effects of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway activation on S-type
neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines and its role in NB tumorigenesis were investigated.
Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the expression of Shh pathway
components-Patched1 (PTCH1) and Gli1 in 40 human primary NB samples. Western
blotting and RT-PCR were used to examine the protein expression and mRNA levels
of PTCH1 and Gli1 in three kinds of S-type NB cell lines (SK-N-AS, SK-N-SH and
SHEP1), respectively. Exogenous Shh was administrated to activate Shh signaling
pathway while cyclopamine was used as a selective antagonist of Shh pathway.
S-type NB cell lines were treated with different concentrations of Shh or/and
cyclopamine for different durations. Cell viability was measured by using MTT
method. Apoptosis rate and cell cycle were assayed by flow cytometry. The
xenograft experiments were used to evaluate the role of Shh pathway in tumor
growth in immunodeficient mice. High-level expression of PTCH1 and Gli1 was
detected in both NB samples and S-type NB cell lines. Cyclopamine decreased the
survival rate of the three cell lines while Shh increased it, and the inhibition 
effects of cyclopamine could be partially reversed by shh pre-treatment.
Cyclopamine induced the cell apoptosis and the cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase, 
while Shh induced the reverse effects and could partially prevent effects of
cyclopamine. Cyclopamine could also inhibit the growth of NB in vivo. Our studies
revealed that activation of the Shh pathway is important for survival and
proliferation of S-type NB cells in vivo and in vitro through affecting cell
apoptosis and cell cycle, suggesting a new therapeutic approach to NB.

PMID: 20556567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. BMC Neurosci. 2010 Jun 8;11:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-11-70.

Newly generated cells are increased in hippocampus of adult mice lacking a serine
protease inhibitor.

Lino MM(1), Vaillant C, Orolicki S, Sticker M, Kvajo M, Monard D.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, CH-4058 Basel,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus and the subventricular 
zone occurs throughout the life of mammals and newly generated neurons can
integrate functionally into established neuronal circuits. Neurogenesis levels in
the dentate gyrus are modulated by changes in the environment (enrichment,
exercise), hippocampal-dependent tasks, NMDA receptor (NMDAR) activity, sonic
hedgehog (SHH) and/or other factors.
RESULTS: previously, we showed that Protease Nexin-1 (PN-1), a potent serine
protease inhibitor, regulates the NMDAR availability and activity as well as SHH 
signaling. Compared with wild-type (WT), we detected a significant increase in
BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus of mice lacking PN-1 (PN-1 -/-) both in
controls and after running exercise. Patched homologue 1 (Ptc1) and Gli1 mRNA
levels were higher and Gli3 down-regulated in mutant mice under standard
conditions and to a lesser extent after running exercise. However, the number of 
surviving BrdU-positive cells did not differ between WT and PN-1 -/- animals.
NMDAR availability was altered in the hippocampus of mutant animals after
exercise.
CONCLUSION: All together our results indicate that PN-1 controls progenitors
proliferation through an effect on the SHH pathway and suggest an influence of
the serpin on the survival of newly generated neurons through modulation of NMDAR
availability.

PMCID: PMC2896953
PMID: 20529321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Br J Cancer. 2010 Jun 29;103(1):43-51. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605715. Epub 2010 Jun
1.

Betulinic acid induces apoptosis and inhibits hedgehog signalling in
rhabdomyosarcoma.

Eichenmüller M(1), Hemmerlein B, von Schweinitz D, Kappler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Lindwurmstrasse 4, Munich 80337, Federal
Republic of Germany.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in
childhood with the ability to resist apoptosis by the activation of survival
promoting and anti-apoptotic proteins.
METHODS: Efficacy of the apoptosis-inducing agent betulinic acid (BA) was
determined in RMS cell cultures and in vivo by measuring cell viability,
survival, apoptosis, hedgehog signalling activity, and neovascularisation.
RESULTS: Betulinic acid had a strong cytotoxic effect on RMS cells in a
dose-dependent manner. The BA treatment caused a massive induction of apoptosis
mediated by the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway, which could be inhibited by the 
broad-range caspase inhibitor zVAD.fmk. Exposure of hedgehog-activated RMS-13
cells to BA resulted in a strong decrease in GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, and IGF2
expression as well as hedgehog-responsive luciferase activity. Intraperitoneal
injection of 20 mg BA per kg per day significantly retarded growth of RMS-13
xenografts in association with markedly higher counts of apoptotic cells and
down-regulation of GLI1 expression compared with control tumours, while leaving
microvascular density, cell proliferation, and myogenic differentiation
unaffected.
CONCLUSION: Our data show that induction of apoptosis and inhibition of hedgehog 
signalling are important features of the anti-tumourigenic effect of BA in RMS
and advices this compound for the use in a multimodal therapy of this highly
aggressive paediatric tumour.

PMCID: PMC2905279
PMID: 20517313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 1;70(13):5618-27. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3740. Epub
2010 Jun 1.

Atoh1 inhibits neuronal differentiation and collaborates with Gli1 to generate
medulloblastoma-initiating cells.

Ayrault O(1), Zhao H, Zindy F, Qu C, Sherr CJ, Roussel MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

The morphogen and mitogen Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) activates a Gli1-dependent
transcription program that drives proliferation of granule neuron progenitors
(GNP) within the external germinal layer of the postnatally developing
cerebellum. Medulloblastomas with mutations activating the Shh signaling pathway 
preferentially arise within the external germinal layer, and the tumor cells
closely resemble GNPs. Atoh1/Math1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
essential for GNP histogenesis, does not induce medulloblastomas when expressed
in primary mouse GNPs that are explanted from the early postnatal cerebellum and 
transplanted back into the brains of naïve mice. However, enforced expression of 
Atoh1 in primary GNPs enhances the oncogenicity of cells overexpressing Gli1 by
almost three orders of magnitude. Unlike Gli1, Atoh1 cannot support GNP
proliferation in the absence of Shh signaling and does not govern expression of
canonical cell cycle genes. Instead, Atoh1 maintains GNPs in a Shh-responsive
state by regulating genes that trigger neuronal differentiation, including many
expressed in response to bone morphogenic protein-4. Therefore, by targeting
multiple genes regulating the differentiation state of GNPs, Atoh1 collaborates
with the pro-proliferative Gli1-dependent transcriptional program to influence
medulloblastoma development.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2896438
PMID: 20516124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Jun;17(6):718-25. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1833. Epub 2010 May
30.

DYRK1B-dependent autocrine-to-paracrine shift of Hedgehog signaling by mutant
RAS.

Lauth M(1), Bergström A, Shimokawa T, Tostar U, Jin Q, Fendrich V, Guerra C,
Barbacid M, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Center for Biosciences, Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Huddinge, Sweden.

Synergism between the RAS and Hedgehog (HH) pathways has been suggested for
carcinogenesis in the pancreas, lung and colon. We investigated the molecular
cross-talk between RAS and HH signaling and found that, although mutant RAS
induces or enhances SHH expression and favors paracrine HH signaling, it
antagonizes autocrine HH signal transduction. Activated RAS can be found in
primary cilia, the central organelle of HH signal transduction, but functions in 
a cilium-independent manner and interferes with Gli2 function and Gli3
processing. In addition, the cell-autonomous negative regulation of HH signal
transduction involves the RAS effector molecule dual specificity tyrosine
phosphorylated and regulated kinase 1B (DYRK1B). In line with a redirection of
autocrine toward paracrine HH signaling by a KRAS-DYRK1B network, we find high
levels of GLI1 expression restricted to the stromal compartment and not to
SHH-expressing tumor cells in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 20512148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Neural Dev. 2010 May 27;5:14. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-5-14.

Sonic hedgehog expressing and responding cells generate neuronal diversity in the
medial amygdala.

Carney RS(1), Mangin JM, Hayes L, Mansfield K, Sousa VH, Fishell G, Machold RP,
Ahn S, Gallo V, Corbin JG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian amygdala is composed of two primary functional
subdivisions, classified according to whether the major output projection of each
nucleus is excitatory or inhibitory. The posterior dorsal and ventral
subdivisions of the medial amygdala, which primarily contain inhibitory output
neurons, modulate specific aspects of innate socio-sexual and aggressive
behaviors. However, the development of the neuronal diversity of this complex and
important structure remains to be fully elucidated.
RESULTS: Using a combination of genetic fate-mapping and loss-of-function
analyses, we examined the contribution and function of Sonic hedgehog
(Shh)-expressing and Shh-responsive (Nkx2-1+ and Gli1+) neurons in the medial
amygdala. Specifically, we found that Shh- and Nkx2-1-lineage cells contribute
differentially to the dorsal and ventral subdivisions of the postnatal medial
amygdala. These Shh- and Nkx2-1-lineage neurons express overlapping and
non-overlapping inhibitory neuronal markers, such as Calbindin, FoxP2, nNOS and
Somatostatin, revealing diverse fate contributions in discrete medial amygdala
nuclear subdivisions. Electrophysiological analysis of the Shh-derived neurons
additionally reveals an important functional diversity within this lineage in the
medial amygdala. Moreover, inducible Gli1CreER(T2) temporal fate mapping shows
that early-generated progenitors that respond to Shh signaling also contribute to
medial amygdala neuronal diversity. Lastly, analysis of Nkx2-1 mutant mice
demonstrates a genetic requirement for Nkx2-1 in inhibitory neuronal
specification in the medial amygdala distinct from the requirement for Nkx2-1 in 
cerebral cortical development.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data reveal a differential contribution of
Shh-expressing and Shh-responding cells to medial amygdala neuronal diversity as 
well as the function of Nkx2-1 in the development of this important limbic system
structure.

PMCID: PMC2892491
PMID: 20507551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jun;239(6):1818-26. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22301.

Gli2 activator function in preosteoblasts is sufficient to mediate Ihh-dependent 
osteoblast differentiation, whereas the repressor function of Gli2 is dispensable
for endochondral ossification.

Kesper DA(1), Didt-Koziel L, Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Duisburg-Essen, Center of Medical Biotechnology, Essen, Germany.

Signaling of Indian hedgehog (Ihh), one of the key regulators of endochondral
ossification is mediated by transcription factors of the Gli family, Gli1, Gli2, 
and Gli3. Gli3 and to a lesser extent Gli2 can be proteolytically processed into 
short repressor proteins. Upon Ihh signaling, processing is inhibited and the
full-length proteins function as activators of transcription. Gli3 has been shown
to mainly act as a repressor of Ihh target genes in chondrocytes, but the role of
other Gli isoforms is less clear. Analyzing mouse mutants deficient for Ihh;Gli2 
or Gli3;Gli2, we show here that the Gli2 repressor has no detectable function in 
chondrocyte or osteoblast differentiation. Instead, Gli2 seems to act as an
activator to fully induce the expression of Ihh target genes in skeletal tissues.
Furthermore, we show that, in the absence of Gli3, the activator function of Gli2
is sufficient to induce Ihh-dependent osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 20503377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Tumour Biol. 2010 Oct;31(5):381-90. doi: 10.1007/s13277-010-0046-4. Epub 2010 May
18.

CD133+ cells from medulloblastoma and PNET cell lines are more resistant to
cyclopamine inhibition of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway than CD133- cells.

Enguita-Germán M(1), Schiapparelli P, Rey JA, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Biology Unit, University of Navarra School of Sciences, Pamplona, 
Spain.

CD133 has recently been used as a reliable marker for brain tumor stem cells
isolation. Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is implicated in medulloblastoma and central
primitive neuroectodermal tumor (cPNET) formation. It has recently been suggested
a role for the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein--typical of pPNET--in the upregulation of 
GLI1 and PTCH1 genes. Cyclopamine inhibits the SHH pathway in medulloblastoma
cell lines, but its effect on cPNET and pPNET cell lines has not been well
established yet. Our purpose was to study the effect of cyclopamine on
medulloblastoma and PNET cell lines and to analyze whether CD133 expression might
be able to modify this effect. We analyzed gene expression, cell viability,
apoptosis, and tumorigenic capability before and after cyclopamine treatment in
CD133 high-expressing and CD133 low-expressing cell lines. All medulloblastoma
and PNET cell lines displayed an inhibitory effect on the expression of SHH
pathway genes, on viability, and on tumorigenic potential after treatment.
Nevertheless, CD133 expression made the cells more resistant to cyclopamine
inhibition. These results open new doors to the understanding of CD133+ cancer
stem cells as residual cells that might be responsible for treatment resistance.

PMID: 20480407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 25;107(21):9736-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004602107. Epub 2010 May 11.

Hedgehog pathway-regulated gene networks in cerebellum development and
tumorigenesis.

Lee EY(1), Ji H, Ouyang Z, Zhou B, Ma W, Vokes SA, McMahon AP, Wong WH, Scott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Stanford, CA, USA.

Many genes initially identified for their roles in cell fate determination or
signaling during development can have a significant impact on tumorigenesis. In
the developing cerebellum, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) stimulates the proliferation of
granule neuron precursor cells (GNPs) by activating the Gli transcription
factors. Inappropriate activation of Shh target genes results in unrestrained
cell division and eventually medulloblastoma, the most common pediatric brain
malignancy. We find dramatic differences in the gene networks that are directly
driven by the Gli1 transcription factor in GNPs and medulloblastoma. Gli1 binding
location analysis revealed hundreds of genomic loci bound by Gli1 in normal and
cancer cells. Only one third of the genes bound by Gli1 in GNPs were also bound
in tumor cells. Correlation with gene expression levels indicated that 116 genes 
were preferentially transcribed in tumors, whereas 132 genes were target genes in
both GNPs and medulloblastoma. Quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization for
some putative target genes support their direct regulation by Gli. The results
indicate that transformation of normal GNPs into deadly tumor cells is
accompanied by a distinct set of Gli-regulated genes and may provide candidates
for targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC2906878
PMID: 20460306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Nat Prod. 2010 May 28;73(5):995-7. doi: 10.1021/np1000818.

Terpenoids and a flavonoid glycoside from Acacia pennata leaves as
hedgehog/GLI-mediated transcriptional inhibitors.

Rifai Y(1), Arai MA, Koyano T, Kowithayakorn T, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho, 
Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan.

Overexpression of glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1), which has been
characterized as a terminal effector and a target gene of the Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway, is associated with the development of cancer. A cellular
screen was applied utilizing of a GLI-dependent luciferase reporter in human
keratinocyte cells (HaCaT) and identified two terpenoids (1 and 2) and a
flavonoid glycoside (5) from Acacia pennata as Hh/GLI inhibitors. Compounds 1, 2,
and 5 exhibited selective cytotoxicity against human pancreatic (PANC1) and
prostate (DU145) cancer cells with no toxic effect on normal cells. This result
was consistent with a dose-dependent reduction of the protein levels of
antiapoptotic BCL-2 and the tumor suppressor patched 1 protein (PTCH).
Additionally, treatment of 1 downregulated mRNA expression of Ptch in PANC1,
suggesting that the compound has an inhibitory effect on the transcription of
Hh/GLI.

PMID: 20450170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Cell Cycle. 2010 May;9(9):1683. Epub 2010 May 1.

Canonical Hedgehog signaling drives proangiogenic responses in endothelial cells.

Spek CA, Bijlsma MF, Queiroz KC.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 1;9(3):570-79.

PMID: 20448456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Genes Immun. 2010 Sep;11(6):509-14. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.15. Epub 2010 May 6.

Evidence that glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 is not a universal risk gene
for inflammatory bowel disease in Caucasians.

Bentley RW(1), Cleynen I, Gearry RB, Barclay ML, Rutgeerts P, Merriman TR,
Ferrante M, Roberts RL, Vermeire S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.

The transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) has a
central function in gastrointestinal tract development and homeostasis. A
non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (rs2228226; Q1100E) in GLI1, 
which impairs GLI1 function in vitro, has been proposed as a risk factor for
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). In this study, we assessed the cumulative
evidence for association of GLI1 with IBD. New genotype data for rs2228226 from
New Zealand (907 controls, 990 IBD patients) and Belgian Caucasian case-control
data sets (312 controls, 1214 IBD patients) were combined with data from the
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases and three
previously studied Caucasian case-control data sets. Meta-analysis of rs2228226
did not detect any association with ulcerative colitis (UC) (P=0.09, odds ratio
(OR)=1.07, 95% confidence interval (CI)=0.92-1.24), Crohn's disease (CD) (P=0.29,
OR=1.06, 95% CI=0.93-1.21) or overall IBD (P=0.15, OR=1.05, 95% CI=0.92-1.19).
Our analyses of rs2228226 suggest that GLI1 is not a significant risk factor for 
IBD in Caucasians.

PMID: 20445566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Neurol Res. 2010 Nov;32(9):975-80. doi: 10.1179/016164110X12681290831360. Epub
2010 May 4.

Sonic Hedgehog/GLI1 signaling pathway inhibition restricts cell migration and
invasion in human gliomas.

Wang K(1), Pan L, Che X, Cui D, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

Recent studies have shown that aberrant activation of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH)/GLI1
signaling pathway is involved in many kinds of human malignancies. Both in vitro 
and in vivo experiments demonstrate that inhibiting the pathway results in tumor 
regression for a fraction of gliomas which harbor an active pathway. However,
little is known about the linkage between the SHH/GLI1 signaling pathway and cell
migration and invasion in gliomas. In this study, we showed that GLI1 expression 
closely correlates with pathological grades of human gliomas by
immunohistochemistry analysis of 110 cases of surgically-resected glioma tissues.
Moreover, we used cyclopamine and RNA interference technique to block the
SHH/GLI1 signaling to investigate the in vitro changes of glioma cells. The
result showed that suppression of the pathway markedly inhibited glioma cell
migration and invasion. The following quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that
decreased expressions of Snail, MMP9, and increased E-cadherin expression
coincided with GLI1 knockout. Collectively, our results raise the possibility
that SHH/GLI1 is a potentially anti-invasive target for therapeutic intervention 
in human gliomas.

PMID: 20444323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Apr 30;11:32. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-32.

Genetic variations regulate alternative splicing in the 5' untranslated regions
of the mouse glioma-associated oncogene 1, Gli1.

Palaniswamy R(1), Teglund S, Lauth M, Zaphiropoulos PG, Shimokawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
SE-14157 Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Alternative splicing is one of the key mechanisms that generate
biological diversity. Even though alternative splicing also occurs in the 5' and 
3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of mRNAs, the understanding of the significance
and the regulation of these variations is rather limited.
RESULTS: We investigated 5' UTR mRNA variants of the mouse Gli1 oncogene, which
is the terminal transcriptional effector of the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway. 
In addition to identifying novel transcription start sites, we demonstrated that 
the expression ratio of the Gli1 splice variants in the 5' UTR is regulated by
the genotype of the mouse strain analyzed. The GT allele, which contains the
consensus intronic dinucleotides at the 5' splice site of intron 1B, favors exon 
1B inclusion, while the GC allele, having a weaker 5' splice site sequence,
promotes exon 1B skipping. Moreover, the alternative Gli1 5' UTRs had an impact
on translational capacity, with the shorter and the exon 1B-skipped mRNA variants
being most effective.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings implicate novel, genome-based mechanisms as regulators 
of the terminal events in the mouse HH signaling cascade.

PMCID: PMC2880320
PMID: 20433698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Oncol Rep. 2010 Jun;23(6):1537-43.

Created Gli-1 duplex short-RNA (i-Gli-RNA) eliminates CD44 Hi progenitors of
taxol-resistant ovarian cancer cells.

Mine T(1), Matsueda S, Gao H, Li Y, Wong KK, Peoples GE, Ferrone S, Ioannides CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. mine@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

Notch and Hedgehog activate cell-cycle progression of adult and cancer stem
cells. Notch is activated by DLL and Jag presents on neighboring cells. We
investigated the effects of density of the Notch-activating ligand, Jag-1, and
targeting Gli-1, in activation of division of paclitaxel/taxol-resistant, (PTX
Res) ovarian cancer cells SKOV3 (SKOV3). We used the specific gamma-presenilin
inhibitor, DAPT, to identify the specificity of activating signals for Notch-1
and created 'butterfly-duplex-3548-Gli-1-inhibitory RNA' (i-Gli-1.RNA) to inhibit
cell division. To accurately quantify kinetics of division, the expression of
CD44 and CD24 was determined in each gated population of divided cells. CD44 High
proliferated when activated by Jag-1 Low and poorly when activated by Jag-1 High.
DAPT inhibited proliferation of cells activated by Jag-1 Low, and increased
proliferation of cells activated by Jag-1 High. Only 5-10% of cells activated by 
Jag-1 High and Jag-1 Low divided fast, polynomial, and symmetric. i-Gli-1.RNA
eliminated more than 50% of the small CD44 High/CD24 Neg cells in divisions 3 and
4. This effect appeared specific compared with cells transfected with negative
control siRNA. i-Gli-1.RNA had no effect on large CD44 High/CD24 Neg cells, but
inhibited the population of CD44 High/CD24 Low cells. Expansion of CD44 High
inversely correlated with Jag-1 density on activating autologous tumor and
fibrosarcoma cells. Created i-RNAs may decrease the resting CSC pool. Notch and
Gli-1 signals play an important role in proliferation/division and survival of
cancer stem cells. Targeting Notch-1 through its enhancer Gl-1, should be
significant for novel treatments to eliminate taxol-resistant cancer stem cells
(CSC). i.Gli-1 RNA should be more effective if used together with Taxol.

PMCID: PMC3426036
PMID: 20428807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Oncol Rep. 2010 Jun;23(6):1523-8.

Effect of Helicobacter pylori infection on the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway
in gastric cancer cells.

Kim JH(1), Choi YJ, Lee SH, Shin HS, Lee IO, Kim YJ, Kim H, Yang WI, Kim H, Lee
YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

This study aimed to investigate the effect of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)
infection on the sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling in gastric cancer. Shh, Patched
(Ptch), and transcription factor Gli1 were overexpressed in H. pylori-infected
gastric cancer cells. The oncoprotein, CagA positive H. pylori resulted in
significantly higher Shh expression. Pretreatment with MG-132 or PDTC
significantly lowered Shh expression. Significant overexpression of Shh and Gli1 
were noted in H. pylori-infected compared to non-infected gastric cancer tissues.
Conclusively, H. pylori activated the Shh signaling pathway in CagA-dependent
manner partly through the NF-kappaB pathway in gastric cancer cells.

PMID: 20428805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cancer. 2010 Apr 26;9:89. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-89.

Hedgehog/Gli supports androgen signaling in androgen deprived and androgen
independent prostate cancer cells.

Chen M(1), Feuerstein MA, Levina E, Baghel PS, Carkner RD, Tanner MJ, Shtutman M,
Vacherot F, Terry S, de la Taille A, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)The Ordway Research Institute, Albany, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) develops as a consequence
of hormone therapies used to deplete androgens in advanced prostate cancer
patients. CRPC cells are able to grow in a low androgen environment and this is
associated with anomalous activity of their endogenous androgen receptor (AR)
despite the low systemic androgen levels in the patients. Therefore, the
reactivated tumor cell androgen signaling pathway is thought to provide a target 
for control of CRPC. Previously, we reported that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling was
conditionally activated by androgen deprivation in androgen sensitive prostate
cancer cells and here we studied the potential for cross-talk between Hh and
androgen signaling activities in androgen deprived and androgen independent (AI) 
prostate cancer cells.
RESULTS: Treatment of a variety of androgen-deprived or AI prostate cancer cells 
with the Hh inhibitor, cyclopamine, resulted in dose-dependent modulation of the 
expression of genes that are regulated by androgen. The effect of cyclopamine on 
endogenous androgen-regulated gene expression in androgen deprived and AI
prostate cancer cells was consistent with the suppressive effects of cyclopamine 
on the expression of a reporter gene (luciferase) from two different
androgen-dependent promoters. Similarly, reduction of smoothened (Smo) expression
with siRNA co-suppressed expression of androgen-inducible KLK2 and KLK3 in
androgen deprived cells without affecting the expression of androgen receptor
(AR) mRNA or protein. Cyclopamine also prevented the outgrowth of AI cells from
androgen growth-dependent parental LNCaP cells and suppressed the growth of an
overt AI-LNCaP variant whereas supplemental androgen (R1881) restored growth to
the AI cells in the presence of cyclopamine. Conversely, overexpression of Gli1
or Gli2 in LNCaP cells enhanced AR-specific gene expression in the absence of
androgen. Overexpressed Gli1/Gli2 also enabled parental LNCaP cells to grow in
androgen depleted medium. AR protein co-immunoprecipitates with Gli2 protein from
transfected 293T cell lysates.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results indicate that Hh/Gli signaling supports
androgen signaling and AI growth in prostate cancer cells in a low androgen
environment. The finding that Gli2 co-immunoprecipitates with AR protein suggests
that an interaction between these proteins might be the basis for Hedgehog/Gli
support of androgen signaling under this condition.

PMCID: PMC2873440
PMID: 20420697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2010 Jul;110(1):68-78. doi:
10.1016/j.tripleo.2010.01.024. Epub 2010 Apr 24.

Are we on the brink of nonsurgical treatment for ameloblastoma?

Sauk JJ(1), Nikitakis NG, Scheper MA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40201, USA.
john.sauk@louisville.edu

OBJECTIVE: Recent identification of altered molecular signaling pathways in
neoplasia has begun to elucidate mechanisms of oncogenesis, differentiation, and 
tumor progression, and to suggest plausible nonsurgical considerations for
treatment. Here we review the sonic hedgehog (SHH) and PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling
pathways, their role in ameloblastoma, a locally aggressive odontogenic tumor,
and evidence for consideration of therapeutic approaches that target these
molecular pathways. In so doing, some of the gaps will be revealed that may impel
investigations and translate to patient care, helping to minimize or eliminate
the need for extensive surgery.
STUDY DESIGN: This is a comprehensive review of the literature regarding
alterations in signaling mechanisms associated with ameloblastomas. In addition, 
this review attempts to explore and discuss possible inhibitors to these pathways
that may have utility in treating ameloblastoma.
RESULTS: The expression of SHH signaling molecules in ameloblastomas at the mRNA 
and protein levels has intimated that these molecules may play a role in cell
proliferation of these tumors. Immunohistochemical analysis has revealed aberrant
signaling in the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in ameloblastomas and appears to be a
valuable tool for elucidating pathogenesis and aggressiveness, and selecting
optimal therapeutics.
CONCLUSION: The understanding of altered pathways in ameloblastoma may soon
provide nonsurgical options for the treatment of this condition. The
demonstration of cross talk in SHH signal transduction with PI3K signaling
through Akt has shown that these pathways converge to control the Gli
transcription factors. Thus, tumors that entirely depend on active SHH signaling 
for survival/growth and maintenance may well be susceptible targets for combined 
chemotherapy with SHH-specific inhibitors together with PI3K, Akt, or mTOR
blocking agents. Some of these inhibitors could be used locally, thereby
minimizing major systemic effects.

Copyright (c) 2010 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20418126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 1;80(5):712-23. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.04.016. Epub 
2010 Apr 20.

Small molecule modulation of HH-GLI signaling: current leads, trials and
tribulations.

Mas C(1), Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
ariel.ruizaltaba@unige.ch

Many human sporadic cancers have been recently shown to require the activity of
the Hedgehog-GLI pathway for sustained growth. The survival and expansion of
cancer stem cells is also HH-GLI dependent. Here we review the advances on the
modulation of HH-GLI signaling by small molecules. We focus on both natural
compounds and synthetic molecules that target upstream pathway components, mostly
SMOOTHENED, and those that target the last steps of the pathway, the GLI
transcription factors. In this review we have sought to provide some bases for
useful comparisons, listing original assays used and sources to facilitate
comparisons of IC50 values. This area is a rapidly expanding field where biology,
medicine and chemistry intersect, both in academia and industry. We also
highlight current clinical trials, with positive results in early stages. While
we have tried to be exhaustive regarding the molecules, not all data is in the
public domain yet. Indeed, we have opted to avoid listing chemical structures but
these can be easily found in the references given. Finally, we are hopeful that
the best molecules will soon reach the patients but caution about the lack of
investment on compounds that lack tight IP positions. While the market in
developed nations is expected to compensate the investment and risk of making
HH-GLI modulators, other sources or plans must be available for developing
nations and poor patient populations. The promise of curing cancer recalls the
once revered dream of El Dorado, which taught us that not everything that
GLI-tters is gold.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20412786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Brain Pathol. 2010 Sep;20(5):936-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2010.00395.x. Epub 
2010 Mar 18.

Intratumoral patterns of genomic imbalance in glioblastomas.

Nobusawa S(1), Lachuer J, Wierinckx A, Kim YH, Huang J, Legras C, Kleihues P,
Ohgaki H.

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.

Glioblastomas are morphologically and genetically heterogeneous, but little is
known about the regional patterns of genomic imbalance within glioblastomas. We
recently established a reliable whole genome amplification (WGA) method to
randomly amplify DNA from paraffin-embedded histological sections with minimum
amplification bias [Huang et al (J Mol Diagn 11: 109-116, 2009)]. In this study, 
chromosomal imbalance was assessed by array comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH; Agilent 105K, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), using WGA-DNA
from two to five separate tumor areas of 14 primary glioblastomas (total, 41
tumor areas). Chromosomal imbalances significantly differed among glioblastomas; 
the only alterations that were observed in > or =6 cases were loss of chromosome 
10q, gain at 7p and loss of 10p. Genetic alterations common to all areas analyzed
within a single tumor included gains at 1q32.1 (PIK3C2B, MDM4), 4q11-q12 (KIT,
PDGFRA), 7p12.1-11.2 (EGFR), 12q13.3-12q14.1 (GLI1, CDK4) and 12q15 (MDM2), and
loss at 9p21.1-24.3 (p16(INK4a)/p14(ARF)), 10p15.3-q26.3 (PTEN, etc.) and
13q12.11-q34 (SPRY2, RB1). These are likely to be causative in the pathogenesis
of glioblastomas (driver mutations). In addition, there were numerous tumor
area-specific genomic imbalances, which may be either nonfunctional (passenger
mutations) or functional, but constitute secondary events reflecting progressive 
genomic instability, a hallmark of glioblastomas.

PMID: 20406234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 15;70(8):3382-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3012.

Common botanical compounds inhibit the hedgehog signaling pathway in prostate
cancer.

Slusarz A(1), Shenouda NS, Sakla MS, Drenkhahn SK, Narula AS, MacDonald RS,
Besch-Williford CL, Lubahn DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211, 
USA.

Many botanical compounds have been proposed to prevent cancer. We investigated
the cancer treatment and prevention abilities of apigenin, baicalein, curcumin,
epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCG), genistein, quercetin, and resveratrol both in 
vivo in transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice as well as
in vitro in prostate cancer cell lines. In our experiments, these seven compounds
act similarly to the Hedgehog antagonist cyclopamine, a teratogenic plant
alkaloid, which had been previously shown to "cure" prostate cancer in a mouse
xenograft model. With IC(50) values ranging from <1 to 25 mumol/L, these
compounds can inhibit Gli1 mRNA concentration by up to 95% and downregulate Gli
reporter activity by 80%. We show that four compounds, genistein, curcumin, EGCG,
and resveratrol, inhibit Hedgehog signaling as monitored by real-time reverse
transcription-PCR analysis of Gli1 mRNA concentration or by Gli reporter
activity. Three compounds, apigenin, baicalein, and quercetin, decreased Gli1
mRNA concentration but not Gli reporter activity. Our results show that these
compounds are also able to reduce or delay prostate cancer in vivo in TRAMP mice.
All seven compounds, when fed in combination as pure compounds or as crude plant 
extracts, inhibit well-differentiated carcinoma of the prostate by 58% and 81%,
respectively. In vitro, we show that all seven compounds also inhibit growth in
human and mouse prostate cancer cell lines. Mechanistically, we propose the
Hedgehog signaling pathway to be a direct or indirect target of these compounds. 
These botanicals at pharmacologic concentrations are potentially safer and less
expensive alternatives to cyclopamine and its pharmaceutical analogues for cancer
therapy.

(c) 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20395211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Oral Oncol. 2010 May;46(5):387-92. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.02.023. Epub 
2010 Apr 3.

Involvement of PTCH1 mutations in the calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor.

Peacock ZS(1), Cox D, Schmidt BL.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

The human homologue of the Drosophila segment polarity gene PTCH1, a tumor
suppressor gene within the Sonic Hedgehog pathway has been implicated as the
mutation responsible for nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) as well as 
many other sporadic neoplasms. The calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (CEOT)
is a rare and aggressive tumor of the jaws. The objective of this study was to
investigate the role of the Sonic hedgehog pathway in the pathogenesis of the
CEOT. We evaluated the protein distribution of PTCH and the transcription factors
Gli1 and Gli2 within seven cases using immunohistochemistry. We also sought to
confirm the findings by sequencing the PTCH1 gene from DNA extracted from the
paraffin-embedded tissue of these cases. Seven cases of paraffin-embedded CEOT
specimens were analyzed with immunohistochemistry. Immunoreactivity for Sonic
hedgehog pathway proteins was evaluated using antibodies to the receptor PTCH as 
well as to the transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2. A keratocystic odontogenic
tumor (KOT) from a 12year-old with NBCCS served as our positive control. Normal
salivary gland tissue served as our negative control. PTCH gene sequencing was
completed using PCR. Immunoreactivity to PTCH was seen in 6/7 cases, to Gli1 in
6/7 cases and to Gli2 in 6/7 cases. All three proteins were positive in the
syndromic KOT and all proteins were negative in normal salivary tissue. Gene
sequencing revealed five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of which two
resulted in missense mutations. A missense mutation was also detected in the KOT.
This study is the first to implicate the Sonic hedgehog pathway in the
pathogenesis of the CEOT through sequencing. Similar to other odontogenic
neoplasms gene mutations in PTCH1 are present in the CEOT.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20371205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Aug;16(8):2605-16. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0048.

Sonic Hedgehog influences the balance of osteogenesis and adipogenesis in mouse
adipose-derived stromal cells.

James AW(1), Leucht P, Levi B, Carre AL, Xu Y, Helms JA, Longaker MT.

Author information: 
(1)Hagey Pediatric Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Division of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5148, USA.

Adipose-derived stromal cells (ASCs) present a great potential for tissue
engineering, as they are capable of differentiating into osteogenic and
adipogenic cell types, among others. In this study, we examined the role of
Hedgehog signaling in the balance of osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation in
mouse ASCs. Results showed that Hedgehog signaling increased during early
osteogenic differentiation (Shh, Ptc1, and Gli1), but decreased during adipogenic
differentiation. N-terminal Sonic Hedgehog (Shh-N) significantly increased in
vitro osteogenic differentiation in mouse ASCs, by all markers examined (*p <
0.01). Concomitantly, Shh-N abrogated adipogenic differentiation, by all markers 
examined (*p < 0.01). Conversely, blockade of endogenous Hedgehog signaling, with
the Hedgehog antagonist cyclopamine, enhanced adipogenesis at the expense of
osteogenesis. We next translated these results to a mouse model of appendicular
skeletal regeneration. Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and
in situ hybridization, we found that skeletal injury (a monocortical 1 mm defect 
in the tibia) results in a localized increase in Hedgehog signaling. Moreover,
grafting of ASCs treated with Shh-N resulted in significantly increased bone
regeneration within the defect site. In conclusion, Hedgehog signaling enhances
the osteogenic differentiation of mouse ASCs, at the expense of adipogenesis.
These data suggest that Hedgehog signaling directs the lineage differentiation of
mesodermal stem cells and represents a promising strategy for skeletal tissue
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2947454
PMID: 20367246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. FASEB J. 2010 Aug;24(8):2893-903. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-148908. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

Zic1 transcription factor in bone: neural developmental protein regulates
mechanotransduction in osteocytes.

Kalogeropoulos M(1), Varanasi SS, Olstad OK, Sanderson P, Gautvik VT, Reppe S,
Francis RM, Gautvik KM, Birch MA, Datta HK.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Group, ICM, The Medical School, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

A transcriptome analysis compared gene expression in human bone biopsy samples
taken from lumbar spine and iliac crest, sites that experience high and low
levels of mechanical stress, respectively. The analysis revealed that the zinc
finger protein of cerebellum (Zic) family member transcription factor Zic1 was
the most up-regulated gene in the lumbar spine (202-fold; P<10(-7)) in comparison
with the iliac crest. Software analysis of differential gene expression in the
biopsy samples identified the ciliary-related proteins PATCH1 and GLI-Kruppel
family members Gli1 and Gli3 as part of a potential molecular network associated 
with Zic1. RT-PCR confirmed the expression of Zic1, Gli1, and Gli3 and other
related key signaling mediators in osteoblastic cells and osteocytes in vitro.
Zic1 was immunolocalized in the cytosol and nucleus of the murine osteocyte cell 
line MLO-Y4 and osteoblast-like cells MC3T3-E1 and in primary rat osteoblasts.
MLO-Y4 cells subjected to prolonged oscillatory fluid flow showed increased
localization of Zic1 in the nucleus with diminished levels in the cytosol, but no
such changes were seen in MC3T3-E1 cells. A shear stress-induced increase in
T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor transcriptional activity was abolished by 
Zic1 gene silencing. These results suggest that Zic1, perhaps together with Gli1 
and Gli3, may act as a link between mechanosensing and Wnt signaling. We conclude
that Zic1, a neural developmental transcription factor, plays an important role
in shear flow mechanotransduction in osteocytes.

PMID: 20354137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jul;224(1):210-7. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22116.

Beta1 integrins mediate cell proliferation in three-dimensional cultures by
regulating expression of the sonic hedgehog effector protein, GLI1.

Goel HL(1), Underwood JM, Nickerson JA, Hsieh CC, Languino LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Prostate Cancer Discovery and Development
Program, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts
01605, USA.

The beta1 integrins play an important role in the modulation of cancer cell
proliferation and tumor growth. We have previously shown that beta1 integrins
associate with insulin-like growth factor type 1 receptor (IGF-IR) and regulate
IGF-stimulated prostate cancer cell proliferation. In the present study, we find 
that downregulation of beta1 in prostate cancer cells inhibits IGF-IR and AKT
activation. We also show that beta1 downregulation in two- and three-dimensional 
(3D) prostate cancer cell cultures significantly reduces expression of GLI1, a
transcription factor known to be regulated by the IGF/AKT signaling pathway and
to be a downstream effector of sonic hedgehog. Re-expression of GLI1 rescues the 
inhibitory effect of beta1 downregulation on prostate cancer cell proliferation
in 3D cultures. We find that downregulation of beta1 significantly reduces
surface expression of the associated alpha 5 integrin subunit. Our results
indicate that the beta1/IGF-IR complex regulates expression of GLI1, which in
turn promotes cancer cell proliferation in 3D cultures.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2885855
PMID: 20333644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Cell Tissue Res. 2010 May;340(2):389-95. doi: 10.1007/s00441-010-0945-0. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

Steroidal regulation of Ihh and Gli1 expression in the rat uterus.

Kubota K(1), Yamauchi N, Yamagami K, Nishimura S, Gobaru T, Yamanaka K, Wood C,
Soh T, Takahashi M, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School Kyushu
University, 6-10-1 Hakozaki, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8581, Japan.

Ovarian steroid hormones, progesterone (P4), and estradiol (E2) strictly regulate
the endometrial tissue remodeling required for successful embryo implantation.
Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is up-regulated by P4 and critically mediates uterine
receptivity in the mouse. However, the regulation of Ihh expression during the
implantation period still remains unclear. The present study was conducted to
elucidate the mechanism of the steroidal regulation in the expression of Ihh and 
Gli1, the mediator of the Ihh pathway. Ihh mRNA was expressed in the rat uterus
on 3.5-5.5 days post-coitus (dpc), while Gli1 expression transiently increased at
3.5 dpc but decreased significantly on 5.5 dpc (P < 0.001). In delayed
implantation, the expression of Ihh was induced by the implantation-induced E2
treatment in the primed rat uterus. In contrast, expression of Gli1 was
significantly decreased by E2 treatment (P = 0.016). In the case of ICI182.780
(ICI) treatment, Ihh expression was eliminated by ICI, whilst Gli1 expression
increased. These results suggest that Ihh expression is maintained at a high
level until the initiation of implantation, while the expression of Gli1 is
decreased just prior to the initiation of implantation depending on the E2
action. This observation aids in the understanding of the Ihh signaling pathway
mediating uterine remodeling for implantation.

PMID: 20232216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. ChemMedChem. 2010 Apr 6;5(4):500-12. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201000011.

Small-molecule inhibitors of the hedgehog signaling pathway as cancer
therapeutics.

Peukert S(1), Miller-Moslin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Discovery Chemistry, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, 250 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
stefan.peukert@novartis.com

Inhibitors of the Hedgehog (Hh) molecular signaling pathway have emerged in
recent years as a promising new class of potential therapeutics for cancer
treatment. Numerous drug discovery efforts have resulted in the identification of
a wide variety of small molecules that target different members of this pathway, 
including Smoothened (Smo), Sonic hedgehog protein (Shh), and Gli1. Several Smo
inhibitors have now entered human clinical trials, and successful
proof-of-concept studies have been carried out in patients with defined genetic
mutations in the Hh pathway. This review provides a general overview of three
main topics in this rapidly expanding area: 1) the various types of biological
assays and in vivo models that have been employed for the identification and
optimization of Hh pathway inhibitors; 2) Smo inhibitors reported to date,
including recent clinical results where available; and 3) efforts toward the
identification and characterization of inhibitors of other members of the Hh
pathway.

PMID: 20229564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Neuro Oncol. 2010 Aug;12(8):790-8. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq026. Epub 2010 Mar 11.

Activation of the Hedgehog pathway in pilocytic astrocytomas.

Rush SZ(1), Abel TW, Valadez JG, Pearson M, Cooper MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt Medical Center, MRBIII, Rm. 6160, 465,
21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Pilocytic astrocytoma is commonly viewed as a benign lesion. However, disease
onset is most prevalent in the first two decades of life, and children are often 
left with residual or recurrent disease and significant morbidity. The Hedgehog
(Hh) pathway regulates the growth of higher WHO grade gliomas, and in this study,
we have evaluated the activation and operational status of this regulatory
pathway in pilocytic astrocytomas. Expression levels of the Hh pathway
transcriptional target PTCH were elevated in 45% of tumor specimens analyzed
(ages 1-22 years) and correlated inversely with patient age. Evaluation of a
tissue array revealed oligodendroglioma-like features, pilomyxoid features,
infiltration, and necrosis more commonly in specimens from younger patients
(below the median patient age of 10 years). Immunohistochemical staining for the 
Hh pathway components PTCH and GLI1 and the proliferation marker Ki67
demonstrated that patients diagnosed before the age of 10 had higher staining
indices than those diagnosed after the age of 10. A significant correlation
between Ki67 and PTCH and GLI1 staining indices was measured, and 86% of
Ki67-positive cells also expressed PTCH. The operational status of the Hh pathway
was confirmed in primary cell culture and could be modulated in a manner
consistent with a ligand-dependent mechanism. Taken together, these findings
suggest that Hh pathway activation is common in pediatric pilocytic astrocytomas 
and may be associated with younger age at diagnosis and tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC2940682
PMID: 20223881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 15;16(6):1781-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1913.
Epub 2010 Mar 9.

Overexpression of smoothened activates the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in
pancreatic cancer-associated fibroblasts.

Walter K(1), Omura N, Hong SM, Griffith M, Vincent A, Borges M, Goggins M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

PURPOSE: Accumulating evidence suggests that cancer-associated stromal
fibroblasts (CAF) contribute to tumor growth by actively communicating with
cancer cells. Our aim is to identify signaling pathways involved in tumor-stromal
cell interactions in human pancreatic cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We established primary fibroblast cultures from human
pancreatic adenocarcinomas and nonneoplastic pancreas tissues. To identify
differentially expressed genes in CAFs, we did gene expression profiling of human
pancreatic CAFs and nonneoplastic pancreatic fibroblasts.
RESULTS: The Hedgehog receptor Smoothened (SMO) was upregulated in CAFs relative 
to control fibroblasts. CAFs expressing SMO could transduce the Sonic hedgehog
signal to activate Gli1 expression, and small interfering RNA knockdown of SMO
blocked the induction of Gli1 in these cells. Stromal fibroblasts of human
primary pancreatic adenocarcinomas overexpressed Smo compared with normal
pancreatic fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings implicate overexpression of Smo as a mechanism for
the activation of Hedgehog signaling in human pancreatic CAFs and suggest that
stromal cells may be a therapeutic target for Smo antagonists in pancreatic
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2846609
PMID: 20215540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Oncol Lett. 2010 Mar;1(2):319-325. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Sonic Hedgehog pathway activity in prostate cancer.

Bragina O(1), Njunkova N, Sergejeva S, Järvekülg L, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Technomedicum, Tallinn
University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia.

Abnormal activation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway has been
demonstrated in a number of human tumors, including prostate cancer. The study
aimed to assess the activity of Shh pathway components (Shh, Gli1, Gli2 and
Gli3), as well as the proliferation markers FoxA1 and Notch1 during cancer
progression in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP). We
evaluated changes in respective proteins by immunohistochemistry at three time
points (12, 17 and 21 weeks of age) in the tissue of TRAMP and C57Bl/6 mice.
Moreover, the expression of mRNA of these proteins was assessed. The present
study shows a significant age-dependent increase in the number of Shh, Gli1, Gli3
and FoxA1-positive prostate cells and a decrease in Gli2-positive cells in TRAMP.
The study also supports the hypothesis that the development of prostate cancer
and its metastasis is associated with activation of the Shh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3436354
PMID: 22966302  [PubMed]


458. Cancer Sci. 2010 Apr;101(4):927-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01495.x. Epub
2010 Jan 15.

Expression and regulation mechanisms of Sonic Hedgehog in breast cancer.

Cui W(1), Wang LH, Wen YY, Song M, Li BL, Chen XL, Xu M, An SX, Zhao J, Lu YY, Mi
XY, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) plays an essential role in vertebrate organogenesis as well 
as the development of some cancers, including breast cancer. The aim of the
present study was to characterize more precisely its role in breast
carcinogenesis and elucidate its regulation mechanisms. The expression of Shh was
investigated in 97 breast carcinomas and 22 paired non-tumorous tissues (distant 
from the primary tumor) by immunohistochemistry and in four breast cell lines by 
Western blotting. We also analyzed the methylation status of the Shh gene with
methylation-specific PCR and assessed whether nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) 
and Gli1 were expressed in breast tissues by immunohistochemistry. Our results
showed that Shh protein expression in breast carcinomas was significant higher
than that in normal breast tissues (P < 0.01). The up-regulation of Shh in breast
carcinomas was correlated significantly with early clinical stage (P < 0.05). In 
addition, we found a substantial increase in Shh expression at both the mRNA and 
protein levels in several human breast carcinoma cell lines. The expression level
of nuclear Gli1 was positively associated with the expression level of Shh in
breast tissues (P < 0.001). Promoter region hypomethylation (43/61, 70.5%) was
frequently observed in breast carcinomas and significantly associated with Shh
up-regulation (P < 0.05). The DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacytidine
(5-Aza) reduced the methylation of Shh promoter and increased the expression of
Shh protein in MDA-MB-435 and MCF-10A cells. Furthermore, most of the breast
carcinoma cases with Shh up-regulation had increased expression of NF-kappaB
(35/49, 71.4%; P < 0.001). Taken together, these observations suggest that Shh
overexpression is a critical event in breast carcinogenesis, and Shh promoter
hypomethylation and NF-kappaB up-regulation are responsible for the up-regulation
of Shh.

PMID: 20180807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Mar;9(3):617-30. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-1013. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

Cytotoxic effects induced by docetaxel, gefitinib, and cyclopamine on side
population and nonside population cell fractions from human invasive prostate
cancer cells.

Mimeault M(1), Johansson SL, Henichart JP, Depreux P, Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5870, USA.

The present study has been undertaken to establish the therapeutic benefit of
cotargeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and sonic hedgehog pathways
by using gefitinib and cyclopamine, respectively, for improving the efficacy of
the current chemotherapeutic drug docetaxel to counteract the prostate cancer
progression from locally invasive to metastatic and recurrent disease stages. The
data from immuofluorescence analyses revealed that EGFR/Tyr(1173)-pEGFR, sonic
hedgehog ligand, smoothened coreceptor, and GLI-1 were colocalized with the
CD133(+) stem cell-like marker in a small subpopulation of prostate cancer cells.
These signaling molecules were also present in the bulk tumor mass of CD133(-)
prostate cancer cells with a luminal phenotype detected in patient's
adenocarcinoma tissues. Importantly, the results revealed that the
CD133(+)/CD44(high)/AR(-/low) side population (SP) cell fraction endowed with a
high self-renewal potential isolated from tumorigenic and invasive WPE1-NB26
cells by the Hoechst dye technique was insensitive to the current
chemotherapeutic drug, docetaxel. In contrast, the docetaxel treatment induced
significant antiproliferative and apoptotic effects on the
CD133(-)/CD44(low)/AR(+) non-SP cell fraction isolated from the WPE1-NB26 cell
line. Of therapeutic interest, the results have also indicated that combined
docetaxel, gefitinib, and cyclopamine induced greater antiproliferative and
apoptotic effects on SP and non-SP cell fractions isolated from WPE1-NB26 cells
than individual drugs or two-drug combinations. Altogether, these observations
suggest that EGFR and sonic hedgehog cascades may represent the potential
therapeutic targets of great clinical interest to eradicate the total prostate
cancer cell mass and improve the current docetaxel-based therapies against
locally advanced and invasive prostate cancers, and thereby prevent metastases
and disease relapse.

PMCID: PMC3228252
PMID: 20179163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):413-22. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091445.

SHP (small heterodimer partner) suppresses the transcriptional activity and
nuclear localization of Hedgehog signalling protein Gli1.

Kim K(1), Kim KH, Cho HK, Kim HY, Kim HH, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan, Republic of
Korea.

Gli (glioma-associated oncogene homologue) proteins act as terminal effectors of 
the Hedgehog signalling pathway, which is implicated in the development of many
human malignancies. Gli activation is important for cell proliferation and
anti-apoptosis in various cancers. Several studies have suggested that nuclear
receptors have anti-cancer effects by inhibiting the activation of various
oncoproteins. However, the involvement of nuclear receptors on the Hedgehog/Gli
signalling pathway is poorly defined. In the present study we identified SHP
(small heterodimer partner) as a nuclear receptor that decreased the expression
of Gli target genes by repressing the transcriptional activity of Gli1. The
inhibitory effect of SHP was associated with the inhibition of Gli1 nuclear
localization via protein-protein interaction. Finally, SHP overexpression
decreased the expression of Gli target genes and SHP knockdown increased the
expression of these genes. Taken together, these results suggest that SHP can
play a negative role in Hedgehog/Gli1 signalling.

PMID: 20175750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Pediatr Surg. 2010 Feb;45(2):387-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2009.10.081.

Increased expression of the hedgehog signaling pathway in pediatric solid
malignancies.

Oue T(1), Yoneda A, Uehara S, Yamanaka H, Fukuzawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Osaka University
Graduate school of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
ooue@pedsurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: The activation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling is involved in the
progression of various cancers. However, the correlation between the Hh signaling
and tumorigenesis of pediatric malignancies has not been well documented. The
present study was undertaken to examine the expression of the Hh signaling
pathway in various pediatric tumors to elucidate the role of Hh signaling in
pediatric malignancies.
METHODS: Surgical specimens were obtained from 68 patients with pediatric
malignancies (neuroblastoma, 25; rhabdomyosarcoma, 18; hepatic tumor, 12; and
renal tumor, 13). The expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh), its receptor Patched
(Ptch), and downstream transcription factor Gli1 was evaluated using
immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: In neuroblastoma, 96%, 100%, and 68%; in rhabdomyosarcoma, 78%, 100%,
and 78%; in Wilms' tumor, 71%, 100%, and 43%; and in hepatoblastoma, 100%, 100%, 
and 73% of the specimens stained positive for Shh, Ptch, and Gli1, respectively. 
Differentiated neuroblastoma cells showed more intense Gli1 expression than in
immature neuroblastoma cells. In rhabdomyosarcoma, the expression of Gli1 was
higher in alveolar type than in embryonal type.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the Shh-Ptch1-Gli1 signaling pathways
are frequently activated in most pediatric malignant tumors. The Hh signaling
pathway may therefore play an important role in the differentiation and malignant
potential of pediatric malignancies.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20152358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1119-28. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0814. Epub 2010 Jan 
29.

Progenitor cell expansion and organ size of mouse adrenal is regulated by sonic
hedgehog.

Huang CC(1), Miyagawa S, Matsumaru D, Parker KL, Yao HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois, 2001 South
Lincoln Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61802, USA.

The adrenal capsule is postulated to harbor stem/progenitor cells, the progenies 
of which contribute to the growth of adrenocortex. We discovered that cells in
the adrenal capsule are positive for Ptch1 and Gli1, genes indicative of
responsiveness to the stimulation of Hedgehog (Hh) ligands. On the other hand,
Sonic hedgehog (Shh), one of the mammalian Hh ligands, is expressed in the
adrenocortex underneath the adrenal capsule, possibly acting upon the
Hh-Responsive capsule. To investigate the functional significance of Shh in
adrenal growth, we ablated Shh in an adrenocortex-specific manner using the
Steroidogenic factor 1-Cre mouse. Loss of Shh in the adrenocortex led to reduced 
proliferation of capsular cells and a 50-75% reduction in adrenocortex thickness 
and adrenal size. The remaining adrenocortex underwent proper zonation and was
able to synthesize steroids, indicating that Shh is dispensable for
differentiation of adrenocortex. When these animals reached adulthood, their
adrenocortex did not undergo compensatory growth in response to a high level of
plasma ACTH, and the size of the adrenal remained significantly smaller than the 
control adrenal. Using a genetic lineage-tracing model, we further demonstrated
that the Hh-responding cells in the adrenal capsule migrated centripetally into
the adrenocortex. Our results not only provide the genetic evidence to support
that the adrenal capsule contributes to the growth of adrenocortex in both fetal 
and adult life but also identify a novel role of Shh in this process.

PMCID: PMC2840682
PMID: 20118198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Blood. 2010 Mar 25;115(12):2391-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-241703. Epub 2010
Jan 27.

Gli1 regulates the proliferation and differentiation of HSCs and myeloid
progenitors.

Merchant A(1), Joseph G, Wang Q, Brennan S, Matsui W.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Oncology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is essential for normal embryonic development and
tissue repair. The role of Hh signaling in hematopoiesis has been studied
primarily by modulating the activity of Patched and Smoothened, but results have 
been conflicting. Some studies demonstrate a requirement for pathway activity in 
hematopoiesis, whereas others report that it is dispensable. Hh activity
converges on the Gli transcription factors, but the specific role of these
downstream effectors in hematopoiesis has not been reported. We have analyzed
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) and progenitor function in mice with a homozygous
deletion of Gli1 (Gli1(null)). Gli1(null) mice have more long-term HSCs that are 
more quiescent and show increased engraftment after transplantation. In contrast,
myeloid development is adversely affected with decreased in vitro colony
formation, decreased in vivo response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF), and impaired leukocyte recovery after chemotherapy. Levels of the
proto-oncogene Cyclin D1 are reduced in Gli1(null) mice and may explain the loss 
of proliferation seen in HSCs and progenitor cells. These data demonstrate that
Gli1 regulates normal and stress hematopoiesis. Moreover, they suggest that Gli1 
and Smoothened may not be functionally redundant, and direct GLI1 inhibitors may 
be needed to effectively block HH/GLI1 activity in human disease.

PMCID: PMC2845897
PMID: 20107231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Apr 15;19(8):1577-92. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq030. Epub 2010 Jan 
27.

A primary cilia-dependent etiology for midline facial disorders.

Brugmann SA(1), Allen NC, James AW, Mekonnen Z, Madan E, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Human faces exhibit enormous variation. When pathological conditions are
superimposed on normal variation, a nearly unbroken series of facial morphologies
is produced. When viewed in full, this spectrum ranges from cyclopia and
hypotelorism to hypertelorism and facial duplications. Decreased Hedgehog pathway
activity causes holoprosencephaly and hypotelorism. Here, we show that excessive 
Hedgehog activity, caused by truncating the primary cilia on cranial neural crest
cells, causes hypertelorism and frontonasal dysplasia (FND). Elimination of the
intraflagellar transport protein Kif3a leads to excessive Hedgehog responsiveness
in facial mesenchyme, which is accompanied by broader expression domains of Gli1,
Ptc and Shh, and reduced expression domains of Gli3. Furthermore, broader domains
of Gli1 expression correspond to areas of enhanced neural crest cell
proliferation in the facial prominences of Kif3a conditional knockouts. Avian
Talpid embryos that lack primary cilia exhibit similar molecular changes and
similar facial phenotypes. Collectively, these data support our hypothesis that a
severe narrowing of the facial midline and excessive expansion of the facial
midline are both attributable to disruptions in Hedgehog pathway activity. These 
data also raise the possibility that genes encoding ciliary proteins are
candidates for human conditions of hypertelorism and FNDs.

PMCID: PMC2846163
PMID: 20106874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 21;5(1):e8824. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008824.

Hedgehog promotes neovascularization in pancreatic cancers by regulating Ang-1
and IGF-1 expression in bone-marrow derived pro-angiogenic cells.

Nakamura K(1), Sasajima J, Mizukami Y, Sugiyama Y, Yamazaki M, Fujii R, Kawamoto 
T, Koizumi K, Sato K, Fujiya M, Sasaki K, Tanno S, Okumura T, Shimizu N, Kawabe
J, Karasaki H, Kono T, Ii M, Bardeesy N, Chung DC, Kohgo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
cancer including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Recent studies have
suggested that the oncogenic function of Hh in PDAC involves signaling in the
stromal cells rather than cell autonomous effects on the tumor cells. However,
the origin and nature of the stromal cell type(s) that are responsive to Hh
signaling remained unknown. Since Hh signaling plays a crucial role during
embryonic and postnatal vasculogenesis, we speculated that Hh ligand may act on
tumor vasculature specifically focusing on bone marrow (BM)-derived cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Cyclopamine was utilized to inhibit the Hh
pathway in human PDAC cell lines and their xenografts. BM transplants, co-culture
systems of tumor cells and BM-derived pro-angiogenic cells (BMPCs) were employed 
to assess the role of tumor-derived Hh in regulating the BM compartment and the
contribution of BM-derived cells to angiogenesis in PDAC. Cyclopamine
administration attenuated Hh signaling in the stroma rather than in the cancer
cells as reflected by decreased expression of full length Gli2 protein and Gli1
mRNA specifically in the compartment. Cyclopamine inhibited the growth of PDAC
xenografts in association with regression of the tumor vasculature and reduced
homing of BM-derived cells to the tumor. Host-derived Ang-1 and IGF-1 mRNA levels
were downregulated by cyclopamine in the tumor xenografts. In vitro co-culture
and matrigel plug assays demonstrated that PDAC cell-derived Shh induced Ang-1
and IGF-1 production in BMPCs, resulting in their enhanced migration and
capillary morphogenesis activity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We identified the BMPCs as alternative stromal targets 
of Hh-ligand in PDAC suggesting that the tumor vasculature is an attractive
therapeutic target of Hh blockade. Our data is consistent with the emerging
concept that BM-derived cells make important contributions to epithelial
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2809097
PMID: 20098680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;2(2):84-95. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjp052. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Context-dependent regulation of the GLI code in cancer by HEDGEHOG and
non-HEDGEHOG signals.

Stecca B(1), Ruiz I Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva CH-1211, Switzerland.

A surprisingly large and unrelated number of human tumors depend on sustained
HEDGEHOG-GLI (HH-GLI) signaling for growth. This includes cancers of the skin,
brain, colon, lungs, prostate, blood and pancreas among others. The basis of such
commonality is not obvious. HH-GLI signaling has also been shown to be active in 
and required for cancer stem cell survival and expansion in different cancer
types, and its activity is essential not only for tumor growth but also for
recurrence and metastatic growth, two key medical problems. Here we review recent
data on the role of HH-GLI signaling in cancer focusing on the role of the GLI
code, the regulated combinatorial and cooperative function of repressive and
activating forms of all Gli transcription factors, as a signaling nexus that
integrates not only HH signals but also those of multiple tumor suppressors and
oncogenes. Recent data support the view that the context-dependent regulation of 
the GLI code by oncogenes and tumor suppressors constitutes a basis for the
widespread involvement of GLI1 in human cancers, representing a perversion of its
normal role in the control of stem cell lineages during normal development and
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2905064
PMID: 20083481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;12(2):132-42. doi: 10.1038/ncb2013. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Histone deacetylase and Cullin3-REN(KCTD11) ubiquitin ligase interplay regulates 
Hedgehog signalling through Gli acetylation.

Canettieri G(1), Di Marcotullio L, Greco A, Coni S, Antonucci L, Infante P,
Pietrosanti L, De Smaele E, Ferretti E, Miele E, Pelloni M, De Simone G, Pedone
EM, Gallinari P, Giorgi A, Steinkühler C, Vitagliano L, Pedone C, Schinin ME,
Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, 324 viale Regina
Elena, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog signalling is crucial for development and is deregulated in several
tumours, including medulloblastoma. Regulation of the transcriptional activity of
Gli (glioma-associated oncogene) proteins, effectors of the Hedgehog pathway, is 
poorly understood. We show here that Gli1 and Gli2 are acetylated proteins and
that their HDAC-mediated deacetylation promotes transcriptional activation and
sustains a positive autoregulatory loop through Hedgehog-induced upregulation of 
HDAC1. This mechanism is turned off by HDAC1 degradation through an E3 ubiquitin 
ligase complex formed by Cullin3 and REN, a Gli antagonist lost in human
medulloblastoma. Whereas high HDAC1 and low REN expression in neural progenitors 
and medulloblastomas correlates with active Hedgehog signalling, loss of HDAC
activity suppresses Hedgehog-dependent growth of neural progenitors and tumour
cells. Consistent with this, abrogation of Gli1 acetylation enhances cellular
proliferation and transformation. These data identify an integrated HDAC- and
ubiquitin-mediated circuitry, where acetylation of Gli proteins functions as an
unexpected key transcriptional checkpoint of Hedgehog signalling.

PMID: 20081843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 1;9(3):570-79.

Hedgehog proteins activate pro-angiogenic responses in endothelial cells through 
non-canonical signaling pathways.

Chinchilla P(1), Xiao L, Kazanietz MG, Riobo NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 15;9(4):647-8.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 15;9(4):646-7.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 May;9(9):1683.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway orchestrates developmental and homeostatic
angiogenesis. the three Hh isoforms--Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) 
and Desert Hedgehog (Dhh)--signal through patched-1 (ptCH1) and Smoothened (SMo),
to activate the Gli transcription factors with a characteristic rank of potency
(Shh >> Ihh > Dhh). To dissect the mechanisms through which Hh proteins promote
angiogenesis, we analyzed processes inherent to vessel formation in endothelial
cells. We found that none of the Hh ligands were able to induce Gli-target genes 
in human umbilical vein (HUVeC) or human cardiac microvascular endothelial cells 
(HMVeC), suggesting that endothelial cells do not respond to Hh through the
canonical pathway. However, our results show that the three Hh proteins promote
endothelial cell tubulogenesis in 3D cultures in a SMo- and Gi protein-dependent 
manner. Consistent with the required cytoskeletal re-arrangement for
tubulogenesis, Shh, Ihh and Dhh all stimulated the small GTPase RhoA and the
formation of actin stress fibers. This effect, which was mediated by SMO, Gi
proteins and Rac1, defines a new non-canonical Hh pathway. In addition to
regulating the actin cytoskeleton, the Hh ligands promoted survival through
inhibition of the pro-apoptotic effect of PTCH1 in a SMO-independent manner.
Altogether, our results support the existence of Gli-independent Hh responses in 
endothelial cells that regulate tubulogenesis and apoptosis. The identification
of novel non-canonical responses elicited by Hh proteins in endothelial cells
highlights the complexity of the Hh signaling pathway and reveals striking
differences in ligand strength for transcriptional and non-transcriptional
responses

PMID: 20081366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 May-Jun;1799(5-6):411-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.01.002. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Tissue-specific Forkhead protein FOXA2 up-regulates SOX14 gene expression.

Popovic J(1), Klajn A, Petrovic I, Stevanovic M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe, 11010 Belgrade, Serbia.

The expression of Sox14 gene in spinal cord explants was found to be regulated by
Sonic hedgehog (SHH) in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that this signaling
molecule might act as a regulator of Sox14-expressing interneuron
differentiation. In the present study we identified the positive control element 
and provided the first evidence that FOXA2 is involved in up-regulation of SOX14 
expression in HepG2 and U87MG cell lines. By functional analysis we demonstrated 
that mutation in FOXA2 binding site reduced the SOX14 reporter construct
activity, and that FOXA2 over-expression increased endogenous SOX14 protein
expression. Further, we have shown that human SOX14 expression is GLI1 dependent 
in U87MG cells and SHH-N dependent in U87MG and HepG2 cell lines. By applying
siRNA silencing of FOXA2, we have demonstrated that upregulation of endogenous
SOX14 gene expression by SHH is, at least in part, mediated by FOXA2. However,
our data revealed that a positive regulatory region, containing functional FOXA2 
site analyzed in this study, is not involved in mediation of SHH dependent SOX14 
activation. Data presented here provide the initial insight into molecular
mechanism underlying tissue and developmentally specific regulation of the SOX14 
gene expression.

PMID: 20074681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jun;51(6):2986-92. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4151.
Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Neuroprotective effect of upregulated sonic Hedgehog in retinal ganglion cells
following chronic ocular hypertension.

Wu J(1), Zhang S, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Center, Eye & ENT Hospital, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200031, China.

PURPOSE: To determine sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression and whether it exerts
neuroprotective effects on retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in a rat chronic ocular 
hypertension model.
METHODS: Intraocular pressure (IOP) elevation in adult rat was induced by
episcleral vein cautery. Retinal expression of Shh protein and mRNA was
determined by immunohistochemistry, Western blot analysis, and real-time PCR.
Exogenous Shh and its inhibitor cyclopamine were intravitreally injected to
examine their effects on RGC survival after ocular hypertension by the counting
of retrograde DiI-labeled RGCs. Shh pathway components mediating neuroprotective 
effects were characterized using Western blot analysis and real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Shh was mainly detected in the RGCs in normal adult rat. Retinas from
the elevated IOP group had 2.1- to 4.4-fold greater Shh expression than control
retinas (P < 0.05). Shh promoted RGC survival at 2 and 4 weeks after IOP
elevation in a dose-dependent manner, resulting in a loss of only 4.54% +/- 0.36%
RGCs at 2 weeks (P < 0.01; vs. PBS-treated groups). In contrast, cyclopamine
increased RGC loss. Protein and mRNA levels of the Shh signal transducer Smo and 
the downstream transcription factor Gli1 were significantly upregulated in RGCs
after chronic ocular hypertension or intravitreal injection of Shh.
CONCLUSIONS: Shh and Smo are upregulated in a time-dependent manner in retinas
exposed to ocular hypertension, and Shh has neuroprotective effects on damaged
RGCs in a rat chronic hypertension model. Shh may exert neuroprotective effects
by relieving the inhibition of Smo and subsequently activating Gli1.

PMID: 20071678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 13;11:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-2.

Non-consensus GLI binding sites in Hedgehog target gene regulation.

Winklmayr M(1), Schmid C, Laner-Plamberger S, Kaser A, Aberger F, Eichberger T,
Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The GLI transcription factors, mediators of the hedgehog signal bind 
with high affinity to the consensus sequence GACCACCCA. The affinity of variant
single substitutions in GLI binding sites has been measured systematically, but
the affinities of the variant binding sites appears low compared to the frequency
of occurrence of variant sites in known GLI target gene promoters.
RESULTS: We quantified transcriptional activation by GLI using PTCH1 promoter
based luciferase reporters containing all single substitutions of the GLI
consensus binding site. As expected variants with very low affinity did not
activate the reporter. Many lower affinity binding sequences are, however,
functional in the presence of moderate GLI concentration. Using two natural
non-consensus GLI site promoters we showed that substitution of the variant
sequences by consensus leads to comparable activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Variant GLI binding sites with relatively low affinity can within
natural promoters lead to strong transcriptional activation. This may facilitate 
the identification of additional direct GLI target genes.

PMCID: PMC2830928
PMID: 20070907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 15;339(2):418-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.01.003. Epub 2010 
Jan 11.

PCP effector gene Inturned is an important regulator of cilia formation and
embryonic development in mammals.

Zeng H(1), Hoover AN, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The PCP effector gene Inturned regulates planar cell polarity (PCP) and wing hair
formation in Drosophila wings. In order to understand the roles for Inturned in
mammalian embryonic development, we generated a null mutant allele for the mouse 
homologue of Inturned (Intu) via gene-targeting in ES cells. Mouse Intu null
mutants are homozygous lethal at midgestation, exhibiting multiple defects
including neural tube closure defects, abnormal dorsal/ventral patterning of the 
central nervous system and abnormal anterior-posterior patterning of the limbs
resulting in severe polydactyly (7-9 digits each limb). The developmental
processes affected by the Intu mutation are under the control of Hh signaling
through Gli-family transcription factors. We found that in Intu mutant embryos
the expression of Gli1 and Ptch1, two direct transcriptional targets of Hh
signaling, is down-regulated, and the proteolytic processing of Gli3 is
compromised. We further demonstrate that Intu plays significant roles in the
formation of primary cilia both during embryonic development and in cultured
fibroblasts. Finally, a cytoplasmic GFP-Intu fusion protein efficiently rescues
the ciliogenic defects in Intu mutant cells. In conclusion, we show that PCP
effector gene Intu is an important regulator of cilia formation, Hh signal
transduction, and embryonic development in mammals.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20067783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jan 12;9:5. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-5.

Smoothened as a new therapeutic target for human osteosarcoma.

Hirotsu M(1), Setoguchi T, Sasaki H, Matsunoshita Y, Gao H, Nagao H, Kunigou O,
Komiya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog signaling pathway functions as an organizer in embryonic
development. Recent studies have demonstrated constitutive activation of Hedgehog
pathway in various types of malignancies. However, it remains unclear how
Hedgehog pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. To explore the 
involvement of aberrant Hedgehog pathway in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma, we 
investigated the expression and activation of Hedgehog pathway in osteosarcoma
and examined the effect of SMOOTHENED (SMO) inhibition.
RESULTS: To evaluate the expression of genes of Hedgehog pathway, we performed
real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry using osteosarcoma cell lines and
osteosarcoma biopsy specimens. To evaluate the effect of SMO inhibition, we did
cell viability, colony formation, cell cycle in vitro and xenograft model in
vivo. Real-time PCR revealed that osteosarcoma cell lines over-expressed Sonic
hedgehog, Indian hedgehog, PTCH1, SMO, and GLI. Real-time PCR revealed
over-expression of SMO, PTCH1, and GLI2 in osteosarcoma biopsy specimens. These
findings showed that Hedgehog pathway is activated in osteosarcomas. Inhibition
of SMO by cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of SMO, slowed the growth of
osteosarcoma in vitro. Cell cycle analysis revealed that cyclopamine promoted G1 
arrest. Cyclopamine reduced the expression of accelerators of the cell cycle
including cyclin D1, cyclin E1, SKP2, and pRb. On the other hand, p21(cip1)
wprotein was up-regulated by cyclopamine treatment. In addition, knockdown of SMO
by SMO shRNA prevents osteosarcoma growth in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that inactivation of SMO may be a useful
approach to the treatment of patients with osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2818696
PMID: 20067614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Aging Cell. 2009 Dec;8(6):738-51.

Hedgehog signaling maintains hair follicle stem cell phenotype in young and aged 
human skin.

Rittié L(1), Stoll SW, Kang S, Voorhees JJ, Fisher GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
lrittie@umich.edu

Skin hair follicles (HF) contain bulge stem cells (SC) that regenerate HFs during
hair cycles, and repair skin epithelia following injury. As natural aging is
associated with decreased skin repair capacity in humans, we have investigated
the impact of age on human scalp HF bulge cell number and function. Here, we
isolated human bulge cells, characterized as CD200+/KRT15+/KRT19+ cells of the
HF, by dissection-combined CD200 selection in young and aged human skin. Targeted
transcriptional profiling indicates that KRT15, KRT19, Dkk3, Dkk4, Tcf3, S100A4, 
Gas1, EGFR and CTGF/CCN2 are also preferentially expressed by human bulge cells, 
compared to differentiated HF keratinocytes (KC). Our results demonstrate that
aging does not alter expression or localization of these HF SC markers. In
addition, we could not detect significant differences in HF density or bulge cell
number between young and aged human scalp skin. Interestingly, hedgehog (Hh)
signaling is activated in human bulge cells in vivo, and down-regulated in
differentiated HF KCs, both in young and aged skin. In addition, activation of Hh
signaling by lentivirus-mediated overexpression of transcription factor Gli1
induces transcription of HF SC markers KRT15, KRT19, and Gas1, in cultured KCs.
Together with previously reported knock-out mouse results, these data suggest a
role for Hh signaling in maintaining bulge cell phenotype in young and aged human
skin.

PMID: 20050020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. EMBO Mol Med. 2009 Sep;1(6-7):338-51. doi: 10.1002/emmm.200900039.

Human colon cancer epithelial cells harbour active HEDGEHOG-GLI signalling that
is essential for tumour growth, recurrence, metastasis and stem cell survival and
expansion.

Varnat F(1), Duquet A, Malerba M, Zbinden M, Mas C, Gervaz P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland.

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2010 Oct;2(10):385-6; author reply 386-7.
    EMBO Mol Med. 2009 Sep;1(6-7):300-2.

Human colon cancers often start as benign adenomas through loss of APC, leading
to enhanced beta CATENIN (beta CAT)/TCF function. These early lesions are
efficiently managed but often progress to invasive carcinomas and incurable
metastases through additional changes, the nature of which is unclear. We find
that epithelial cells of human colon carcinomas (CCs) and their stem cells of all
stages harbour an active HH-GLI pathway. Unexpectedly, they acquire a high
HEDGEHOG-GLI (HH-GLI) signature coincident with the development of metastases. We
show that the growth of CC xenografts, their recurrence and metastases require
HH-GLI function, which induces a robust epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Moreover, using a novel tumour cell competition assay we show that the
self-renewal of CC stem cells in vivo relies on HH-GLI activity. Our results
indicate a key and essential role of the HH-GLI1 pathway in promoting CC growth, 
stem cell self-renewal and metastatic behavior in advanced cancers. Targeting
HH-GLI1, directly or indirectly, is thus predicted to decrease tumour bulk and
eradicate CC stem cells and metastases.

PMCID: PMC3378144
PMID: 20049737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. EMBO Mol Med. 2009 Sep;1(6-7):300-2. doi: 10.1002/emmm.200900042.

Hedgehog signalling in colon cancer and stem cells.

Gulino A(1), Ferretti E, De Smaele E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
alberto.gulino@uniroma1.it

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2010 Oct;2(10):385-6; author reply 386-7.

Comment on
    EMBO Mol Med. 2009 Sep;1(6-7):338-51.

The participation of the HH pathway in colon cancer has remained controversial.
In this issue, Varnat et al (2009) demonstrate that HH signalling is essential
for human colon cancer growth, recurrence, metastases and stem cell expansion.
This closeup by Gulino et al discusses the paper and its implications.

PMCID: PMC3378148
PMID: 20049733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Med Rep. 2010 Jan-Feb;3(1):133-9. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000230.

Forskolin, a Hedgehog signal inhibitor, inhibits cell proliferation and induces
apoptosis in pediatric tumor cell lines.

Yamanaka H(1), Oue T, Uehara S, Fukuzawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates the development of many organs in
mammals. Recent studies have indicated that the activation of the Hh signaling
pathway contributes to the growth of various adult cancers. However, little is
known about its role in the development of pediatric malignancies. The present
study was undertaken to examine the expression and functional involvement of Hh
signal transcription factors in pediatric tumor cells in order to determine their
potential as therapeutic targets. We utilized real-time RT-PCR to investigate the
expression of Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (Gli1) in various pediatric
tumor cell lines, including rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma and hepatoblastoma.
The mRNA expression of Gli1 was markedly increased in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS-YM,
RD, RH30) cell lines, and moderately increased in neuroblastoma (NB19) and
hepatoblastoma (Huh6) cell lines. The proliferation of these cell lines was dose 
dependently inhibited by Forskolin, a specific Hh signal inhibitor. In addition, 
Forskolin-induced growth suppression was associated with the down-regulation of
C-Myc. Moreover, the blockade of Hh signaling with Forskolin enhanced cell
apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. These results demonstrated that Hh signal
activation frequently occurs in neuroblastoma, hepatoblastoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines. The inhibition of Hh signaling suppressed
proliferation and increased apoptosis in these tumor cells. These findings
suggest that the Hh signaling pathway plays an important role in tumorigenesis
and is a potential molecular target of new treatment strategies for these
pediatric malignant tumors.

PMID: 21472212  [PubMed]


478. Anticancer Res. 2009 Nov;29(11):4629-32.

Cyclopamine and quercetin suppress the growth of leukemia and lymphoma cells.

Kawahara T(1), Kawaguchi-Ihara N, Okuhashi Y, Itoh M, Nara N, Tohda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) and Wnt signaling pathways are involved in the
stimulation of growth of leukemia and lymphoma cells. In the present study,
whether or not the Hh inhibitor, cyclopamine, and the Wnt inhibitor, quercetin,
suppress cell growth was investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effects of cyclopamine and quercetin on the in vitro
growth and protein expression of ten acute leukemia and B-cell lymphoma cell
lines were examined.
RESULTS: Cyclopamine and quercetin suppressed cell growth and induced apoptosis
in seven and eight cell lines respectively. Cyclopamine decreased the level of
Gli1 protein, a target gene product of Hh signaling. Quercetin decreased the
level of Notch1 protein and its active fragment in the DND-41 T-lymphoblastic
leukemia cell line with constitutive Notch activation.
CONCLUSION: Cyclopamine and quercetin suppress the growth of a number of leukemia
and lymphoma cells. This finding suggests the potential use of these compounds in
molecularly-targeted therapy for leukemia and lymphoma.

PMID: 20032413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Carcinog. 2010 Mar;49(3):302-14. doi: 10.1002/mc.20604.

Curcumin inhibits the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway and triggers apoptosis in 
medulloblastoma cells.

Elamin MH(1), Shinwari Z, Hendrayani SF, Al-Hindi H, Al-Shail E, Khafaga Y,
Al-Kofide A, Aboussekhra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Medical Research, King Faisal Specialist Hospital
and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Medulloblastoma is an aggressive primary brain tumor that arises in the
cerebellum of children and young adults. The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling
pathway that plays important roles in the pathology of this aggressive disease is
a promising therapeutic target. In the present report we have shown that curcumin
has cytotoxic effects on medulloblastoma cells. Curcumin suppressed also cell
proliferation and triggered cell-cycle arrest at G(2)/M phase. Moreover, curcumin
inhibited the Shh-Gli1 signaling pathway by downregulating the Shh protein and
its most important downstream targets GLI1 and PTCH1. Furthermore, curcumin
reduced the levels of beta-catenin, the activate/phosphorylated form of Akt and
NF-kappaB, which led to downregulating the three common key effectors, namely
C-myc, N-myc, and Cyclin D1. Consequently, apoptosis was triggered by curcumin
through the mitochondrial pathway via downregulation of Bcl-2, a downstream
anti-apoptotic effector of the Shh signaling. Importantly, the resistant cells
that exhibited no decrease in the levels of Shh and Bcl-2, were sensitized to
curcumin by the addition of the Shh antagonist, cyclopamine. Furthermore, we have
shown that curcumin enhances the killing efficiency of nontoxic doses of
cisplatin and gamma-rays. In addition, we present clear evidence that piperine,
an enhancer of curcumin bioavailability in humans, potentiates the apoptotic
effect of curcumin against medulloblastoma cells. This effect was mediated
through strong downregulation of Bcl-2. These results indicate that curcumin, a
natural nontoxic compound, represents great promise as Shh-targeted therapy for
medulloblastomas.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20025076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2010;15(1):153-76. doi: 10.2478/s11658-009-0040-2. Epub 2009 
Dec 20.

Missense mutations in IHH impair Indian Hedgehog signaling in C3H10T1/2 cells:
Implications for brachydactyly type A1, and new targets for Hedgehog signaling.

Guo S(1), Zhou J, Gao B, Hu J, Wang H, Meng J, Zhao X, Ma G, Lin C, Xiao Y, Tang 
W, Zhu X, Cheah KS, Feng G, Chan D, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, China.

Heterozygous missense mutations in IHH result in Brachydactyly type A1 (BDA1;
OMIM 112500), a condition characterized by the shortening of digits due to
hypoplasia/aplasia of the middle phalanx. Indian Hedgehog signaling regulates the
proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and is essential for
endochondral bone formation. Analyses of activated IHH signaling in C3H10T1/2
cells showed that three BDA1-associated mutations (p.E95K, p.D100E and p.E131K)
severely impaired the induction of targets such as Ptch1 and Gli1. However, this 
was not a complete loss of function, suggesting that these mutations may affect
the interaction with the receptor PTCH1 or its partners, with an impact on the
induction potency. From comparative microarray expression analyses and
quantitative real-time PCR, we identified three additional targets, Sostdc1,
Penk1 and Igfbp5, which were also severely affected. Penk1 and Igfbp5 were
confirmed to be regulated by GLI1, while the induction of Sostdc1 by IHH is
independent of GLI1. SOSTDC1 is a BMP antagonist, and altered BMP signaling is
known to affect digit formation. The role of Penk1 and Igfbp5 in skeletogenesis
is not known. However, we have shown that both Penk1 and Igfbp5 are expressed in 
the interzone region of the developing joint of mouse digits, providing another
link for a role for IHH signaling in the formation of the distal digits.

PMID: 20024692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Neurooncol. 2010 Jul;98(3):319-27. doi: 10.1007/s11060-009-0082-3. Epub 2009
Dec 19.

Gli1 inhibition induces cell-cycle arrest and enhanced apoptosis in brain glioma 
cell lines.

Wang K(1), Pan L, Che X, Cui D, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200040, China.

The Hedgehog (HH)-Gli1 signaling pathway plays an important role in the
patterning and development of the central nervous system during embryogenesis.
Recent data have shown its possible involvement in a subset of human gliomas, and
inhibition of the pathway resulted in tumor suppression in both in vitro and in
vivo studies. The underlying mechanisms of tumor suppression, however, remain to 
be fully elucidated. Here, we investigated Gli1 expression in 65 surgically
resected malignant glioma tissues and found the Ki-67 labeling index to be higher
in Gli1-positive gliomas than in Gli1-negative gliomas. Depletion of Gli1
expression by small interfering RNA (siRNA) interference led to remarkably
decreased cell proliferation and enhanced apoptosis in U87 glioma cell line. To
explore the molecular mechanisms of the phenotypic changes, we performed
real-time quantitative RT-PCR analysis to monitor the changes of a series of
genes which play critical roles in the regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis.
The result showed that downregulation of G(1) cyclins, downregulation of Bcl-2,
and upregulation of p21 were detected after Gli1 downregulation. Additionally,
cyclopamine was used to inhibit the HH signaling activity as an indirect approach
to decrease Gli1 expression, and we observed that cyclopamine exclusively
inhibited cell growth in HH-pathway-active glioma cell lines. The cell phenotypic
and molecular changes induced by cyclopamine were consistent with those caused by
siGli1 interference. In conclusion, our findings support an important role of
Gli1 in cell-cycle and apoptosis regulation in human brain gliomas; hence, it can
serve as a potential target of new therapeutic strategies for these diseases.

PMID: 20024601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Biosyst. 2010 Jan;6(1):44-54. doi: 10.1039/b910196a. Epub 2009 Aug 27.

Small-molecule modulators of the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Stanton BZ(1), Peng LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford
Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is the most widely characterized of the three vertebrate
Hedgehog homologs, and is essential for proper embryonic development. Shh binds
to its receptor, Patched (Ptch1), resulting in the de-repression of Smoothened
(Smo). This leads to the activation of Gli2, which regulates the transcription of
target genes that include Gli1 and Ptch1. Several synthetic and naturally
occurring small-molecule modulators of Smo have been discovered. Shh-signaling
antagonists that bind to Smo include cyclopamine, SANT1, and Cur-61414. Shh
signaling agonists that bind to Smo include the synthetic small molecules
purmorphamine and SAG. Small molecules that inhibit Shh signaling downstream of
Smo, GANT58 and GANT61 have also been reported. Robotnikinin inhibits the Shh
pathway by directly targeting Shh. Although progress has been made in
understanding and modulating Shh signaling, fundamental aspects of Shh signal
transduction remain obscure, including the mechanism(s) whereby Ptch1 regulates
Smo activity. Small-molecule modulators of Shh signaling provide a means to
regulate the activity of a pathway implicated in medulloblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma (BCC), pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer and developmental disorders. 
Several Shh inhibitors have not succeeded in the clinic for unknown reasons, but 
clinical trials in BCC and pancreatic cancer with the promising Smo antagonists
GDC-0449 and IPI-926 are currently underway.

PMID: 20024066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Dec 18;10:433. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-433.

Using mechanistic Bayesian networks to identify downstream targets of the sonic
hedgehog pathway.

Shah A(1), Tenzen T, McMahon AP, Woolf PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
shahad@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: The topology of a biological pathway provides clues as to how a
pathway operates, but rationally using this topology information with observed
gene expression data remains a challenge.
RESULTS: We introduce a new general-purpose analytic method called Mechanistic
Bayesian Networks (MBNs) that allows for the integration of gene expression data 
and known constraints within a signal or regulatory pathway to predict new
downstream pathway targets. The MBN framework is implemented in an open-source
Bayesian network learning package, the Python Environment for Bayesian Learning
(PEBL). We demonstrate how MBNs can be used by modeling the early steps of the
sonic hedgehog pathway using gene expression data from different developmental
stages and genetic backgrounds in mouse. Using the MBN approach we are able to
automatically identify many of the known downstream targets of the hedgehog
pathway such as Gas1 and Gli1, along with a short list of likely targets such as 
Mig12.
CONCLUSIONS: The MBN approach shown here can easily be extended to other pathways
and data types to yield a more mechanistic framework for learning genetic
regulatory models.

PMCID: PMC3087349
PMID: 20021670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cancer. 2009 Dec 16;8:123. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-123.

The sonic hedgehog signaling pathway is reactivated in human renal cell carcinoma
and plays orchestral role in tumor growth.

Dormoy V(1), Danilin S, Lindner V, Thomas L, Rothhut S, Coquard C, Helwig JJ,
Jacqmin D, Lang H, Massfelder T.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U682, Section of Renal Cancer and Renal Physiopathology, University of 
Strasbourg, School of Medicine, Strasbourg, 67085 France.
valerian.dormoy@medecine.u-strasbg.fr

BACKGROUND: Human clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CRCC) remains resistant to
therapies. Recent advances in Hypoxia Inducible Factors (HIF) molecular network
led to targeted therapies, but unfortunately with only limited clinical
significance. Elucidating the molecular processes involved in kidney
tumorigenesis and resistance is central to the development of improved therapies,
not only for kidney cancer but for many, if not all, cancer types. The oncogenic 
PI3K/Akt, NF-kB and MAPK pathways are critical for tumorigenesis. The sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is crucial to normal development.
RESULTS: By quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblot, we report that the SHH signaling 
pathway is constitutively reactivated in tumors independently of the von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene expression which is inactivated in the 
majority of CRCC. The inhibition of the SHH signaling pathway by the specific
inhibitor cyclopamine abolished CRCC cell growth as assessed by cell counting,
BrdU incorporation studies, fluorescence-activated cell sorting and
beta-galactosidase staining. Importantly, inhibition of the SHH pathway induced
tumor regression in nude mice through inhibition of cell proliferation and
neo-vascularization, and induction of apoptosis but not senescence assessed by in
vivo studies, immunoblot and immunohistochemistry. Gli1, cyclin D1, Pax2, Lim1,
VEGF, and TGF-beta were exclusively expressed in tumors and were shown to be
regulated by SHH, as evidenced by immunoblot after SHH inhibition. Using specific
inhibitors and immunoblot, the activation of the oncogenic PI3K/Akt, NF-kB and
MAPK pathways was decreased by SHH inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support targeting SHH for the treatment of CRCC and
pave the way for innovative and additional investigations in a broad range of
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2803450
PMID: 20015350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):175-80. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082610bl.

Signalling molecules involved in mouse bladder smooth muscle cellular
differentiation.

Liu B(1), Feng D, Lin G, Cao M, Kan YW, Cunha GR, Baskin LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA, USA.

Mouse bladder mesenchyme differentiates into smooth muscle under the influence of
urothelium at gestational day 13.5 (E13.5). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is considered to
be the upstream gene arising from the urothelium, which induces smooth muscle in 
the peripheral bladder mesenchyme. We hypothesize differential gene expression
across the full thickness of bladder mesenchyme as a function of proximity to the
inducing bladder urothelium and the peripheral location of the smooth muscle.
Embryonic bladders from FVB mice were collected at E12.5, 13.5, 15 and 16 and
cryosectioned followed by microdissection with a PixCell II laser capture
microscope. RNA extraction was performed at the laser captured sites and mRNA
expression profiles were measured using SYBR Green quantitative RT-PCR. Smooth
muscle a-actin (SMAA) and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (SM-MHC) were
expressed in the E13.5, E15 and E16 bladders in the peripheral layer of
mesenchyme, but not in the prospective submucosa. Patched 1 (Ptc1), Gli1 and bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp) 4 expression was consistently elevated in the
mesenchymal layer immediately adjacent to the urothelium compared to the
peripheral location at E12.5. After E12.5, Ptc1 expression decreased to an
undetectable level throughout the bladder mesenchyme. The level of TGF-beta1 was 
highest in the mesenchymal layer adjacent to the serosa at E13.5. The level of
expression of serum response factor (SRF) was also highest at E15 in the
peripheral mesenchyme. Genes downstream of Shh are differentially expressed in
the prospective submucosa vs. the peripheral bladder mesenchyme as a function
gestation age and smooth muscle differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2855152
PMID: 20013655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Endocrinology. 2010 Feb;151(2):766-73. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0875. Epub 2009 Dec
11.

Use of mutant mouse lines to investigate origin of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone-1 neurons: lineage independent of the adenohypophysis.

Metz H(1), Wray S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology Section, National Institute of
Neurological Disorder and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Mutant mouse lines have been used to study the development of specific neuronal
populations and brain structures as well as behaviors. In this report, single-
and double-mutant mice were used to examine the lineage of GnRH-1 cells. GnRH is 
essential for vertebrate reproduction, with either GnRH-1 or GnRH-3 controlling
release of gonadotropins from the anterior pituitary, depending on the species.
It is clear that the neuroendocrine GnRH cells migrate from extracentral nervous 
system locations into the forebrain. However, the embryonic origin of GnRH-1 and 
GnRH-3 cells is controversial and has been suggested to be nasal placode,
adenohypophyseal (anterior pituitary) placode, or neural crest, again dependent
on the species examined. We found that mutant mice with either missing or
disrupted anterior pituitaries (Gli2(-/-), Gli1(-/-)Gli2(-/-), and Lhx3(-/-))
exhibit a normal GnRH-1 neuronal population and that these cells are still found 
associated with the developing vomeronasal organ. These results indicate that in 
mice, GnRH-1 cells develop independent of the adenohypophyseal placode and are
associated early with the formation of the nasal placode.

PMCID: PMC2817619
PMID: 20008041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):4185-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038232. Epub 2009
Dec 7.

Identification of a suppressive mechanism for Hedgehog signaling through a novel 
interaction of Gli with 14-3-3.

Asaoka Y(1), Kanai F, Ichimura T, Tateishi K, Tanaka Y, Ohta M, Seto M, Tada M,
Ijichi H, Ikenoue T, Kawabe T, Isobe T, Yaffe MB, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Gli transcription factors are central effectors of Hedgehog signaling in
development and tumorigenesis. Using a tandem affinity purification (TAP)
strategy and mass spectrometry, we have found that Gli1 interacts with
14-3-3epsilon, and that Gli2 and Gli3 also bind to 14-3-3epsilon through
homologous sites. This interaction depends on their phosphorylation, and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), a known negative regulator of Hedgehog
signaling serves as a responsible kinase. A Gli2 mutant engineered to eliminate
this interaction exhibited increased transcriptional activity (2 approximately
3x). Transcriptional repression by 14-3-3 binding was also observed with Gli3,
when its N-terminal repressor domain was deleted. The phosphorylation sites
responsible for the binding to 14-3-3 are distinct from those required for
proteolysis, the known mechanism for PKA-induced repression of Hh signaling. Our 
data propose a novel mechanism in which PKA down-regulates Hedgehog signaling by 
promoting the interaction between Gli and 14-3-3 as well as proteolysis. Given
the certain neuronal or malignant disorders in human caused by the abnormality of
17p13 encompassing 14-3-3epsilon overlap with increased Hh signaling, the
Gli-14-3-3 interaction may have pathological significance for those human
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2823557
PMID: 19996099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Cancer. 2009 Nov 30;8:113. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-113.

GLI1 genotypes do not predict basal cell carcinoma risk: a case control study.

Watson A(1), Kent P, Alam M, Paller AS, Umbach DM, Yoon JW, Iannaccone PM,
Walterhouse DO.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota - Duluth, Minnesota, USA.
Awatson1@smdc.org

BACKGROUND: Susceptibility to basal cell carcinoma results from complex
interactions between ultraviolet radiation exposure and genetic factors. The GLI1
oncogene is believed to play a role in the genesis of these tumors. We determined
whether GLI1 polymorphisms were risk factors for developing basal cell carcinoma,
either alone or in combination with patterns of past sun exposure, and whether
there were functional differences among different GLI1 haplotypes.
RESULTS: GLI1 genotypes at c.2798 and c.3298 from 201 basal cell carcinoma
patients were compared to 201 age and sex-matched controls. Neither genotype nor 
haplotype frequencies differed between cases and controls. However, the odds of
developing basal cell carcinoma on the trunk compared to the head/neck appeared
somewhat lower with carriers of the c.3298GC than the CC genotype. There was no
evidence for interactions between skin type, childhood sunburning, average adult 
sun exposure, adult sunbathing, or intermittency of sun exposure and GLI1
haplotype. Additionally, we found no significant differences in transcription
activation or cell transforming ability among the four GLI1 haplotypes.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that different GLI1 genotypes alone or in
combination with past sun exposure patterns as assessed in this study do not
affect basal cell carcinoma risk.

PMCID: PMC2789726
PMID: 19948058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Sci. 2010 Feb;101(2):328-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01395.x. Epub
2009 Oct 12.

Contrasting activity of Hedgehog and Wnt pathways according to gastric cancer
cell differentiation: relevance of crosstalk mechanisms.

Kim JH(1), Shin HS, Lee SH, Lee I, Lee YS, Park JC, Kim YJ, Chung JB, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Gastric cancer displays different biological behaviors according to histological 
differentiation. The different biological behavior might involve the activation
of distinct signaling pathways necessary for the growth and survival of cancer
cells in gastric cancer. We investigated the differentiation-related signal
interaction between Hedgehog and Wnt pathways in gastric cancer cells.
Differentiation of gastric cancer cells was induced by sodium butyrate. The sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) signal expressions were increased during cellular differentiation.
In contrast, the expression of Wnt signaling was decreased during
differentiation. Ectopic expression of glioma-associated oncogene-1 (GLI1)
increased the level of secreted frizzled related protein-1 (SFRP1) transcript,
whereas inhibition of GLI1 reduced the level of SFRP1 transcript. ChIP assay
showed that GLI1 induced the transcriptional regulation of SFRP1 gene expression.
Ectopic expression of GLI1 decreased the nuclear beta-catenin staining, but the
inhibition of GLI1 induced the reversal of nuclear beta-catenin overexpression.
Ectopic expression of beta-catenin also decreased the expression of GLI1 in the
butyrate treated cancer cells. SHH and GLI1 immunoexpression was greater in well 
differentiated gastric cancer tissues compared to poorly differentiated tissues, 
and nuclear beta-catenin immunoexpression was lower in well differentiated
compared to poorly differentiated tissues. The SHH and Wnt pathways are
differentially involved according to gastric cancer cell differentiation.

PMID: 19930158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Nov;12(6):603-6.

[Hedgehog signaling pathway activates in gastric carcinoma and promotes the
proliferation through GLI1 in MKN28 cell].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XW(1), Li JF, Qu Y, Cai Q, Ji J, Nie H, Chen XH, Zhu ZG, Liu BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Surgery, Ruijin
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of Hedgehog (HH) pathway on proliferation
and in vitro tumorigenicity of gastric cancer cell lines.
METHODS: The expression of SHH, PTCH, SMO, SUFU and GLI1 in seven cell lines were
tested by RT-PCR. siRNA targeting GLI1 mRNA was transfected into MKN28 cells.
Cell proliferation and in vitro tumorigenicity were examined by CCK8 and soft
agar colony formation test.
RESULTS: SHH in six gastric cancer cell lines was up-regulated. Expression of
PTCH in KATOIII cell lines and expression of SUFU in MKN28 and KATOIII were
reduced. GLI1 siRNA significantly inhibited the expression of GLI1 in MKN28 cell 
line. Growth rate and colony formation rate of MKN28 cells treated with GLI1
siRNA were significantly lower than those of control cells (all P <0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: HH signaling pathway is widely activated in gastric cancer cell
lines. The activation of HH signaling pathway promotes the growth of MKN28 cells.

PMID: 19921574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Aug;123(1):59-71. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0617-5.
Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Gli1 promotes cell survival and is predictive of a poor outcome in
ERalpha-negative breast cancer.

Xu L(1), Kwon YJ, Frolova N, Steg AD, Yuan K, Johnson MR, Grizzle WE, Desmond RA,
Frost AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Kaul 640B, 1530 
Third Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Gli1 is a transcription factor and oncogene with documented roles in the
progression of several cancer types, including cancers of the skin and pancreas. 
The contribution of Gli1 to the progression of breast cancer is less established.
In order to investigate the functional impact of Gli1 in breast cancer,
expression of Gli1 and its contribution to cell growth was assessed in breast
cancer cell lines. These in vitro results were compared to expression of Gli1,
determined by immunohistochemistry, in 171 breast cancers. In these cancers, the 
association of Gli1 with expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and
progesterone receptor (PR), ErbB2, p53, the rate of proliferation, and
clinicopathologic parameters and outcome was assessed. Expression of Gli1 and
ERalpha mRNA was strongly correlated in ERalpha-positive cell lines (r = 0.999). 
Treatment with estrogen increased expression of Gli1 in 2 of 3 ERalpha-positive
cell lines; this increase was prevented by treatment with the ERalpha-specific
antagonist MPP. Silencing of Gli1 by shRNA markedly reduced the survival of two
ERalpha-negative cell lines, but caused only a modest reduction in
ERalpha-positive cell lines. In breast cancer tissues, cancers with nuclear
localization of Gli1 had a higher ERalpha (P=0.027) and lower p53 expression
(P=0.017) than those without nuclear localization of Gli1. However, nuclear
localization of Gli1 was predictive of a poorer cancer-specific survival in
ERalpha-negative, including triple negative, cancers (P = 0.005), but not
ERalpha-positive cancers. In conclusion, we demonstrate a positive association
between expression of Gli1 and ERalpha; however, our data indicate a greater
functional effect of Gli1 in ERalpha-negative cancers.

PMCID: PMC2888711
PMID: 19902354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Res. 2009 Nov 15;69(22):8572-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1500. Epub
2009 Nov 3.

Wnt signaling stimulates transcriptional outcome of the Hedgehog pathway by
stabilizing GLI1 mRNA.

Noubissi FK(1), Goswami S, Sanek NA, Kawakami K, Minamoto T, Moser A, Grinblat Y,
Spiegelman VS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Wnt and Hedgehog signaling pathways play central roles in embryogenesis, stem
cell maintenance, and tumorigenesis. However, the mechanisms by which these two
pathways interact are not well understood. Here, we identified a novel mechanism 
by which Wnt signaling pathway stimulates the transcriptional output of Hedgehog 
signaling. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling induces expression of an RNA-binding
protein, CRD-BP, which in turn binds and stabilizes GLI1 mRNA, causing an
elevation of GLI1 expression and transcriptional activity. The newly described
mode of regulation of GLI1 seems to be important to several functions of Wnt,
including survival and proliferation of colorectal cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2783483
PMID: 19887615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Feb 15;316(4):627-37. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.10.018. Epub
2009 Oct 21.

Identification of a novel serine/threonine kinase ULK3 as a positive regulator of
Hedgehog pathway.

Maloverjan A(1), Piirsoo M, Michelson P, Kogerman P, Osterlund T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia. alla.maloverjan@ttu.ee

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays crucial roles in embryonic development 
and is implicated in tissue homeostasis maintenance and neurogenesis in adults.
Aberrant activation of Hh signaling is associated with various developmental
abnormalities and several types of cancer. Genetic and biochemical studies
ascertain serine/threonine kinase Fused (Fu) as a protein involved in Hh
signaling in Drosophila. However, the role of Fu is not fully conserved in
mammals suggesting involvement of other kinases in the mammalian Hh signaling
pathway. In search of potential homologues to Drosophila and human Fu, we have
cloned human serine/threonine kinase ULK3 and assessed its ability to regulate
GLI transcription factors, mediators of SHH signaling. We demonstrate that ULK3
enhances endogenous and over-expressed GLI1 and GLI2 transcriptional activity in 
cultured cells, as assessed by GLI-luciferase reporter assay. Besides that, ULK3 
alters subcellular localization of GLI1, as assessed by immunofluorescent
staining and immunoblotting assays. We show that ULK3 is an autophosphorylated
kinase and phosphorylates GLI proteins in vitro. We also demonstrate that ULK3
catalytical activity is crucial for its function in SHH pathway. We show that
ULK3 is widely expressed and its expression is higher in a number of tissues
where Shh signaling is known to be active. Our data suggest that serine/threonine
kinase ULK3 is involved in the SHH pathway as a positive regulator of GLI
proteins.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19878745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mech Dev. 2010 Jan-Feb;127(1-2):73-81. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.10.005. Epub 2009 
Oct 25.

Hedgehog pathway activity is required for the lethality and intestinal phenotypes
of mice with hyperactive Wnt signaling.

Varnat F(1), Zacchetti G, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Geneva Medical School, Department Genetic Medicine and
Development, Geneva, Switzerland.

Several lines of evidence point to the central role of WNT signaling in the
initiation of intestinal tumorigenesis, most often due to loss of APC, a negative
regulator of the WNT-betaCATENIN/TCF pathway. Modeling human colon cancers in
mice through loss of Apc has shown that inappropriate activation of Wnt signaling
is sufficient to induce adenoma formation. More recent analyses have also
demonstrated a key role for HEDGEHOG-GLI (HH-GLI) signaling in human colon
cancers. However, how the WNT and HH pathways interact during intestinal
development, homeostasis and cancer is not clear. Marker analyses suggest
predominant paracrine signaling from rare Shh producing cells in the crypt's
bottom to adjacent Gli1(+) mesenchymal cells in normal adult mice. Using
conditional KO models, we show that inhibition of the function of the critical Hh
mediator Smoothened (Smo) rescues the lethality and intestinal phenotypes of loss
of Apc. The results uncover an essential role of the Hh pathway in tumors induced
by hyperactive Wnt signaling, suggest the action of the Hh pathway in parallel or
downstream of Wnt signaling, and validate this model for its use in preclinical
work testing Hh pathway antagonists.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19861162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Sep;9(7):873-86.

Hedgehog target genes: mechanisms of carcinogenesis induced by aberrant hedgehog 
signaling activation.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog signaling is aberrantly activated in glioma, medulloblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma, lung cancer, esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer,
breast cancer, and other tumors. Hedgehog signals activate GLI family members via
Smoothened. RTK signaling potentiates GLI activity through PI3K-AKT-mediated GSK3
inactivation or RAS-STIL1-mediated SUFU inactivation, while GPCR signaling to Gs 
represses GLI activity through adenylate cyclase-mediated PKA activation. GLI
activators bind to GACCACCCA motif to regulate transcription of GLI1, PTCH1,
PTCH2, HHIP1, MYCN, CCND1, CCND2, BCL2, CFLAR, FOXF1, FOXL1, PRDM1 (BLIMP1),
JAG2, GREM1, and Follistatin. Hedgehog signals are fine-tuned based on positive
feedback loop via GLI1 and negative feedback loop via PTCH1, PTCH2, and HHIP1.
Excessive positive feedback or collapsed negative feedback of Hedgehog signaling 
due to epigenetic or genetic alterations leads to carcinogenesis. Hedgehog
signals induce cellular proliferation through upregulation of N-Myc, Cyclin D/E, 
and FOXM1. Hedgehog signals directly upregulate JAG2, indirectly upregulate
mesenchymal BMP4 via FOXF1 or FOXL1, and also upregulate WNT2B and WNT5A.
Hedgehog signals induce stem cell markers BMI1, LGR5, CD44 and CD133 based on
cross-talk with WNT and/or other signals. Hedgehog signals upregulate BCL2 and
CFLAR to promote cellular survival, SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), ZEB1, ZEB2
(SIP1), TWIST2, and FOXC2 to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and
PTHLH (PTHrP) to promote osteolytic bone metastasis. KAAD-cyclopamine,
Mu-SSKYQ-cyclopamine, IPI-269609, SANT1, SANT2, CUR61414 and HhAntag are
small-molecule inhibitors targeted to Smoothened, GANT58, GANT61 to GLI1 and
GLI2, and Robot-nikinin to SHH. Hedgehog signaling inhibitors should be used in
combination with RTK inhibitors, GPCR modulators, and/or irradiation for cancer
therapy.

PMID: 19860666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 27;4(10):e7608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007608.

GLI1 is a central mediator of EWS/FLI1 signaling in Ewing tumors.

Joo J(1), Christensen L, Warner K, States L, Kang HG, Vo K, Lawlor ER, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Childrens Hospital 
Los Angeles and the Saban Research Institute, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

The Ewing Sarcoma Family Tumors (ESFT) consist of the classical pathologic
entities of Ewing Sarcoma and peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor.
Occurring largely in the childhood through young adult years, these tumors have
an unsurpassed propensity for metastasis and have no defined cell of origin. The 
biology of these aggressive malignancies centers around EWS/FLI1 and related
EWS/ETS chimeric transcription factors, which are largely limited to this tumor
class. Much progress has been made in the identification of a network of loci
whose expression is modulated by EWS/FLI1 and its congeners. To date, little
progress has been made in reconstructing the sequence of direct and indirect
events that produce this network of modulated loci. The recent identification of 
GLI1 as an upregulated target of EWS/ETS transcription factors suggests a target 
which may be a more central mediator in the ESFT signaling network. In this
paper, we further define the relationship of EWS/FLI1 expression and GLI1
upregulation in ESFT. This relationship is supported with data from primary tumor
specimens. It is consistently observed across multiple ESFT cell lines and with
multiple means of EWS/FLI1 inhibition. GLI1 inhibition affects tumor cell line
phenotype whether shRNA or endogenous or pharmacologic inhibitors are employed.
As is seen in model transformation systems, GLI1 upregulation by EWS/FLI1 appears
to be independent of Hedgehog stimulation. Consistent with a more central role in
ESFT pathogenesis, several known EWS/FLI1 targets appear to be targeted through
GLI1. These findings further establish a central role for GLI1 in the
pathogenesis of Ewing Tumors.

PMCID: PMC2763206
PMID: 19859563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Apr;337(1-2):185-92. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0298-8. Epub 
2009 Oct 24.

Distinct expression patterns of hedgehog ligands between cultured and primary
colorectal cancers are associated with aberrant methylation of their promoters.

Fu X(1), Deng H, Zhao L, Li J, Zhou Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The People's Hospital of Deyang City, Sichuan,
China.

Ligand-dependent activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway in colorectal cancers
(CRCs) is controversial, and the regulation mechanism of Hh ligands expression
remains to be determined. In the present study, the mRNA expressions of Sonic
hedgehog (SHH), Indian hedgehog (IHH), Patched, Smoothened, and Gli1 were
examined in four cultured colon cancer cell lines by reverse transcription-PCR.
Moreover, ligands mRNA expression (SHH and IHH) were examined by reverse
transcription-PCR, and SHH protein expression by immunohistochemistry in 25
primary CRCs. The methylation status of SHH and IHH was also investigated by
bisulfate sequencing or methylation specific PCR. IHH mRNA was completely absent 
in cell lines studied, and expressed at a very low level or not expressed at all 
in primary CRCs. Methylation analysis revealed that IHH promoter was
hypermethylated in colon cancer cell lines. Absence of SHH mRNA expression and
hypermethylation of its promoter was also observed in colon cancer cell lines.
However, high level expression of SHH and hypomethylation of its promoter was
detected in primary CRCs. In conclusion, ligand dependent activity of Hh pathway 
is inactive in cultured colon cancer cells correlating to ligands
hypermethylation. In contrast, SHH overexpression, possible consequence of
promoter hypomethylation, could play a role in the carcinogenesis of primary
CRCs.

PMID: 19856079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Jan;4(1):38-49. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2009.09.002. Epub 2009 Sep
16.

Role of Sonic hedgehog signaling and the expression of its components in human
embryonic stem cells.

Wu SM(1), Choo AB, Yap MG, Chan KK.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, ASTAR (Agency for
Science, Technology and Research), 20 Biopolis Way, No. 06-01 Centros, Singapore 
138668, Singapore.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) are characterized by their ability to
self-renew and differentiate into all cell types of the body, making them a
valuable resource for regenerative medicine. Yet, the molecular mechanisms by
which hESC retain their capacity for self-renewal and differentiation remain
unclear. The Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in organogenesis and
differentiation during development, and is also involved in the proliferation and
cell-fate specification of neural stem cells and neural crest stem cells. As
there has been no detailed study of the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway in
hESC, this study examines the expression and functional role of SHH during hESC
self-renewal and differentiation. Here, we show the gene and protein expression
of key components of the SHH signaling pathway in hESC and differentiated
embryoid bodies. Despite the presence of functioning pathway components, SHH
plays a minimal role in maintaining pluripotency and regulating proliferation of 
undifferentiated hESC. However, during differentiation with retinoic acid, a
GLI-responsive luciferase assay and target genes PTCH1 and GLI1 expression reveal
that the SHH signaling pathway is highly activated. Besides, addition of
exogenous SHH to hESC differentiated as embryoid bodies increases the expression 
of neuroectodermal markers Nestin, SOX1, MAP2, MSI1, and MSX1, suggesting that
SHH signaling is important during hESC differentiation toward the neuroectodermal
lineage. Our findings provide a new insight in understanding the SHH signaling in
hESC and the further development of hESC differentiation for regenerative
medicine.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19836325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 16;4(10):e7491. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007491.

Enteric neural crest differentiation in ganglioneuromas implicates Hedgehog
signaling in peripheral neuroblastic tumor pathogenesis.

Gershon TR(1), Shiraz A, Qin LX, Gerald WL, Kenney AM, Cheung NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, United States of America. gershont@neurology.unc.edu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014 Jul 25;9(7):e103881. Shirazi, Arash [corrected to Shiraz, Ashton].

Peripheral neuroblastic tumors (PNTs) share a common origin in the sympathetic
nervous system, but manifest variable differentiation and growth potential.
Malignant neuroblastoma (NB) and benign ganglioneuroma (GN) stand at opposite
ends of the clinical spectrum. We hypothesize that a common PNT progenitor is
driven to variable differentiation by specific developmental signaling pathways. 
To elucidate developmental pathways that direct PNTs along the differentiation
spectrum, we compared the expression of genes related to neural crest development
in GN and NB. In GNs, we found relatively low expression of sympathetic markers
including adrenergic biosynthesis enzymes, indicating divergence from sympathetic
fate. In contrast, GNs expressed relatively high levels of enteric neuropeptides 
and key constituents of the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway, including Dhh, Gli1 
and Gli3. Predicted HH targets were also differentially expressed in GN,
consistent with transcriptional response to HH signaling. These findings indicate
that HH signaling is specifically active in GN. Together with the known role of
HH activity in enteric neural development, these findings further suggested a
role for HH activity in directing PNTs away from the sympathetic lineage toward a
benign GN phenotype resembling enteric ganglia. We tested the potential for HH
signaling to advance differentiation in PNTs by transducing NB cell lines with
Gli1 and determining phenotypic and transcriptional response. Gli1 inhibited
proliferation of NB cells, and induced a pattern of gene expression that
resembled the differential pattern of gene expression of GN, compared to NB
(p<0.00001). Moreover, the transcriptional response of SY5Y cells to Gli1
transduction closely resembled the transcriptional response to the
differentiation agent retinoic acid (p<0.00001). Notably, Gli1 did not induce
N-MYC expression in neuroblastoma cells, but strongly induced RET, a known
mediator of RA effect. The decrease in NB cell proliferation induced by Gli1, and
the similarity in the patterns of gene expression induced by Gli1 and by RA,
corroborated by closely matched gene sets in GN tumors, all support a model in
which HH signaling suppresses PNT growth by promoting differentiation along
alternative neural crest pathways.

PMCID: PMC2759000
PMID: 19834598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Plant Signal Behav. 2009 Aug;4(8):746-9. Epub 2009 Aug 25.

The common metabolite glycerol-3-phosphate is a novel regulator of plant defense 
signaling.

Venugopal SC(1), Chanda B, Vaillancourt L, Kachroo A, Kachroo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40546,
USA.

Comment on
    Plant Physiol. 2008 Aug;147(4):2017-29.

Conversion of glycerol to glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) is one of the highly
conserved steps of glycerol metabolism in evolutionary diverse organisms. In
plants, G3P is produced either via the glycerol kinase (GK)-mediated
phosphorylation of glycerol, or via G3P dehydrogenase (G3Pdh)-mediated reduction 
of dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP). We have recently shown that G3P levels
contribute to basal resistance against the hemibiotrophic pathogen,
Colletotrichum higginsianum. Since a mutation in the GLY1-encoded G3Pdh conferred
more susceptibility compared to a mutation in the GLI1-encoded GK, we proposed
that GLY1 is the major contributor of the total G3P pool that participates in
defense against C. higginsianum.

PMCID: PMC2801388
PMID: 19820353  [PubMed]



1. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Jan 15;288(1-2):156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.09.006. Epub
2009 Oct 12.

Gli1 is a potential target for alleviating multidrug resistance of gliomas.

Cui D(1), Xu Q, Wang K, Che X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200040, China.

Although chemotherapy plays an important role in combined treatment of human
gliomas, it fails to bring about satisfactory outcomes in a number of patients.
One of the major obstacles in this treatment is the development of multidrug
resistance (MDR) during treatment. Regulation of MDR in the context of gliomas is
poorly understood, and clinical efforts to inhibit it have not been fruitful.
Activation of the Hedgehog (HH) pathway has been shown to contribute to the
growth, maintenance and relapse of various cancers. As data were not available on
the role of Gli1 expression in glioma progression, we analyzed the correlation
between Gli1 expression and tumor recurrence after chemotherapy in 60 glioma
samples. The effects of inhibiting or activating the HH pathway on sensitizing or
rendering glioma cell lines resistant to VCR, VP16, CDDP and ACNU, which are
widely used in clinical chemotherapy, were determined. Additionally, the impact
of the HH pathway on the expressions of MDR1, MRP1, MVP, MGMT, Bcl-2 and Survivin
genes was determined. Our results indicate that overexpression of Gli1 is
correlated with glioma recurrence after chemotherapy. We further show that the HH
pathway activity can promote clonogenic survival of glioma cell lines in
chemotherapy. Additionally, we found that blocking the HH pathway enhanced
cytotoxicity of chemotherapeutic agents in glioma cells, through down-regulating 
the expressions of MDR1, MRP1, MVP, MGMT, Bcl-2 and Survivin genes. Taken
together, these results suggest that Gli1 plays a dominant role in
chemoresistance of glioma cells, and that suppression of Gli1 expression might be
a valid therapeutic option for overcoming MDR and for increasing the success of
chemotherapy.

PMID: 19818966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Jan 15;242(2):136-45. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2009.09.023. Epub 2009 Oct 8.

Prenatal cadmium exposure dysregulates sonic hedgehog and Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling in the thymus resulting in altered thymocyte development.

Hanson ML(1), Brundage KM, Schafer R, Tou JC, Barnett JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, PO Box 9177, West Virginia University, Morgantown,
WV 26506-9177, USA.

Cadmium (Cd) is both an environmental pollutant and a component of cigarette
smoke. Although evidence demonstrates that adult exposure to Cd causes changes in
the immune system, there are limited reports in the literature of
immunomodulatory effects of prenatal exposure to Cd. The sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Wnt/beta-catenin pathways are required for thymocyte maturation. Several studies 
have demonstrated that Cd exposure affects these pathways in different organ
systems. This study was designed to investigate the effect of prenatal Cd
exposure on thymocyte development, and to determine if these effects were linked 
to dysregulation of Shh and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways. Pregnant C57Bl/6 mice were
exposed to an environmentally relevant dose (10 ppm) of Cd throughout pregnancy
and effects on the thymus were assessed on the day of birth. Thymocyte phenotype 
was determined by flow cytometry. A Gli:luciferase reporter cell line was used to
measure Shh signaling. Transcription of target genes and translation of key
components of both signaling pathways were assessed using real-time RT-PCR and
western blot, respectively. Prenatal Cd exposure increased the number of CD4(+)
cells and a subpopulation of double-negative cells (DN; CD4(-)CD8(-)), DN4
(CD44(-)CD25(-)). Shh and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling were both decreased in the
thymus. Target genes of Shh (Patched1 and Gli1) and Wnt/beta-catenin (c-fos, and 
c-myc) were affected differentially among thymocyte subpopulations. These
findings suggest that prenatal exposure to Cd dysregulates two signaling pathways
in the thymus, resulting in altered thymocyte development.

PMCID: PMC2789900
PMID: 19818801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Evol Bioinform Online. 2009 May 18;5:5-13.

Evolution and functional diversification of the GLI family of transcription
factors in vertebrates.

Abbasi AA(1), Goode DK, Amir S, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320, Pakistan. abbasiam@qau.edu.pk

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates the "SONIC HEDGEHOG" signalling pathway has been
implicated in cell-fate determination, proliferation and the patterning of many
different cell types and organs. As the GLI family members (GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3) 
are key mediators of hedgehog morphogenetic signals, over the past couple of
decades they have been extensively scrutinized by genetic, molecular and
biochemical means. Thus, a great deal of information is currently available about
the functional aspects of GLI proteins in various vertebrate species. To address 
the roles of GLI genes in diversifying the repertoire of the Hh signalling and
deploying them for the vertebrate specifications, in this study we have examined 
the evolutionary patterns of vertebrate GLI sequences within and between species.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic tree analysis suggests that the vertebrate GLI1, GLI2 and
GLI3 genes diverged after the separation of urochordates from vertebrates and
before the tetrapods-bony fishes split. Lineage specific duplication events were 
also detected. Estimation of mode and strength of selection acting on GLI
orthologs demonstrated that all members of the GLI gene family experienced more
relaxed selection in teleost fish than in the mammalian lineage. Furthermore, the
GLI1 gene appeared to have been exposed to different functional constraints in
fish and tetrapod lineages, whilst a similar level of functional constraints on
GLI2 and GLI3 was suggested by comparable average non-synonymous (Ka)
substitutions across the lineages. A relative rate test suggested that the
majority of the paralogous copies of the GLI family analyzed evolved with similar
evolutionary rates except GLI1 which evolved at a significantly faster rate than 
its paralogous counterparts in tetrapods.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that sequence evolutionary patterns of GLI family
members are largely correlated with the reported similarities and differences in 
the functionality of GLI proteins within and between the various vertebrate
species. We propose that duplication and divergence of GLI genes has increased in
the complexity of vertebrate body plan by recruiting the hedgehog signalling for 
the novel developmental tasks.

PMCID: PMC2747127
PMID: 19812723  [PubMed]


4. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Oct 15;194(2):88-95. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.06.003.

Amplification and expression of EGFR and ERBB2 in Wilms tumor.

Vasei M(1), Modjtahedi H, Ale-Booyeh O, Mosallaei A, Kajbafzadeh AM, Shahriari M,
Ghaderi AA, Soleymanpour H, Kosari F, Moch H, Sauter G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shiraz Medical School and Shiraz Institute of Cancer 
Research, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. vaseim@sums.ac.ir

Wilms tumor is one of the most common solid tumors in children. We evaluated
expression and amplification of a number of genes and their prognostic
significance in 45 patients with Wilms tumor, using tissue microarray technology.
The expression of EGFR, ERBB2, MDM2, CCND1, MLH1, MSH2, TP53, and ABCB1 (alias
MDR1) was studied by immunohistochemistry. Amplification of the EGFR, ERBB2,
MDM2, CCND1, CTTN (previously EMS1), RAF1, MYC, FGF3 (previously INT2), WNT1,
GLI1, CDK4, and NCOA3 (alias AIB1) genes was assessed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Expression of EGFR was seen in 17 of the 45 cases (38%) but was
not associated with gene amplification. The ERBB2 gene was neither overexpressed 
nor amplified in any case. Tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry analyses
for ERBB2 in whole-tumor sections were also negative in all cases. Strong p53
reactivity was noted in blastemal cells in two cases with an unfavorable outcome.
ABCB1 reactivity was seen in five cases with favorable histology and outcome.
Only one case showed nuclear cyclin D1 positivity. All tumors showed MLH1 and
MSH2 expression. All examined genes showed normal copy numbers. Unfavorable
histology correlated with poor prognosis (P=0.03). There was no significant
association between gene expression and prognosis. Overexpression of the EGFR
gene in many Wilms tumor cases warrants further study to determine the
therapeutic benefit of EGFR inhibitors in combination with other therapies in
Wilms tumor patients.

PMID: 19781441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Clin Exp Med. 2010 Mar;10(1):51-7. doi: 10.1007/s10238-009-0068-7. Epub 2009 Sep 
25.

Hedgehog signaling regulates proliferation of prostate cancer cells via
stathmin1.

Chung MK(1), Kim HJ, Lee YS, Han ME, Yoon S, Baek SY, Kim BS, Kim JB, Oh SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Pusan National University, Mulgeum-Eup, Beomeo-Ri,
Yangsan, 626-870, South Korea.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is an essential pathway in embryonic development of
prostate. Hh also plays roles in the proliferation of progenitor cells and cancer
cells of adult prostate. However, how Hh signaling contributes to carcinogenesis 
of prostate is poorly understood. Stathmin1 is a microtubule-regulating protein
that plays an important role in the assembly and disassembly of the mitotic
spindle. Stathmin1 is expressed in normal developing mouse prostate and in
prostate cancer. The expression pattern of stathmin1 is similar to that of Shh in
prostate development and cancer, suggesting a connection between these two
proteins. In this study, we examined the relationship between stathmin1 and Hh
signaling. Here, we show that stathmin1 expression is regulated by Hh signaling
in prostate cancer cells. Cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of Hh signaling,
reduced the expression of stathmin1 in prostate cancer cells. However, the Shh
peptide induced stathmin1 expression. Overexpression of Gli1 further confirmed
the relationship. Co-expression of stathmin1 and Patched 1, a receptor for Hh
signaling was observed in prostate cancer tissues. Cyclopamine and stathmin1
siRNA both decreased proliferation of prostate cancer cells but did not produce
an additive effect, suggesting a common pathway. These results suggest that Hh
signaling regulates proliferation of prostate cancer cells by controlling
stathmin1 expression.

PMID: 19779961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Stroke. 2009 Nov;40(11):3618-26. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.561951. Epub 2009 Sep
17.

Sonic hedgehog regulates ischemia/hypoxia-induced neural progenitor
proliferation.

Sims JR(1), Lee SW, Topalkara K, Qiu J, Xu J, Zhou Z, Moskowitz MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Neuroscience Center, Harvard Medical School,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Stroke and Neurovascular Regulation Laboratory,
Charlestown, Mass 02129, USA. jsims@partners.org

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) protein is required for the
maintenance of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in the embryonic and adult
hippocampus. Brain ischemia causes increased proliferation of hippocampal NPCs.
We therefore examined whether Shh regulates the increase in proliferation of NPCs
after ischemia/hypoxia.
METHODS: Male SV129 mice were exposed to a 20-minute middle cerebral artery
occlusion; hippocampi were then analyzed for Shh mRNA and protein expression by
real-time polymerase chain reaction, immunoblot, and immunohistochemistry.
Primary cell cultures of neurons, astrocytes, and NPCs were exposed to 16 hours
of hypoxia (1% O(2)) and analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunoblot for Shh expression. Proliferation of NPCs, in vivo and in vitro, was
measured by bromodeoxyuridine incorporation.
RESULTS: Among the cell types examined in vitro, only NPC and neurons increased
Shh mRNA under hypoxic conditions. Furthermore, hypoxia increased proliferation
of NPCs and this proliferation was enhanced by the addition of recombinant Shh or
blocked by the pathway-specific inhibitor, cyclopamine. Middle cerebral artery
occlusion was associated with a transient 2-fold increase in the mRNA encoding
both Shh and its transcription factor, Gli1, 0.5 days after ischemia. Within the 
hippocampus, Shh protein was increased approximately 3-fold 3 and 7 days after
ischemia and was observed predominantly within cells in the CA3 and hilar
regions. Shh was expressed only in mature neurons. In vivo, cyclopamine
suppressed ischemia-induced proliferation of subgranular NPCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The Shh pathway plays a role in the proliferation of NPCs induced by
ischemia/hypoxia and might participate in injury remodeling.

PMCID: PMC2869495
PMID: 19762700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Oncology. 2009;77(3-4):231-43. doi: 10.1159/000236047. Epub 2009 Sep 7.

Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in olfactory neuroblastoma.

Mao L(1), Xia YP, Zhou YN, Dai RL, Yang X, Wang YJ, Duan SJ, Qiao X, Mei YW, Hu
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVES: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is associated with tumor
development; however, the role of Shh signaling in the development of olfactory
neuroblastoma (ONB) is unknown. This study aimed to investigate the relationship 
between the regulation of Shh signaling and the pathogenesis of ONB.
METHODS: The expression of Shh signaling components was characterized by
immunohistochemistry in human non-tumor olfactory epithelium and ONB specimens,
and by RT-PCR and immunoblotting in human ONB cell lines. The impact of the
treatment with cyclopamine (a selective inhibitor of the Shh pathway) and/or
exogenous Shh on ONB cell proliferation, cycle and apoptosis was examined by MTT,
soft agar colony formation and flow cytometry assays, respectively. The influence
of Shh signaling on the expression of Shh signaling components and cell
cycle-related regulators was determined by immunoblotting and quantitative
RT-PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of Pacthed1, Gli1 and Gli2 was detected in 70, 70, and
65% of human ONB specimens, respectively, and in proportion of ONB cell lines,
but not in non-tumor olfactory epithelium. Treatment with cyclopamine inhibited
the proliferation and colony formation of ONB cells, induced ONB cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis, and down-regulated the expression of Pacthed1, Gli1 and
cyclin D1, but up-regulated p21 expression in vitro. These regulatory effects of 
cyclopamine were partially or completely erased by exogenous Shh.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the Shh signaling pathway is crucial for the 
growth of ONB.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19738389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Carcinog. 2009;8:13. doi: 10.4103/1477-3163.55429.

Gli1 maintains cell survival by up-regulating IGFBP6 and Bcl-2 through promoter
regions in parallel manner in pancreatic cancer cells.

Xu XF(1), Guo CY, Liu J, Yang WJ, Xia YJ, Xu L, Yu YC, Wang XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Tenth Hospital, Tongji University,
Shanghai, China. wangxp1965@yahoo.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been
reported to be related to malignant biological behavior of pancreatic cancer but 
its mechanism is unclear yet. Since IGF pathway and Bcl-2 family are involved in 
proliferation and apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells, we hypothesize that they 
are possibly associated with Hh pathway.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied the relationship of Shh-Gli1 signaling pathway 
with proliferation and apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells and the regulation of
transcription factor Gli1 to insulin-like growth factor binding protein 6
(IGFBP6) and Bcl-2 genes at the level of transcription.
RESULTS: Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Smoothened (Smo), patched and Gli1 were expressed 
in pancreatic cancer cells. Cyclopamine inhibited cell proliferation at low
concentration and induced apoptosis at high concentration. Effect of RNA
interference (RNAi) for Gli1 to cell survival is mainly due to proliferation
inhibition though involved in apoptosis. The transcription factor Gli1 bound to
promoter regions of Bcl-2 and IGFBP6 genes and the levels of IGFBP6,
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and Bcl-2 messenger RNA (mRNA) were
decreased as well as Gli1 mRNA significantly by cyclopamine or RNAi in cultured
pancreatic cancer cells (p < 0.01). Finally PCNA, IGFBP6 and Bcl-2 mRNA were
upregulated as well as Shh or Gli1 in pancreatic cancer tissues (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals that Gli1 maintained cell survival by binding the 
promoter regions and facilitating transcription of IGFBP6 and Bcl-2 genes in a
parallel manner in pancreatic cancer cells and suggests it may be one of the
mechanisms of Shh-Gli1 signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC2746911
PMID: 19736394  [PubMed]


9. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jan;37(1):359-62. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9782-1.

Analysis of mutation in exon 17 of PTCH in patients with nevoid basal cell
carcinoma syndrome.

Li J(1), Wang J, Liu Y, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Stomatology, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China.

Abnormalities in sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway components are major
contributing factors in the development of nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndromes 
(NBCCS) that include SHH, PTCH, SMO and GLI. The novel patched homologue (PTCH)
mutation and clinical manifestations with NBCCS links PTCH haplosufficiency and
aberrant activation of the sonic hedgehog/Patched/smoothened pathway. To
investigate further the molecular genetics of NBCCS, we performed mutation
analysis of PTCH gene in a family case with five affected members. These clinical
manifestations might be associated with a novel constitutional mutation of the
PTCH gene, 3146A-->T (1049N-->I), in exon 17. The analyzed results of tumor
tissue show a high expression of GLI. Our findings suggested that the mutation of
3146A-->T may be the cause of high expression of GLI and permit SMO to transmit
signal to the nucleus through SHH/PTCH/SMO pathway.

PMID: 19728145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 17;361(12):1164-72. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0905360. Epub 2009 
Sep 2.

Inhibition of the hedgehog pathway in advanced basal-cell carcinoma.

Von Hoff DD(1), LoRusso PM, Rudin CM, Reddy JC, Yauch RL, Tibes R, Weiss GJ,
Borad MJ, Hann CL, Brahmer JR, Mackey HM, Lum BL, Darbonne WC, Marsters JC Jr, de
Sauvage FJ, Low JA.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Genomics Research Institute and Scottsdale Healthcare,
Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 17;361(12):1202-5.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in hedgehog pathway genes, primarily genes encoding patched
homologue 1 (PTCH1) and smoothened homologue (SMO), occur in basal-cell
carcinoma. In a phase 1 clinical trial, we assessed the safety and
pharmacokinetics of GDC-0449, a small-molecule inhibitor of SMO, and responses of
metastatic or locally advanced basal-cell carcinoma to the drug.
METHODS: We selected 33 patients with metastatic or locally advanced basal-cell
carcinoma to receive oral GDC-0449 at one of three doses; 17 patients received
150 mg per day, 15 patients received 270 mg per day, and 1 patient received 540
mg per day. We assessed tumor responses with the use of Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), physical examination, or both. Molecular
aspects of the tumors were examined.
RESULTS: The median duration of the study treatment was 9.8 months. Of the 33
patients, 18 had an objective response to GDC-0449, according to assessment on
imaging (7 patients), physical examination (10 patients), or both (1 patient). Of
the patients who had a response, 2 had a complete response and 16 had a partial
response. The other 15 patients had either stable disease (11 patients) or
progressive disease (4 patients). Eight grade 3 adverse events that were deemed
to be possibly related to the study drug were reported in six patients, including
four with fatigue, two with hyponatremia, one with muscle spasm, and one with
atrial fibrillation. One grade 4 event, asymptomatic hyponatremia, was judged to 
be unrelated to GDC-0449. One patient withdrew from the study because of adverse 
events. We found evidence of hedgehog signaling in tumors that responded to the
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: GDC-0449, an orally active small molecule that targets the hedgehog 
pathway, appears to have antitumor activity in locally advanced or metastatic
basal-cell carcinoma. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00607724.)

2009 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMID: 19726763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 17;361(12):1173-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0902903. Epub 2009
Sep 2.

Treatment of medulloblastoma with hedgehog pathway inhibitor GDC-0449.

Rudin CM(1), Hann CL, Laterra J, Yauch RL, Callahan CA, Fu L, Holcomb T, Stinson 
J, Gould SE, Coleman B, LoRusso PM, Von Hoff DD, de Sauvage FJ, Low JA.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. rudin@jhmi.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 17;361(12):1202-5.

Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children. Aberrant
activation of the hedgehog signaling pathway is strongly implicated in the
development of some cases of medulloblastoma. A 26-year-old man with metastatic
medulloblastoma that was refractory to multiple therapies was treated with a
novel hedgehog pathway inhibitor, GDC-0449; treatment resulted in rapid (although
transient) regression of the tumor and reduction of symptoms. Molecular analyses 
of tumor specimens obtained before treatment suggested that there was activation 
of the hedgehog pathway, with loss of heterozygosity and somatic mutation of the 
gene encoding patched homologue 1 (PTCH1), a key negative regulator of hedgehog
signaling.

2009 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMID: 19726761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Am J Sports Med. 2009 Dec;37(12):2377-85. doi: 10.1177/0363546509341829. Epub
2009 Sep 2.

Tibiofemoral and patellofemoral kinematics after reconstruction of an isolated
posterior cruciate ligament injury: in vivo analysis during lunge.

Gill TJ(1), Van de Velde SK, Wing DW, Oh LS, Hosseini A, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: The actual in vivo tibiofemoral and patellofemoral kinematics of the 
posterior cruciate ligament (PCL)-reconstructed knee joint are unknown.
HYPOTHESIS: Current single-bundle PCL reconstruction is unable to correct the
abnormal tibiofemoral and patellofemoral kinematics caused by rupture of the
ligament.
STUDY DESIGN: Controlled laboratory study/case series; Level of evidence, 4.
METHODS: Seven patients with an isolated PCL injury in 1 knee and the
contralateral side intact were included in the study. Magnetic resonance and dual
fluoroscopic imaging techniques were used to compare the tibiofemoral and
patellofemoral kinematics between the intact contralateral (control group),
PCL-deficient, and PCL-reconstructed knee during physiologic loading with a
single-legged lunge. Data were collected preoperatively and 2 years after
single-bundle reconstruction.
RESULTS: The PCL reconstruction reduced the abnormal posterior tibial translation
in PCL-deficient knees to levels not significantly different from those of the
intact knee. Posterior cruciate ligament deficiency resulted in an increased
lateral tibial translation between 75 degrees and 120 degrees of flexion, and
reconstruction was unable to restore these values to normal. No differences were 
detected among the groups in varus-valgus and internal-external rotation. The PCL
reconstruction reduced the increased patellar flexion of PCL-deficient knees
between 90 degrees and 120 degrees of knee flexion and the lateral shift at 120
degrees . The abnormal patellar rotation and tilt seen in PCL deficiency at
flexion angles of 75 degrees and greater persisted after reconstruction.
CONCLUSION: Single-bundle PCL reconstruction was successful in restoring normal
anteroposterior translation of the tibia, as well as the patellar flexion and
shift. However, single-bundle PCL reconstruction was unable to achieve the same
success in mediolateral translation of the tibia or in the patellar rotation and 
tilt.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The persistent abnormal mediolateral translation of the
tibia, as well as decreased patellar rotation and tilt, provide a possible
explanation for the development of cartilage degeneration after reconstruction of
an isolated PCL injury.

PMCID: PMC3832057
PMID: 19726621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Oncol. 2009 Oct;35(4):873-9.

Betulinic acid treatment promotes apoptosis in hepatoblastoma cells.

Eichenmüller M(1), von Schweinitz D, Kappler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany.

Hepatoblastoma (HB) represents the most common malignant liver tumor in children 
with a dismal prognosis for patients with advanced disease. This study provides
evidence that the naturally occurring pentacyclic triterpenoid betulinic acid
(BA) is highly effective against HB. We demonstrate that BA has a strong
cytotoxic effect on HB cells in a dose-dependent manner by impinging on cell
viability and causing massive induction of programmed cell death. Apoptotic
features including morphological changes, membrane asymmetry and proteolytic
cleavage of caspase 3 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase were frequently found in
BA-treated HB cells, which is suggestive of the mitochondrial intrinsic apoptotic
pathway. In contrast, the hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell line HepG2 was
resistant to BA treatment. This insensitivity was dependent on the high
expression of survival factors, such as Survivin and BCL2. Interestingly, BA
treatment led to a significant decrease in expression of the hedgehog target
genes GLI1, PTCH1 and IGF2 in HepT3 cells. In conclusion, we demonstrate that BA 
is capable of inducing apoptosis in HB cells and thereby might be a hopeful new
strategy for treating HB, especially those with an activated hedgehog signaling
pathway.

PMID: 19724925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;69(17):6790-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0886. Epub
2009 Aug 25.

A novel splice variant of GLI1 that promotes glioblastoma cell migration and
invasion.

Lo HW(1), Zhu H, Cao X, Aldrich A, Ali-Osman F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
huiwen.lo@duke.edu

The family of GLI zinc finger transcription factors regulates the expression of
genes involved in many important cellular processes, notably embryonal
development and cellular differentiation. The glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 1 (GLI1) isoform, in particular, has attracted much attention because
of its frequent activation in many human cancers and its interactions with other 
signaling pathways, such as those mediated by K-RAS, transforming growth
factor-beta, epidermal growth factor receptor, and protein kinase A. Here, we
report the identification of a novel truncated GLI1 splice variant, tGLI1, with
an in-frame deletion of 123 bases (41 codons) spanning the entire exon 3 and part
of exon 4 of the GLI1 gene. Expression of tGLI1 is undetectable in normal cells
but is high in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and other cancer cells. Although
tGLI1 undergoes nuclear translocalization and transactivates GLI1-binding sites
similar to GLI1, unlike GLI1, it is associated with increased motility and
invasiveness of GBM cells. Using microarray analysis, we showed >100 genes to be 
differentially expressed in tGLI1-expressing compared with GLI1-expressing GBM
cells, although both cell types expressed equal levels of known GLI1-regulated
genes, such as PTCH1. We further showed one of the tGLI1 up-regulated genes,
CD24, an invasion-associated gene, to be required for the migratory and invasive 
phenotype of GBM cells. These data provide conclusive evidence for a novel
gain-of-function GLI1 splice variant that promotes migration and invasiveness of 
GBM cells and open up a new research paradigm on the role of the GLI1 pathway in 
malignancy.

PMCID: PMC2771365
PMID: 19706761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. BMC Cancer. 2009 Aug 25;9:298. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-298.

Expression of the glioma-associated oncogene homolog (GLI) 1 in human breast
cancer is associated with unfavourable overall survival.

ten Haaf A(1), Bektas N, von Serenyi S, Losen I, Arweiler EC, Hartmann A, Knüchel
R, Dahl E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of the
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. atenhaaf@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GLI1, a member of the GLI subfamily of
Krüppel-like zinc finger proteins is involved in signal transduction within the
hedgehog pathway. Aberrant hedgehog signalling has been implicated in the
development of different human tumour entities such as colon and lung cancer and 
increased GLI1 expression has been found in these tumour entities as well. In
this study we questioned whether GLI1 expression might also be important in human
breast cancer development. Furthermore we correlated GLI1 expression with
histopathological and clinical data to evaluate whether GLI1 could represent a
new prognostic marker in breast cancer treatment.
METHODS: Applying semiquantitative realtime PCR analysis and immunohistochemistry
(IHC) GLI1 expression was analysed in human invasive breast carcinomas (n = 229) 
in comparison to normal human breast tissues (n = 58). GLI1 mRNA expression was
furthermore analysed in a set of normal (n = 3) and tumourous breast cell lines
(n = 8). IHC data were statistically interpreted using SPSS version 14.0.
RESULTS: Initial analysis of GLI1 mRNA expression in a small cohort of (n = 5)
human matched normal and tumourous breast tissues showed first tendency towards
GLI1 overexpression in human breast cancers. However only a small sample number
was included into these analyses and values for GLI1 overexpression were
statistically not significant (P = 0.251, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U-test). On
protein level, nuclear GLI1 expression in breast cancer cells was clearly more
abundant than in normal breast epithelial cells (P = 0.008, two-tailed
Mann-Whitney U-test) and increased expression of GLI1 protein in breast tumours
significantly correlated with unfavourable overall survival (P = 0.019), but also
with higher tumour stage (P < 0.001) and an increased number of tumour-positive
axillar lymph nodes (P = 0.027). Interestingly, a highly significant correlation 
was found between GLI1 expression and the expression of SHH, a central upstream
molecule of the hedgehog pathway that was previously analysed on the same tissue 
microarray.
CONCLUSION: Our study presents a systematic expression analysis of GLI1 in human 
breast cancer. Elevated levels of GLI1 protein in human breast cancer are
associated with unfavourable prognosis and progressive stages of disease. Thus
GLI1 protein expression measured e.g. by an IHC based scoring system might have
an implication in future multi-marker panels for human breast cancer prognosis or
molecular sub typing. The highly significant correlation between SHH and GLI1
expression characterises GLI1 as a potential functional downstream target of the 
hedgehog signalling pathway in human breast cancer as well. Furthermore, our
study indicates that altered hedgehog signalling may represent a key disease
pathway in the progression of human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2753634
PMID: 19706168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Development. 2009 Sep;136(18):3089-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.041343.

Dampened Hedgehog signaling but normal Wnt signaling in zebrafish without cilia.

Huang P(1), Schier AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Center for Brain Science,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Broad Institute, Harvard University, 16 Divinity
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. huang@mcb.harvard.edu

Cilia have been implicated in Hedgehog (Hh) and Wnt signaling in mouse but not in
Drosophila. To determine whether the role of cilia is conserved in zebrafish, we 
generated maternal-zygotic (MZ) oval (ovl; ift88) mutants that lack all cilia.
MZovl mutants display normal canonical and non-canonical Wnt signaling but show
defects in Hh signaling. As in mouse, zebrafish cilia are required to mediate the
activities of Hh, Ptc, Smo and PKA. However, in contrast to mouse Ift88 mutants, 
which show a dramatic reduction in Hh signaling, zebrafish MZovl mutants display 
dampened, but expanded, Hh pathway activity. This activity is largely due to
gli1, the expression of which is fully dependent on Hh signaling in mouse but not
in zebrafish. These results reveal a conserved requirement for cilia in
transducing the activity of upstream regulators of Hh signaling but distinct
phenotypic effects due to differential regulation and differing roles of
transcriptional mediators.

PMCID: PMC2730366
PMID: 19700616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Bone. 2009 Dec;45(6):1146-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.08.009. Epub 2009 Aug 13.

Sonic hedgehog alleviates the inhibitory effects of high glucose on the
osteoblastic differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells.

Guan CC(1), Yan M, Jiang XQ, Zhang P, Zhang XL, Li J, Ye DX, Zhang FQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai, 
China; Department of Prosthodontics, the 2nd Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, China.

To assess the influence of high extracellular glucose levels on the osteogenic
differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and to determine if Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) protein can alleviate those effects. BMSCs were incubated with NG 
(normal glucose), NG+Shh (200 ng/ml Shh in normal glucose), NG+Shh+Gan (200 ng/ml
Shh and 5 micromol/L GANT61 in normal glucose), HG (high glucose), HG+Shh (200
ng/ml Shh in high glucose), and HG+Shh+Gan (200 ng/ml Shh and 5 micromol/L GANT61
in high glucose). The expression levels of Shh signaling pathway genes Patched 1 
(PTCH1) and osteogenesis-related genes were tested, which included bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), and 
osteopontin (OPN). Alkaline phosphatase (ALPase) activity and mineralized matrix 
formation were also investigated. Immunofluorescent staining of Gli1 was tested
for Shh signaling activation. We found that recombinant Shh in normal-glucose
medium could promote osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs, while inhibiting Shh
signaling by GANT61 could antagonize this differentiation. Besides that high
glucose impaired the Shh signaling as well as osteogenic differentiation of
BMSCs, reactivation of Shh signal pathway by addition of Shh protein could
mitigate the inhibition while further deactivation by Shh inhibitor GANT61 could 
retain their osteogenic inhibitions. The above data suggest that Shh pathway
activity is involved in the HG condition mediated osteoblastic differentiation
deficiency for BMSCs and that recombinant Shh could alleviate this inhibitory
effect.

PMID: 19683085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 18;106(33):14016-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906549106. Epub 2009 Aug 4.

Identification, molecular characterization, clinical prognosis, and therapeutic
targeting of human bladder tumor-initiating cells.

Chan KS(1), Espinosa I, Chao M, Wong D, Ailles L, Diehn M, Gill H, Presti J Jr,
Chang HY, van de Rijn M, Shortliffe L, Weissman IL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford Cancer
Center, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94304-5542, USA.
kc1@bcm.tmc.edu

Major clinical issues in bladder cancer include the identification of prediction 
markers and novel therapeutic targets for invasive bladder cancer. In the current
study, we describe the isolation and characterization of a tumor-initiating cell 
(T-IC) subpopulation in primary human bladder cancer, based on the expression of 
markers similar to that of normal bladder basal cells
(Lineage-CD44(+)CK5(+)CK20(-)). The bladder T-IC subpopulation was defined
functionally by its enriched ability to induce xenograft tumors in vivo that
recapitulated the heterogeneity of the original tumor. Further, molecular
analysis of more than 300 bladder cancer specimens revealed heterogeneity among
activated oncogenic pathways in T-IC (e.g., 80% Gli1, 45% Stat3, 10% Bmi-1, and
5% beta-catenin). Despite this molecular heterogeneity, we identified a unique
bladder T-IC gene signature by gene chip analysis. This T-IC gene signature,
which effectively distinguishes muscle-invasive bladder cancer with worse
clinical prognosis from non-muscle-invasive (superficial) cancer, has significant
clinical value. It also can predict the progression of a subset of recurring
non-muscle-invasive cancers. Finally, we found that CD47, a protein that provides
an inhibitory signal for macrophage phagocytosis, is highly expressed in bladder 
T-ICs compared with the rest of the tumor. Blockade of CD47 by a mAb resulted in 
macrophage engulfment of bladder cancer cells in vitro. In summary, we have
identified a T-IC subpopulation with potential prognostic and therapeutic value
for invasive bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC2720852
PMID: 19666525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Head Neck. 2010 Mar;32(3):333-40. doi: 10.1002/hed.21191.

Expression of hedgehog signaling molecules in Merkel cell carcinoma.

Brunner M(1), Thurnher D, Pammer J, Heiduschka G, Petzelbauer P, Schmid C,
Schneider S, Erovic BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog signaling pathway is important for human development and
carcinogenesis in various malignancies.
METHODS: One tissue microarray with triplets of 28 samples from 25 patients with 
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) was constructed. Six samples of normal skin and 5
samples of normal oral mucosa served as controls. All samples were analyzed
immunohistochemically with antibodies directed against Sonic hedgehog, Indian
hedgehog, Patched, Smoothened, Gli-1, Gli-2, and Gli-3.
RESULTS: All investigated proteins were frequently and intensely overexpressed in
MCCs (Sonic hedgehog, 93%; Indian hedgehog, 84%; Patched, 86%; Smoothened, 79%;
Gli-1, 79%; Gli-2, 79%; Gli-3, 86%) compared with control samples. High levels of
Patched and Indian hedgehog were significantly associated with an increase in
patients overall (p = .015) and recurrence-free survival (p = .011),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the Hedgehog signaling pathway is strongly
activated in MCC and thus may play a role in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19644931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Oncogene. 2009 Oct 1;28(39):3468-76. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.208. Epub 2009 Jul 20.

Targeted inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway in established malignant glioma
xenografts enhances survival.

Sarangi A(1), Valadez JG, Rush S, Abel TW, Thompson RC, Cooper MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Hedgehog pathway activity has been demonstrated in malignant glioma. However, its
role in tumor growth has not been determined. Here we demonstrate that
pharmacological inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway in established orthotopic
malignant glioma xenografts confers a survival advantage. Pathway inhibition is
measured in transplanted human tumor cells and not in host mouse brain.
Correspondingly, survival benefit is observed only in tumors with an operational 
Hedgehog pathway. These data indicate that Hedgehog signaling regulates the
growth of select malignant gliomas. We also demonstrate that Hedgehog pathway
component and gene target expression segregate to CD133(+) tumor initiating
cells. Treated mice eventually succumb to disease, thus, targeting the Hedgehog
pathway in CD133(+) cells produces significant, but incomplete tumor regression. 
Therefore, our studies suggest that more complete tumor regression may require
the inclusion of other therapeutic targets, including CD133(-) cells.

PMCID: PMC2756306
PMID: 19617900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;23(10):1532-43. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0453. Epub 2009 Jul
16.

Negative regulation of Hedgehog signaling by liver X receptors.

Kim WK(1), Meliton V, Park KW, Hong C, Tontonoz P, Niewiadomski P, Waschek JA,
Tetradis S, Parhami F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California 90095, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is indispensable in embryonic development, and its
dysregulated activity results in severe developmental disorders as shown by
genetic models of naturally occurring mutations in animal and human pathologies. 
Hh signaling also functions in postembryonic development and adult tissue
homeostasis, and its aberrant activity causes various human cancers. Better
understanding of molecular regulators of Hh signaling is of fundamental
importance in finding new strategies for pathway modulation. Here, we identify
liver X receptors (LXRs), members of the nuclear hormone receptor family, as
previously unrecognized negative regulators of Hh signaling. Activation of LXR by
specific pharmacological ligands, TO901317 and GW3965, inhibited the responses of
pluripotent bone marrow stromal cells and calvaria organ cultures to sonic Hh,
resulting in the inhibition of expression of Hh-target genes, Gli1 and Patched1, 
and Gli-dependent transcriptional activity. Moreover, LXR ligands inhibited sonic
Hh-induced differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells into osteoblasts.
Elimination of LXRs by small interfering RNA inhibited ligand-induced inhibition 
of Hh target gene expression. Furthermore, LXR ligand did not inhibit Hh
responsiveness in mouse embryonic fibroblasts that do not express LXRs, whereas
introduction of LXR into these cells reestablished the inhibitory effects. Daily 
oral administration of TO901317 to mice after 3 d significantly inhibited
baseline Hh target-gene expression in liver, lung, and spleen. Given the
importance of modulating Hh signaling in various physiological and pathological
settings, our findings suggest that pharmacological targeting of LXRs may be a
novel strategy for Hh pathway modulation.

PMCID: PMC2754896
PMID: 19608643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mod Pathol. 2009 Oct;22(10):1312-20. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.98. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

Sonic hedgehog signaling proteins and ATP-binding cassette G2 are aberrantly
expressed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Kim JE(1), Singh RR, Cho-Vega JH, Drakos E, Davuluri Y, Khokhar FA, Fayad L,
Medeiros LJ, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Dysregulation of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway has been shown in
several cancer types, but has not been explored in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
We assessed 67 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma for expression of SHH
(ligand), GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (transcriptional effectors of SHH signaling), and
the ATP-binding cassette (ABC)G2 (a downstream target of SHH signaling), using
immunohistochemistry. For comparison, we assessed the expression levels of these 
proteins in 28 cases of follicular lymphoma, 5 chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma, and 5 reactive lymph nodes. In diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, SHH was expressed in 61 of 67 (91%) cases, GLI1 in 62 of 67 (93%), GLI2
in 41 of 56 (73%), and GLI3 in 22 of 56 (39%). Expression of ABCG2 was detected
in 52 of 55 (95%) cases and was high in 15 (27%) cases. SHH expression positively
correlated with expression levels of ABCG2 (P=0.05). Patients with diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma with high ABCG2 expression showed significantly shorter overall
survival (P=0.031) and failure-free survival (P=0.029) compared with patients
with tumors with low or no expression of ABCG2. Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
expressed SHH, and GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 more frequently and more intensely than
cases of follicular lymphoma or chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic
lymphoma. In conclusion, our data show that SHH signaling proteins and ABCG2 are 
aberrantly expressed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and that ABCG2 expression
has prognostic implications. These findings also provide evidence that
dysregulation of the SHH pathway may be involved in the pathogenesis of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 19593328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Blood. 2009 Oct 8;114(15):3276-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-219436. Epub 2009
Jul 8.

Identification of novel antigens with induced immune response in monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance.

Blotta S(1), Tassone P, Prabhala RH, Tagliaferri P, Cervi D, Amin S, Jakubikova
J, Tai YT, Podar K, Mitsiades CS, Zullo A, Franco B, Anderson KC, Munshi NC.

Author information: 
(1)Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center and LeBow Institute for Myeloma
Therapeutics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transformation from monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS)
to multiple myeloma (MM) is thought to be associated with changes in immune
processes. We have therefore used serologic analysis of recombinant cDNA
expression library to screen the sera of MGUS patients to identify
tumor-associated antigens. A total of 10 antigens were identified, with specific 
antibody responses in MGUS. Responses appeared to be directed against
intracellular proteins involved in cellular functions, such as apoptosis (SON,
IFT57/HIPPI), DNA and RNA binding (ZNF292, GPATCH4), signal transduction
regulators (AKAP11), transcriptional corepressor (IRF2BP2), developmental
proteins (OFD1), and proteins of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (PSMC1).
Importantly, the gene responsible for the oral-facial-digital type I syndrome
(OFD1) had response in 6 of 29 (20.6%) MGUS patients but 0 of 11 newly diagnosed 
MM patients. Interestingly, 3 of 11 (27.2%) MM patients after autologous stem
cell transplantations showed responses to OFD1. We have confirmed T-cell
responses against OFD1 in MGUS and observed down-regulation of GLI1/PTCH1 and
p-beta-catenin after OFD1 knock-down with specific siRNA, suggesting its
functional role in the regulation of Hh and Wnt pathways. These findings
demonstrate OFD1 as an important immune target and highlight its possible role in
signal transduction and tumorigenesis in MGUS and MM.

PMCID: PMC2759650
PMID: 19587378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cancer. 2009 Jul 6;8:44. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-44.

Inhibition of p70S6K2 down-regulates Hedgehog/GLI pathway in non-small cell lung 
cancer cell lines.

Mizuarai S(1), Kawagishi A, Kotani H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tsukuba Research Institute, Merck Research
Laboratories, Banyu Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
shinji_mizuarai@merck.com

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (HH) pathway promotes tumorigenesis in a diversity of
cancers. Activation of the HH signaling pathway is caused by overexpression of HH
ligands or mutations in the components of the HH/GLI1 cascade, which lead to
increased transactivation of GLI transcription factors. Although negative kinase 
regulators that antagonize the activity of GLI transcription factors have been
reported, including GSK3beta, PKA and CK1s, little is known regarding positive
kinase regulators that are suitable for use on cancer therapeutic targets. The
present study attempted to identify kinases whose silencing inhibits HH/GLI
signalling in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
RESULTS: To find positive kinase regulators in the HH pathway, kinome-wide siRNA 
screening was performed in a NSCLC cell line, A549, harboring the GLI regulatory 
reporter gene. This showed that p70S6K2-silencing remarkably reduced GLI reporter
gene activity. The decrease in the activity of the HH pathway caused by
p70S6K2-inhibition was accompanied by significant reduction in cell viability. We
next investigated the mechanism for p70S6K2-mediated inhibition of GLI1
transcription by hypothesizing that GSK3beta, a negative regulator of the HH
pathway, is activated upon p70S6K2-silencing. We found that
phosphorylated-GSK3beta (Ser9) was reduced by p70S6K2-silencing, causing a
decreased level of GLI1 protein. Finally, to further confirm the involvement of
p70S6K2 in GLI1 signaling, down-regulation in GLI-mediated transcription by
PI3KCA-inhibition was confirmed, establishing the pivotal role of the
PI3K/p70S6K2 pathway in GLI1 cascade regulation.
CONCLUSION: We report herein that inhibition of p70S6K2, known as a downstream
effector of the PI3K pathway, remarkably decreases GLI-mediated transactivation
in NSCLC by reducing phosphorylated-GSK3beta followed by GLI1 degradation. These 
results infer that p70S6K2 is a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC with
hyperactivated HH/GLI pathway.

PMCID: PMC2714036
PMID: 19575820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 May;42(5):615-25. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0390OC. 
Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Gli2 influences proliferation in the developing lung through regulation of cyclin
expression.

Rutter M(1), Wang J, Huang Z, Kuliszewski M, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology and Experimental Medicine Program, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8 Canada.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is crucial for normal lung
development. In the lung, epithelial-produced Shh signals via mesenchymal Gli1-3 
transcription factors. Gli-null lung phenotypes suggest that Gli2 is the primary 
Gli transcription factor transducing Shh-regulated lung growth, although the
mechanism has yet to be elucidated. To clarify the role of Gli2 during lung
development, we overexpressed gli2 in the lung mesenchyme of mice, to investigate
for changes in Shh signaling, and cellular proliferation. The ectopic
overexpression of gli2 resulted in increased Shh pathway activation as evident by
increased expression of shh, ptc1, ptc2, smo, hhip, and gli1. Interestingly, we
also observed increased expression of gli3 transcripts. Using two different mouse
models, gli3-null and gli3Delta699 (Gli3 constitutive repressor), it was found
that Gli3 activity does not affect the levels of gli2 in the developing lung.
Real-time PCR and immunoblotting revealed that there is increased expression of
cyclins D1, D2, and E1 associated with increased gli2 levels. Furthermore, the
increase and decrease of cyclins (associated with changes in gli2 levels)
positively correlated with cellular proliferation, as assessed by phospho-histone
H3 immunohistochemistry. To determine if Gli3 has an effect on cyclin expression 
in the developing lung, we measured the levels of cyclin D1, D2, and E1, in
gli3-null and gli3Delta699 mice and compared them to their wild-type
counterparts. However, no change in the levels of cyclins D1, D2, or E1 due to
altered Gli3 was observed. These findings suggest that Gli2 and not Gli3 is the
primary mediator of Shh signaling influencing fetal lung growth through cyclin
regulation.

PMID: 19574535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2009;21(6):805-15. doi: 10.1071/RD08277.

Sonic hedgehog promotes porcine oocyte maturation and early embryo development.

Nguyen NT(1), Lin DP, Yen SY, Tseng JK, Chuang JF, Chen BY, Lin TA, Chang HH, Ju 
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, National Chung Hsing University, 250 Kuokuang
Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan, ROC.

In the present study, we investigated the effects of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
protein on porcine oocyte maturation and early embryo development.
Immunohistochemistry showed activation of Shh signalling in cumulus-oocyte
complexes (COCs), as reflected by Patched (Ptc), Smoothened (Smo) and Gli1
expression in oocytes, cumulus cells and granulosa cells, particularly those of
small follicles (<2 mm in diameter). Western blot analysis showed Smo expression 
in COCs and in denuded oocytes derived from small and medium (3-7 mm)-sized
follicles. Small follicles contained the highest concentration of Shh in
follicular fluid compared with medium-sized and large (>7 mm in diameter)
follicles. Supplementation with Shh (0.5 or 1 microg mL(-1)) enhanced oocyte
maturation compared with the control group (92.4% and 90.4% v. 81.9%,
respectively; P < 0.05). This effect was reversed by the simultaneous addition of
cyclopamine (1-2 microm), an Shh inhibitor. Similar to intact COCs, denuded COCs 
showed enhanced maturation following Shh supplementation. Furthermore, cyclin B1 
content, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 phosphorylation, intracellular
calcium release, blastocyst rate and total cell numbers were greater (P < 0.05)
in oocytes matured in the presence of 0.5 and 1 microg mL(-1) Shh compared with
control oocytes. The findings of the present study provide the first evidence
that the Shh signalling pathway is active, or at least partially activated, in
the porcine ovary and is likely to promote oocyte cytoplasmic and nuclear
maturation, as well as subsequent in vitro development, although the underlying
mechanisms remain to be elucidated.

PMID: 19567223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Sep 10;315(15):2648-57. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.06.018. Epub
2009 Jun 24.

Hedgehog signal activation coordinates proliferation and differentiation of fetal
liver progenitor cells.

Hirose Y(1), Itoh T, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Growth and Differentiation, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays crucial roles in development and homeostasis of
various organs. In the adult liver, it regulates proliferation and/or viability
of several types of cells, particularly under injured conditions, and is also
implicated in stem/progenitor cell maintenance. However, the role of this
signaling pathway during the normal developmental process of the liver remains
elusive. Although Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the ventral foregut
endoderm from which the liver derives, the expression disappears at the onset of 
the liver bud formation, and its possible recurrence at the later stages has not 
been investigated. Here we analyzed the activation and functional relevance of Hh
signaling during the mouse fetal liver development. At E11.5, Shh and an
activation marker gene for Hh signaling, Gli1, were expressed in Dlk(+)
hepatoblasts, the fetal liver progenitor cells, and the expression was rapidly
decreased thereafter as the development proceeded. In the culture of Dlk(+)
hepatoblasts isolated from the E11.5 liver, activation of Hh signaling stimulated
their proliferation and this effect was cancelled by a chemical Hh signaling
inhibitor, cyclopamine. In contrast, hepatocyte differentiation of Dlk(+)
hepatoblasts in vitro as manifested by the marker gene expression and acquisition
of ammonia clearance activity was significantly inhibited by forced activation of
Hh signaling. Taken together, these results demonstrate the temporally restricted
manner of Hh signal activation and its role in promoting the hepatoblast
proliferation, and further suggest that the pathway needs to be shut off for the 
subsequent hepatic differentiation of hepatoblasts to proceed normally.

PMID: 19559697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 21;284(34):22888-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.021949. Epub
2009 Jun 25.

The hedgehog pathway transcription factor GLI1 promotes malignant behavior of
cancer cells by up-regulating osteopontin.

Das S(1), Harris LG, Metge BJ, Liu S, Riker AI, Samant RS, Shevde LA.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama 36604,
USA.

The role of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling as a developmental pathway is well
established. Several recent studies have implicated a role for this pathway in
multiple cancers. In this study we report that expression of GLI1 and osteopontin
(OPN) increase progressively with the progression of melanoma from primary
cutaneous cancer to metastatic melanoma in clinically derived specimens. We have 
further determined that OPN is a direct transcriptional target of GLI1. We have
observed that OPN expression is stimulated in the presence of Hh ligands and
inhibited in the presence of the Smoothened (SMO) inhibitor, cyclopamine.
Transcriptional silencing of GLI1 negatively impacts OPN expression and
compromises the ability of cancer cells to proliferate, migrate, and invade in
vitro and interferes with their ability to grow as xenografts and spontaneously
metastasize in nude mice. These altered attributes could be rescued by
re-expressing OPN in the GLI1-silenced cells, suggesting that OPN is a critical
downstream effector of active GLI1 signaling. Our observations lead us to
conclude that the GLI1-mediated up-regulation of OPN promotes malignant behavior 
of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2755696
PMID: 19556240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Med Chem. 2009 Jul 23;52(14):4277-87. doi: 10.1021/jm900106f.

Structure-activity relationships and cancer-cell selective toxicity of novel
inhibitors of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 1 (Gli1) mediated
transcription.

Mahindroo N(1), Connelly MC, Punchihewa C, Kimura H, Smeltzer MP, Wu S, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

We report novel inhibitors of Gli1-mediated transcription as potential anticancer
agents. Focused chemical libraries were designed and assessed for inhibition of
functional cell-based Gli1-mediated transcription and selective toxicity toward
cancer cells. The SAR was revealed, and the selectivity of the lead compounds'
inhibition of Gli1-mediated transcription over that of Gli2 was determined.
Compound 63 (NMDA298-1), which inhibited Gli1-mediated transcription in C3H10T1/2
cells with an IC(50) of 6.9 muM, showed 3-fold selectivity for inhibiting
transcription mediated by Gli1 over that by Gli2. Cell-viability assays were
performed to evaluate the chemical library in a normal cell line and a panel of
cancer cell lines with or without up-regulated expression of the Gli1 gene. These
compounds decreased the viability of several cancer cell lines but were less
active in the noncancerous BJ-hTERT cells.

PMCID: PMC2853048
PMID: 19545120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Bioorg Med Chem. 2009 Jul 15;17(14):4943-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2009.06.008. Epub
2009 Jun 10.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of SANT-2 and analogues as inhibitors of the 
hedgehog signaling pathway.

Büttner A(1), Seifert K, Cottin T, Sarli V, Tzagkaroulaki L, Scholz S, Giannis A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Leipzig, Institute for Organic Chemistry, Johannisallee 29,
D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in cell signaling of embryonic
development and adult tissue homeostasis. In vertebrates, the hh gene encodes
three different unique proteins: sonic hedgehog (Shh), desert hedgehog (Dhh) and 
indian hedgehog (Ihh). Disruption of the Hh signaling pathway leads to severe
disorders in the development of vertebrates whereas aberrant activation of the Hh
pathway has been associated with several malignancies including Gorlin syndrome
(a disorder predisposing to basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma), prostate, pancreatic and breast cancers. In vivo evidence
suggests the antagonism of excessive Hh signaling provides a route to unique
mechanism-based anti-cancer therapies. Recently the small molecule SANT-2 was
identified as a potent antagonist of Hh-signaling pathway. Here, we describe the 
synthesis, SAR studies as well as biological evaluation of SANT-2 and its
analogues. Fifteen SANT-2 derivatives were synthesized and analyzed for their
interference with the expression of the Hh target gene Gli1 in a reporter gene
assay. By comparison of structure and activity important molecular descriptors
for Gli inhibition could be identified. Furthermore we identified derivative
TC-132 that was slightly more potent than the parent compound SANT-2. Selected
compounds were tested for Hh related teratogenic effects in the small teleost
model medaka. Albeit Gli expression has indicated a 16-fold higher Hh-inhibiting 
activity than observed for the plant alkaloid cyclopamine, none of the tested
compounds were able to induce the cyclopamine-specific phenotype in the medaka
assay.

PMID: 19541490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Genesis. 2009 Sep;47(9):628-37. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20532.

Targeted disruption of Sonic Hedgehog in the mouse adrenal leads to
adrenocortical hypoplasia.

Ching S(1), Vilain E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

Development of the mammalian adrenal gland is regulated by a diverse network of
growth and transcription factors. Disruptions in these pathways often result in
adrenal insufficiency because of adrenal hypoplasia. Several lines of evidence
have suggested that the Hedgehog signaling pathway, which controls many aspects
of tissue and organ patterning, may play a direct role in adrenal morphogenesis
as well. Therefore, we examined the role of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a member of the
Hedgehog family, in mouse adrenal development. We show that Shh and its
downstream effectors Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 are expressed in the adrenal cortex
throughout development, and that Shh is required for normal adrenal
organogenesis. Conditional inactivation of Shh in the adrenal cortex using a
Cre-loxP system resulted in severe hypoplasia and disorganization of the cortex. 
In mice carrying the targeted mutation (Shh(fl/fl;SF-1/Cre+)), adrenal mass was
significantly reduced and the cortex failed to encapsulate the adrenal medulla.
Taken together, these results establish a direct role for Shh signaling in normal
adrenal development.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19536807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jun;29(6):2147-57.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway plays an essential role in maintaining the
CD44+CD24-/low subpopulation and the side population of breast cancer cells.

Tanaka H(1), Nakamura M, Kameda C, Kubo M, Sato N, Kuroki S, Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The side population (SP) and the CD44(+)/CD24(-/low) population have been
reported in separate studies to include more tumorigenic cells than other
populations, and to have the ability to form new tumors and undergo heterogeneous
differentiation in breast cancer tissue. However, the relationship between these 
two populations has not yet been explored in breast cancer cells. Here it is
shown that the SP and the CD44(+)/CD24(-/low) populations are overlapping. Both
populations were resistant to paclitaxel. Components of the Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway were more highly expressed in these cell populations at both
the mRNA and protein levels compared with other populations. Furthermore,
inhibition of Hh signaling activity suppressed the proliferation of both
populations. The significance of Hh signaling activity in the proliferation of
both populations was confirmed by the effect of an si-RNA against Gli1, a
trans-activator of the Hh signaling pathway, on the proliferation of both
populations. These data suggest that the Hh signaling pathway is essential for
the proliferation of the tumorigenic population of breast cancer cells, and that 
this pathway might represent a new candidate for breast cancer therapy targeting 
cancer stem cells.

PMID: 19528475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jul;35(1):187-92.

Integrative genomic analyses on GLI1: positive regulation of GLI1 by
Hedgehog-GLI, TGFbeta-Smads, and RTK-PI3K-AKT signals, and negative regulation of
GLI1 by Notch-CSL-HES/HEY, and GPCR-Gs-PKA signals.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

GLI family members are zinc-finger transcription factors, which are involved in
embryogenesis and carcinogenesis through transcription regulation of GLI1, CCND1,
CCND2, FOXA2, FOXC2, RUNX2, SFRP1, and JAG2. GLI1 transcription is upregulated in
a variety of human tumors, such as basal cell carcinoma, lung cancer, breast
cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, and esophageal cancer. Hedgehog
signaling via Smoothened cascade and receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling via
PI3K-AKT cascade induce stabilization of GLI1 protein, whereas G-protein coupled 
receptor (GPCR) signaling via Gs-PKA cascade induces degradation of GLI1 protein.
Here we report integrative genomic analyses of the GLI1 gene. The GLI1 and
ARHGAP9 genes are located in a tail-to-tail manner with overlapping 3'-ends.
ARHGAP9 was expressed in bone marrow, spleen, thymus, monocytes, and macrophages,
whereas GLI1 was almost undetectable in normal tissues or cells with predominant 
ARHGAP9 expression. Because overlapping sense and anti-sense transcripts are
annealed to each other to give rise to double-stranded RNAs functioning as
endogenous RNAi, GLI1 expression might be negatively regulated by ARHGAP9
transcripts. GLI-binding element with one base substitution at the +1589-bp
position from the transcriptional start site (TSS) of the human GLI1 gene was
completely conserved in chimpanzee GLI1, mouse Gli1, and rat Gli1 genes. Ten
Smad-binding elements, double E-boxes for EMT regulators, and double N-boxes for 
HES/HEY family members within intron 1 of the human GLI1 gene were also conserved
in mammalian GLI1 orthologs. GLI1 transcription is upregulated due to Hedgehog,
and TGFbeta signaling activation, whereas GLI1 transcription is downregulated due
to Snail/Slug, and Notch signaling activation. Together these facts indicate that
Hedgehog, TGFbeta, and RTK signals positively regulate GLI1, and that Notch, and 
GsPCR signals negatively regulate the GLI1.

PMID: 19513567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Pathol. 2009 Sep;219(1):61-8. doi: 10.1002/path.2568.

Neuronal differentiation in basal cell carcinoma: possible relationship to
Hedgehog pathway activation?

Gore SM(1), Kasper M, Williams T, Regl G, Aberger F, Cerio R, Neill GW, Philpott 
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, St. Bartholomew's and the London, Queen Mary's 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Although deregulated Hedgehog signalling and elevated Gli transcription factor
expression are known to promote the development of basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
little is known about molecular mechanisms driving the development of specific
growth pattern subtypes. Using gene array analysis, we have previously observed
that over-expression of GLI1 in human keratinocytes promotes increased expression
of the neuronal differentiation markers ARC and ULK1. We asked whether neuronal
differentiation is a characteristic of BCC and whether there is any correlation
with BCC subtype. Using RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, we confirmed that the
neuronal markers ARC, beta-tubulin III, GAP-43 and Neurofilament are expressed in
human BCC but not in normal epidermis. Moreover, we found that expression of
these neuronal differentiation markers showed strong correlation to BCC subtype, 
with more aggressive infiltrative and morphoeic BCC showing low levels or lack of
expression compared to nodular, superficial and micronodular subtypes. Primary
human keratinocytes retrovirally expressing GLI1(-) and GLI2(-) showed elevated
levels of beta-tubulin III and ARC but not Neurofilament or GAP-43, suggesting
that beta-tubulin III and Arc may be early targets of aberrant Gli expression in 
BCC, whereas expression of Neurofilament and GAP-43 are either later, downstream 
targets or under control of alternative pathways. We propose that neuronal
differentiation is a feature of BCC and that expression of these markers is in
part due to aberrant Hedgehog signalling. Moreover, we suggest that correlation
between loss of expression of neuronal markers in infiltrative and morphoeic BCC 
subtypes reflects dedifferentiation of more aggressive BCC subtypes.

PMID: 19479712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Oral Pathol Med. 2009 Aug;38(7):597-604. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2009.00778.x.
Epub 2009 Apr 16.

The immunoprofile of odontogenic keratocyst (keratocystic odontogenic tumor) that
includes expression of PTCH, SMO, GLI-1 and bcl-2 is similar to ameloblastoma but
different from odontogenic cysts.

Vered M(1), Peleg O, Taicher S, Buchner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine, The Maurice and Gabriela
Goldschleger School of Dental Medicine, Israel affiliated to the Sackler Faulty
of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel. mvered@post.tau.ac.il

BACKGROUND: The aggressive biological behavior of odontogenic keratocysts (OKCs),
unlike that of other odontogenic cysts, has argued for its recent
re-classification as a neoplasm, 'keratocystic odontogenic tumor'. Identification
of mutations in the PTCH gene in some of the OKCs that were expected to produce
truncated proteins, resulting in loss of control of the cell cycle, provided
additional support for OKCs having a neoplastic nature.
METHODS: We investigated the immunohistochemical expression of the sonic hedgehog
(SHH) signaling pathway-related proteins, PTCH, smoothened (SMO) and GLI-1, and
of the SHH-induced bcl-2 oncoprotein in a series of primary OKC (pOKC), recurrent
OKC (rOKC) and nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome-associated OKCs (NBCCS-OKCs),
and compared them to solid ameloblastomas (SAMs), unicystic ameloblastomas
(UAMs), 'orthokeratinized' OKCs (oOKCs), dentigerous cysts (DCs) and radicular
cysts (RCs).
RESULTS: All studied lesions expressed the SHH pathway-related proteins in a
similar pattern. The expression of bcl-2 in OKCs (pOKCs and NBCCS-OKCs) and SAMs 
was significantly higher than in oOKCs, DCs and RCs (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The present results of the immunoprofile of OKCs (that includes the 
expression of the SHH-related proteins and the SHH-induced bcl-2 oncoprotein)
further support the notion of OKC having a neoplastic nature. As OKCs vary
considerably in their biologic behavior, it is suggested that the quality and
quantity of interactions between the SHH and other cell cycle regulatory pathways
are likely to work synergistically to define the individual phenotype and
corresponding biological behavior of this lesion.

PMID: 19473442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;69(11):4810-7. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3938. Epub
2009 May 19.

Development of mammary tumors by conditional expression of GLI1.

Fiaschi M(1), Rozell B, Bergström A, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biosciences, Department of Biosciences, Karolinska
Institutet,Novum, SE-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden.

A diverse set of cellular defects, presumably elicited by multiple genetic
alterations, underlies cancer development. Aberrant Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has
recently been implicated in the development and maintenance of breast cancer.
However, evidence conclusively showing that activated Hh signaling can induce
mammary tumors is lacking. We now show that transgenic expression of the Hh
effector protein GLI1 under the regulation of the mouse mammary tumor virus
promoter, expressed in the mouse mammary gland, is associated with the appearance
of hyperplastic lesions, defective terminal end buds, and tumor development. The 
GLI1-induced tumors are histologically heterogeneous and involve the expansion of
a population of epithelial cells expressing the progenitor cell markers keratin 6
and Bmi-1. Moreover, tumor cells express genes involved in proliferation, cell
survival, and metastasis. GLI1-induced tumors do not fully regress following
transgene deinduction, indicating that some tumors develop and are maintained
autonomously, independent of sustained transgenic GLI1 expression. The data
strongly support a role of Hh/GLI signaling in breast cancer development and
suggest that inhibition of this signaling pathway represents a new therapeutic
opportunity for limiting tumorigenesis and early tumorigenic progression.

PMCID: PMC2689922
PMID: 19458072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Gastroenterology. 2009 Aug;137(2):618-28. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.05.002. Epub
2009 May 13.

Paracrine Hedgehog signaling in stomach and intestine: new roles for hedgehog in 
gastrointestinal patterning.

Kolterud A(1), Grosse AS, Zacharias WJ, Walton KD, Kretovich KE, Madison BB,
Waghray M, Ferris JE, Hu C, Merchant JL, Dlugosz AA, Kottmann AH, Gumucio DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2200, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 Aug;137(2):422-4.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hedgehog signaling is critical in gastrointestinal patterning.
Mice deficient in Hedgehog signaling exhibit abnormalities that mirror
deformities seen in the human VACTERL (vertebral, anal, cardiac, tracheal,
esophageal, renal, limb) association. However, the direction of Hedgehog signal
flow is controversial and the cellular targets of Hedgehog signaling change with 
time during development. We profiled cellular Hedgehog response patterns from
embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) to adult in murine antrum, pyloric region, small
intestine, and colon.
METHODS: Hedgehog signaling was profiled using Hedgehog pathway reporter mice and
in situ hybridization. Cellular targets were identified by immunostaining.
Ihh-overexpressing transgenic animals were generated and analyzed.
RESULTS: Hedgehog signaling is strictly paracrine from antrum to colon throughout
embryonic and adult life. Novel findings include the following: mesothelial cells
of the serosa transduce Hedgehog signals in fetal life; the hindgut epithelium
expresses Ptch but not Gli1 at E10.5; the 2 layers of the muscularis externa
respond differently to Hedgehog signals; organogenesis of the pyloric sphincter
is associated with robust Hedgehog signaling; dramatically different Hedgehog
responses characterize stomach and intestine at E16; and after birth, the
muscularis mucosa and villus smooth muscle consist primarily of
Hedgehog-responsive cells and Hh levels actively modulate villus core smooth
muscle.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies reveal a previously unrecognized association of
paracrine Hedgehog signaling with several gastrointestinal patterning events
involving the serosa, pylorus, and villus smooth muscle. The results may have
implications for several human anomalies and could potentially expand the
spectrum of the human VACTERL association.

PMCID: PMC2717174
PMID: 19445942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2009 Sep-Oct;43(2):149-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.04.004. 
Epub 2009 May 13.

Indian hedgehog supports definitive erythropoiesis.

Cridland SO(1), Keys JR, Papathanasiou P, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Qld,
Australia.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) has been reported to stimulate haematopoiesis ex vivo. In
this study we studied the consequences of loss of function of Ihh for murine
haematopoietic development. Ihh has no essential role in primitive
erythropoiesis, but it is required in a non cell autonomous fashion for
definitive erythropoieisis. Many components of the hedgehog signaling pathway are
present in the fetal liver, with Ihh and Gli1 being most highly expressed in the 
stroma and Ptc1 being most highly expressed in haematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells. Ihh knockout HSC and progenitor cell populations are produced in normal
numbers in vivo and respond normally to haematopoietic cytokines in vitro, but
terminal erythroid differentiation is defective leading to fatal anemia in mid
gestation in many Ihh knockout embryos. These loss-of-function studies are
consistent with previous gain-of-function studies which show Ihh can induce blood
from ectoderm or expand HSCs in stroma-dependent culture.

PMID: 19443245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Reproduction. 2009 Aug;138(2):329-39. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0317. Epub 2009 May 11.

The hedgehog-patched signaling pathway and function in the mammalian ovary: a
novel role for hedgehog proteins in stimulating proliferation and steroidogenesis
of theca cells.

Spicer LJ(1), Sudo S, Aad PY, Wang LS, Chun SY, Ben-Shlomo I, Klein C, Hsueh AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078,
USA. leon.spicer@okstate.edu

The expression of hedgehog (Hh) genes, their receptor, and the co-receptor in
mice, rat, and bovine ovaries were investigated. RT-PCR of ovarian transcripts in
mice showed amplification of transcripts for Indian (Ihh) and desert (Dhh) Hh,
patched 1 (Ptch1), and smoothened (Smo) genes. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and
northern blot analyses showed that whole ovarian Ihh and Dhh transcripts
decreased 4-24 h after hCG versus 0-48 h after pregnant mares serum gonadotrophin
treatment in mice, whereas mouse Ptch1 and Smo transcripts were expressed
throughout the gonadotropin treatments. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
revealed that the expression of the Hh-patched signaling system with Ihh mRNA
abundance in granulosa cells was greater, whereas Smo and Ptch1 mRNA abundance
was less in theca cells of small versus large follicles of cattle. In cultured
rat and bovine theca-interstitial cells, qRT-PCR analyses revealed that the
abundance of Gli1 and Ptch1 mRNAs were increased (P<0.05) with sonic hedgehog
(SHH) treatment. Additional studies using cultured bovine theca cells indicated
that SHH induces proliferation and androstenedione production. IGF1 decreased Ihh
mRNA abundance in bovine granulosa cells. The expression and regulation of Ihh
transcripts in granulosa cells and Ptch1 mRNA in theca cells suggest a potential 
paracrine role of this system in bovine follicular development. This study
illustrates for the first time Hh activation of Gli1 transcriptional factor in
theca cells and its stimulation of theca cell proliferation and androgen
biosynthesis.

PMID: 19433502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Pathol Int. 2009 May;59(5):279-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02366.x.

Expression of sonic hedgehog signaling molecules in normal, hyperplastic and
carcinomatous endometrium.

Kim KH(1), Kim JM, Choi YL, Shin YK, Lee HC, Seong IO, Kim BK, Chae SW, Chung YS,
Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Eulji University College of Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.

The aim of the present study was to determine the expression profile of the
hedgehog (Hh) signaling molecules in normal, hyperplastic, and carcinomatous
uterine endometrium. For this purpose, 271 endometrial tissue samples, (62 of
normal endometrium, 127 of endometrial hyperplasias, and 82 endometrial
adenocarcinomas) were studied using antibodies recognizing Hh-related signaling
proteins, such as, sonic hedgehog (Shh), Patched (PTCH), Smoothened (Smo),
Suppressor of fused [Su(Fu)], Gli-1, Gli-2, and Gli-3 by immunohistochemistry.
The mRNA expression of these molecules was also assessed on reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the normal endometrium, the
expression of Hh signaling molecules was generally downregulated except for
Su(Fu), Gli-2, and Shh. In particular, the expression of both PTCH and Smo was
very low or almost absent. Overall expression of Hh signaling molecules increased
in hyperplastic endometrium; in particular, PTCH and Smo were significantly
highly expressed in complex and atypical hyperplasia. In carcinoma samples
extensive alterations were observed in the expression pattern of the signaling
molecules. Nuclear Gli-2, cytoplasmic Gli-3, and Su(Fu) were overexpressed,
whereas Shh, PTCH, and Smo expression were significantly reduced compared with
the hyperplastic endometrium. The results suggest that the alteration of Hh
signaling may be implicated in tumorigenesis of the endometrium.

PMID: 19432668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Cancer. 2009 Sep 1;125(5):1212-21. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24400.

Hedgehog and epithelial-mesenchymal transition signaling in normal and malignant 
epithelial cells of the esophagus.

Isohata N(1), Aoyagi K, Mabuchi T, Daiko H, Fukaya M, Ohta H, Ogawa K, Yoshida T,
Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

It has been established that the Hedgehog (Hh) and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) signals act on morphogenesis of embryonic and adult tissues.
Recently, both signals have been involved in tumor malignancy. However, little is
known as to whether Hh and EMT signals act on normal and malignant epithelial
cells in the esophagus. By laser microdissection (LMD)-based microarray and
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in the undifferentiated and
differentiated epithelial cells of the esophagus, we compared the expression
profiles of Hh and EMT signaling molecules of these cells with those of cancers. 
Whether and how both signalings act in undifferentiated cells and in cancer cells
are investigated by treatment of a Hh-signal inhibitor and/or siRNAs of Hh and
EMT transcriptional key regulator genes on a mouse primary culture and on human
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cell lines. Undifferentiated esophageal
epithelial cells and most ESCCs coexpressed Hh and EMT signaling genes. Some
mesenchymal-related genes were regulated by an EMT regulator SIP1/ZEB2/ZFHX1B,
which was a downstream gene of a primary transcriptional transducer GLI1 in Hh
signaling. Hh signal block inhibited esophageal keratinocyte differentiation and 
cancer cell invasion and growth. These findings suggest that the mesenchymal gene
expression of undifferentiated cells is maintained or strengthened in cancer
cells through Hh signaling. This is a first report showing the presence of
crosstalk between Hh and EMT pathways.

2009 UICC.

PMID: 19431210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Gastroenterology. 2009 Aug;137(2):629-38. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.04.059. Epub
2009 May 7.

Reduced level of smoothened suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis by
down-regulation of Wnt signaling.

Arimura S(1), Matsunaga A, Kitamura T, Aoki K, Aoki M, Taketo MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 Aug;137(2):422-4.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway regulates development and
progression of several types of cancer, its involvement in colon cancer remains
unclear. We aimed to clarify the roles of Hh signaling in intestinal
tumorigenesis.
METHODS: We studied expression of the Hh signaling components in the intestinal
tumors of Apc(+/Delta716) mouse, a model for familial adenomatous polyposis. We
used small interfering RNAs against Smoothened (SMO), which encodes the major
signal transducer of the Hh pathway, to knockdown SMO expression and explore its 
function in human colon cancer cell lines. We also compared the intestinal tumor 
phenotypes of Apc(+/Delta716)Smo(+/-) mice with those of Apc(+/Delta716) mice.
RESULTS: Expression of Smo was markedly increased in the intestinal adenoma
epithelium of Apc(+/Delta716) mice. Importantly, SMO knockdown in human colon
cancer cell lines suppressed proliferation in culture; cells arrested at the G1/S
phase. Furthermore, Apc(+/Delta716)Smo(+/-) mice had decreased numbers of polyps 
in the large size class (Phi >or= 1-2 mm) and recessed polyp morphology,
accompanied by reduced proliferation of the tumor epithelial cells. Unexpectedly,
reduced expression of Smo suppressed beta-catenin-dependent transcription, rather
than Hh-responsive Gli-dependent transcription. Interestingly, SMO knockdown
reduced protein levels of active beta-catenin and induced its nuclear exclusion.
CONCLUSIONS: Smo contributes to intestinal tumorigenesis by increasing Wnt
signaling. SMO might be a good therapeutic target for patients with colorectal
polyps and carcinomas, even in the absence of Hh signal activation.

PMID: 19427313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Anticancer Res. 2009 Mar;29(3):871-9.

The Hedgehog pathway is a possible therapeutic target for patients with estrogen 
receptor-negative breast cancer.

Kameda C(1), Tanaka H, Yamasaki A, Nakamura M, Koga K, Sato N, Kubo M, Kuroki S, 
Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Understanding the expression patterns of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) is
essential for determining therapeutic strategies for patients with breast cancer.
The prognosis of patients with ERalpha-negative breast cancer is still poor. We
have previously shown that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is constitutively activated in
breast cancer and that Hh signaling could be a new therapeutic target. Therefore,
in this study, whether or not Hh signaling could be utilized as a therapeutic
target for patients with ERalpha-negative breast cancer was examined. For this
purpose, three ERalpha-negative breast cancer cell lines were used in which Hh
pathway-related molecules such as the ligand Patched1 and the transcriptional
factor Gli1 as target cells are expressed. Cyclopamine, an inhibitor of the Hh
pathway, significantly suppressed both the cell proliferation and invasion
ability of these cancer cells. In addition, the knockdown of Gli1 by RNA
interference in these cells also significantly reduced both cell proliferation
and invasion ability. Since our previous data have shown a constitutive
activation of the Hh pathway in surgically-resected ERalpha-negative breast
cancer specimens, the Hh pathway, especially Gli1, may be a useful therapeutic
target for patients with ERalpha-negative breast cancer.

PMID: 19414322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dig Dis Sci. 2010 Apr;55(4):1098-105. doi: 10.1007/s10620-009-0812-6. Epub 2009
Apr 28.

Molecular biomarkers correlate with disease-free survival in patients with anal
canal carcinoma treated with chemoradiation.

Ajani JA(1), Wang X, Izzo JG, Crane CH, Eng C, Skibber JM, Das P, Rashid A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, Unit 426, The University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030,
USA. jajani@mdanderson.org

Large primary tumor and clinical nodal involvement in patients with anal
carcinoma treated with chemoradiation are associated with poor disease-free
survival (DFS). However, the outcome in individual patient is unpredictable. We
hypothesized that biomarkers related to chemotherapy and/or radiation resistance 
would be associated with DFS. We analyzed clinical and biomarker data in 30
patients with anal carcinoma who had chemoradiation. Patient selection was based 
on the availability of untreated cancer for biomarkers, completion of prescribed 
chemoradiation, and patient outcomes (~50% disease-free) nonrepresentative of
published cohorts but conducive to biomarker discovery. Ten biomarkers, Ki67,
human telomerase (hTERT), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), p53, p16,
Bcl-2, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), nuclear factor kappa-B
(NF-kappaB), SHH, and Gli-1, were studied. Raw data as continuous variable (only 
EGFR was trichotomized) were analyzed. Univariate and multivariate Cox models
were utilized to assess relationship between DFS and biomarkers. Twenty-three of 
30 patients were women, tumor diameter was >5 cm in 30, and 37% had clinically
positive nodes. Fourteen (30%) patients had a DFS event after chemoradiation. In 
univariate analysis, NF-kappaB (P = 0.01), SHH (P = 0.02), Gli-1 (P = 0.02), and 
tumor diameter (P = 0.03) were significantly associated with DFS, and Ki67 (P =
0.07) was marginally significant. In multivariate analysis, tumor diameter (P =
0.003), Ki67 (P = 0.005), NF-kappaB (P = 0.002), SHH (P = 0.02), and Gli-1 (P =
0.02) were significantly associated with DFS. Our data, albeit preliminary,
suggest that several biomarkers (Ki67, NF-kappaB, SHH, and Gli-1) are associated 
with DFS. Upon further expansion and validation, these results may provide a
biomarker-based understanding of heterogeneous clinical biology of patients with 
anal carcinoma.

PMID: 19399614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2010 Jun;395(5):515-25. doi: 10.1007/s00423-009-0493-9.
Epub 2009 Apr 25.

Expression and regulation of hedgehog signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer.

Yang Y(1), Tian X, Xie X, Zhuang Y, Wu W, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034,
People's Republic of China. yangyinmo@263.net

INTRODUCTION: Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive malignancy with a poor
prognosis. The overall 5-year survival rate of pancreatic cancer is less than 5%,
and has not improved significantly for years. Further understanding of the
molecular carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer is critical for designing effective
ways to treat this type of malignancy.
METHODS: In this study, we examine expression of hedgehog signaling molecules in 
54 surgically removed pancreatic cancer specimens as well as seven available
pancreatic cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: We find that expression of Ptch is associated with tumor size, tumor
differentiation, lymph node metastasis, and clinical stages, whereas expression
of Smo is associated with tumor differentiation and lymph node metastasis. Our
studies from pancreatic cancer cell lines indicate that targeted inhibition of
hedgehog signaling by Smo signaling inhibitor KAAD-cyclopamine causes hedgehog
target gene expression (Gli1) suppression, induces P21 expression and G1 cell
population, and reduced expression of Cyclin D1 and IGF2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that hedgehog signaling activation is a very 
common event in pancreatic cancer and that targeted inhibition of hedgehog
signaling may be effective in treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 19396459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2009 Jun;29(6):1166-74. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2009.41.
Epub 2009 Apr 22.

Bone marrow stromal cells increase oligodendrogenesis after stroke.

Zhang J(1), Li Y, Zhang ZG, Lu M, Borneman J, Buller B, Savant-Bhonsale S, Elias 
SB, Chopp M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Oligodendrocytes are sensitive to ischemic damage. The Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
pathway is critical in oligodendrogenesis; Gli1 is the principal effector of Shh 
signaling. We investigated oligodendrogenesis and Shh/Gli1 pathway activation
after bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) treatment of stroke in rats. Rats were
subjected to the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo). BMSCs have been shown
to promote functional recovery post stroke. A therapeutic dose of BMSC (3 x 10(6)
cells) treatment was initiated 1 day after MCAo. Immunohistochemistry was carried
out to measure the oligodendrocyte progenitor cells, oligodendrocytes, myelin,
and expressions of Shh and Gli1 at 14 days after MCAo. Gene expression of Shh and
Gli1 was tested at 2 days after MCAo. An in vitro study was used to investigate
the effects of BMSC on a premature oligodendrocyte cell line (N20.1 cells). BMSC 
treatment significantly increased O4(+) oligodendrocytes, MBP(+) area, and
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)(+), NG2(+), BrdU(+)-NG2(+) cells, and mRNA and protein
expressions of Shh and Gli1 in the ipsilateral brain of the MCAo rats than that
in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)-treated rats. BMSCs promoted N20.1 cell
proliferation and Gli1 mRNA expression, and these effects were abolished by the
Shh pathway inhibitor cyclopamine. These data indicate that the BMSC treatment
stimulates oligodendrogenesis by activation of the Shh/Gli1 pathway post stroke.

PMCID: PMC2849641
PMID: 19384336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Development. 2009 May;136(10):1761-70. doi: 10.1242/dev.034157. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

sonic hedgehog is required in pulmonary endoderm for atrial septation.

Hoffmann AD(1), Peterson MA, Friedland-Little JM, Anderson SA, Moskowitz IP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

The genesis of the septal structures of the mammalian heart is central to
understanding the ontogeny of congenital heart disease and the evolution of
cardiac organogenesis. We found that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling marked a subset of
cardiac progenitors specific to the atrial septum and the pulmonary trunk in the 
mouse. Using genetic inducible fate mapping with Gli1(CreERT2), we marked
Hh-receiving progenitors in anterior and posterior second heart field splanchnic 
mesoderm between E8 and E10. In the inflow tract, Hh-receiving progenitors
migrated from the posterior second heart field through the dorsal mesocardium to 
form the atrial septum, including both the primary atrial septum and dorsal
mesenchymal protrusion (DMP). In the outflow tract, Hh-receiving progenitors
migrated from the anterior second heart field to populate the pulmonary trunk.
Abrogation of Hh signaling during atrial septal progenitor specification resulted
in atrial and atrioventricular septal defects and hypoplasia of the developing
DMP. Hedgehog signaling appeared necessary and sufficient for atrial septal
progenitor fate: Hh-receiving cells rendered unresponsive to the Hh ligand
migrated into the atrium in normal numbers but populated the atrial free wall
rather than the atrial septum. Conversely, constitutive activation of Hh
signaling caused inappropriate enlargement of the atrial septum. The close
proximity of posterior second heart field cardiac progenitors to pulmonary
endoderm suggested a pulmonary source for the Hh ligand. We found that Shh is
required in the pulmonary endoderm for atrial septation. Therefore, Hh signaling 
from distinct pulmonary and pharyngeal endoderm is required for inflow and
outflow septation, respectively. These data suggest a model in which respiratory 
endoderm patterns the morphogenesis of cardiac structural components required for
efficient cardiopulmonary circulation.

PMCID: PMC2673765
PMID: 19369393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mech Dev. 2009 May-Jun;126(5-6):394-405. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.02.002. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

The role of Parafibromin/Hyrax as a nuclear Gli/Ci-interacting protein in
Hedgehog target gene control.

Mosimann C(1), Hausmann G, Basler K.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center Frontiers in Genetics, Institut für
Molekularbiologie, Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway, an evolutionarily conserved key regulator of embryonic
patterning and tissue homeostasis, controls its target genes by managing the
processing and activities of the Gli/Ci transcription factors. Little is known
about the nuclear co-factors the Gli/Ci proteins recruit, and how they
mechanistically control Hh target genes. Here, we provide evidence for the
involvement of Parafibromin/Hyx as a positive component in Hh signaling. We found
that hyx RNAi impaired Hh pathway activity in Drosophila cell culture. Consistent
with an evolutionarily conserved function in Hh signaling, RNAi-mediated
knockdown of Parafibromin in mammalian cell culture experiments diminished the
transcriptional activity of Gli1 and Gli2. In vivo, in Drosophila, genetic
impairment of hyx decreased the expression of the high-threshold Hh target gene
knot/collier. Conversely, hyx overexpression ameliorated the inhibitory activity 
of Ptc and Ci(75) misexpression during Drosophila wing development. We
subsequently found that Parafibromin can form a complex with all three Glis, and 
provide evidence that Parafibromin/Hyx directly binds Region 1, the Su(fu)
interaction domain, in the N-terminus of all Glis and Ci. Taken together, our
results suggest a target gene-selective involvement of the PAF1 complex in Hh
signaling via the Parafibromin/Hyx-mediated recruitment to Gli/Ci.

PMID: 19368795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20876-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807648200. Epub 2009
Apr 14.

Converse conformational control of smoothened activity by structurally related
small molecules.

Yang H(1), Xiang J, Wang N, Zhao Y, Hyman J, Li S, Jiang J, Chen JK, Yang Z, Lin 
S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

The seven-pass transmembrane protein Smoothened (Smo) is an essential component
of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway that is critically involved in normal
animal development as well as pathological malignancies. In studying Hh-related
biological processes, it would be highly desirable if Smo activity could be
instantly switched between activation and inhibition. Using Gli1-dependent GFP
transgenic zebrafish and in vitro biochemical assays, we identified and
characterized two potent Smo inhibitors, SANT74 and 75 (Smoothened antagonist 74 
and 75), by screening a small molecule library designed based on the scaffold of 
Smo agonist SAG. These compounds are structural analogs of SAG with the methyl
group substituted by a propyl or allyl group in SANTs. We show that SANTs and SAG
exert opposite effects on Smo activity by regulating protein conformation. Our
study represents the first demonstration of conformational regulation of Smo by
small molecule analogs, and the combinational use of these Smo modulators in a
temporal controlled fashion should be useful for studying Hh biology.

PMCID: PMC2742853
PMID: 19366682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Hematol. 2009 May;89(4):422-30. doi: 10.1007/s12185-009-0286-5. Epub 2009
Apr 10.

Growth factor independent 1b (Gfi1b) and a new splice variant of Gfi1b are highly
expressed in patients with acute and chronic leukemia.

Vassen L(1), Khandanpour C, Ebeling P, van der Reijden BA, Jansen JH, Mahlmann S,
Dührsen U, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), IFZ, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, 45122 Essen, Germany.

Gfi1b is a transcriptional repressor that is essential for erythroid cells and
megakaryocytes, but is also expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and early
myeloid progenitors. The chromosomal localization of the Gfi1b gene at 9q34 and
its functional homology with the proto-oncogene Gfi1 were suggestive for a role
of Gfi1b in malignant transformation and myeloid leukemia. We show here that the 
expression of Gfi1b is strongly elevated in CML and AML patients compared to
normal healthy controls and that imatinib, a drug widely used to treat CML,
further enhances Gfi1b expression in patients even after remission. Our data
suggest that Gfi1b may be an important factor to establish or maintain myeloid
leukemia and myeloproliferative diseases and that, high expression levels of
Gfi1b might be associated with the emergence of Philadelphia chromosome negative 
myeloid malignancies after imatinib withdrawal or after the development of
imatinib resistance.

PMID: 19360458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Oncol. 2009 May;34(5):1411-5.

Transcriptional regulation of WNT2B based on the balance of Hedgehog, Notch, BMP 
and WNT signals.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

We cloned and characterized human WNT2B in 1996, and then others cloned and
characterized mouse, chicken, and zebrafish WNT2B orthologs. WNT2B is expressed
in several types of human cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, gastric cancer,
breast cancer, head/neck squamous cell carcinoma, cervical cancer and leukemia.
WNT2B is one of canonical WNTs transducing signals through Frizzled (FZD) and
LRP5/LRP6 receptors to beta-catenin-TCF/LEF signaling cascade. Here, refined
integrative genomic analyses on WNT2B orthologs were carried out to elucidate its
transcriptional mechanisms. GLI-, double FOX-, HES/HEY-, bHLH-, and Sp1-binding
sites within mammalian WNT2B promoter were well conserved. Because GLI1, FOXA2,
FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1 and FOXL1 are direct target genes of Hedgehog-GLI2 signaling 
cascade, Hedgehog signals should induce WNT2B upregulation through GLI family
members as well as FOX family members. Notch, BMP and Hedgehog signals inhibit
WNT2B expression via HES/HEY-binding to N-box, whereas BMP and WNT signals
inhibit bHLH transcription factor-induced WNT2B expression via ID1, ID2, ID3,
MSX1 or MSX2. Together these facts indicate that Hedgehog signals and bHLH
transcription factors are involved in WNT2B upregulation, which is counteracted
by BMP, WNT and Notch signals. Mesenchymal BMP induces IHH expression in
gastrointestinal epithelial cells, and then epithelial Hedgehog induces WNT2B and
BMP4 expression in mesenchymal cells. NF-kappaB signals induce SHH upregulation, 
and WNT2B is upregulated in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). BMP-IHH and
inflammation-SHH signaling loops are involved in WNT2B up-regulation during
embryogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis, and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19360354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3249-55. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4710. Epub
2009 Apr 7.

The miR-17/92 polycistron is up-regulated in sonic hedgehog-driven
medulloblastomas and induced by N-myc in sonic hedgehog-treated cerebellar neural
precursors.

Northcott PA(1), Fernandez-L A, Hagan JP, Ellison DW, Grajkowska W, Gillespie Y, 
Grundy R, Van Meter T, Rutka JT, Croce CM, Kenney AM, Taylor MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research
Centre, Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor, and
mechanisms underlying its development are poorly understood. We identified
recurrent amplification of the miR-17/92 polycistron proto-oncogene in 6% of
pediatric medulloblastomas by high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism
genotyping arrays and subsequent interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization on
a human medulloblastoma tissue microarray. Profiling the expression of 427 mature
microRNAs (miRNA) in a series of 90 primary human medulloblastomas revealed that 
components of the miR-17/92 polycistron are the most highly up-regulated miRNAs
in medulloblastoma. Expression of miR-17/92 was highest in the subgroup of
medulloblastomas associated with activation of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
pathway compared with other subgroups of medulloblastoma. Medulloblastomas in
which miR-17/92 was up-regulated also had elevated levels of MYC/MYCN expression.
Consistent with its regulation by Shh, we observed that Shh treatment of primary 
cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNP), proposed cells of origin for the
Shh-associated medulloblastomas, resulted in increased miR-17/92 expression. In
CGNPs, the Shh effector N-myc, but not Gli1, induced miR-17/92 expression.
Ectopic miR-17/92 expression in CGNPs synergized with exogenous Shh to increase
proliferation and also enabled them to proliferate in the absence of Shh. We
conclude that miR-17/92 is a positive effector of Shh-mediated proliferation and 
that aberrant expression/amplification of this miR confers a growth advantage to 
medulloblastomas.

PMCID: PMC2836891
PMID: 19351822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mod Pathol. 2009 Jun;22(6):839-47. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.45. Epub 2009 Mar 
27.

Aberrant activation of hedgehog signaling pathway contributes to endometrial
carcinogenesis through beta-catenin.

Liao X(1), Siu MK, Au CW, Chan QK, Chan HY, Wong ES, Ip PP, Ngan HY, Cheung AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Mary Hospital, the University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China.

The hedgehog and Wnt signaling pathways play important roles in human cancers
with possible interaction. This study aimed at analysis and correlation of the
expression of Gli1, a transcriptional factor and target gene of hedgehog
signaling pathway, with clinicopathological parameters and expression of
beta-catenin, an important member of the Wnt pathway, in normal, hyperplastic and
malignant endometrium. Immunohistochemical study on 15 normal endometrium, 14
simple and complex hyperplasia without atypia, 37 atypical complex hyperplasia
and 80 endometrial cancers showed significant Gli1 overexpression and
beta-catenin nuclear immunoreactivity in endometrial cancers and atypical
endometrial hyperplasia when compared with normal endometrium (P<0.05).
Overexpression of Gli1 in endometrial cancers correlated with well-differentiated
histological grade (P<0.001), non-myometrial invasion (P=0.004) and superficial
myometrial invasion (P=0.041). beta-Catenin nuclear immunoreactivity was also
associated with well-differentiated histology (P=0.013). Gli1 overexpression
positively correlated with beta-catenin nuclear immunoreactivity in atypical
complex hyperplasia (P=0.013) and endometrial carcinoma (P=0.017). Similar Gli1
and beta-catenin protein expression pattern was observed in normal and
endometrial cancer cell lines by western blotting. We further showed a complex
formation between Gli1 and beta-catenin protein in endometrial cancer cell lines 
in an immunoprecipitation study. Ectopic overexpression of Gli1 into endometrial 
cancer cells led to reduced expression of beta-catenin in cell cytoplasm and
increased expression of beta-catenin in the nuclei. In summary, overexpression of
Gli1 was an early event in endometrial carcinogenesis. Aberrant activation of
hedgehog pathway may play important roles in endometrial cancer through
beta-catenin nuclear accumulation.

PMID: 19329935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Med Chem. 2009 Jul 9;52(13):3829-45. doi: 10.1021/jm801420y.

Hedgehog-Gli signaling pathway inhibitors as anticancer agents.

Mahindroo N(1), Punchihewa C, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. Neeraj.Mahindroo@stjude.org

PMCID: PMC2743241
PMID: 19309080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int J Lab Hematol. 2010 Apr;32(2):150-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2009.01149.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 12.

Expression profile of Notch-related genes in multidrug resistant K562/A02 cells
compared with parental K562 cells.

Yan S(1), Ma D, Ji M, Guo D, Dai J, Zhao P, Ji C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong,
China.

Drug resistance is the major setback of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) therapy.
Notch proteins have demonstrated functional regulation in cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis and thus may affect drug resistance. Our study
aimed to identify the Notch-related gene profile in drug-resistant AML cells and 
provide potential strategies for resistant AML therapy.
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay was conducted 
to detect the cytotoxicity of adriamycin toward K562 and drug-resistant K562/A02.
Intracellular mean fluorescence intensity was monitored to reflect the intake of 
adriamycin by confocal microscopy. cDNA microarray was used to test the
expression of 113 Notch signaling pathway-related genes in K562/A02 and K562.
Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western
blot were used to validate the results from microarray. K562/A02 cells showed a
65-fold higher IC(50) to adriamycin and less intracellular accumulation of
adriamycin than K562. cDNA microarray showed marked increases in binding of
collagen and cell proliferation-related genes (CD44, DLL3, IL17B, NUMB, and
NUMBL) and decreases in signal transduction and transcription factor activity
related genes (FZD9, GBP2, GLI1, GLI2, IFNG, KRT5, Notch2, and Notch3). The
change of gene expression was further validated by real-time RT-PCR and western
blot. Notch signaling pathway-related genes may contribute to the drug resistance
of AML.

PMID: 19302234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;487:435-49. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-547-7_21.

Synthetic microRNA targeting glioma-associated antigen-1 protein.

Tsuda N(1), Mine T, Ioannides CG, Chang DZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Kurume University, Kurume, Japan.

The transcription factor glioma-associated antigen-1 (Gli-1) mediates activation 
of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway, a process that precedes the transformation
of tissue stem cells into cancerous stem cells and that is involved in early and 
late epithelial tumorigenesis. Hypothesizing that targeting the 3'-untranslated
region (3'-UTR) of Gli-1 mRNA would effectively inhibit epithelial tumor cell
proliferation, we evaluated several complementary miRNA molecules for their
ability to do so. The synthetic miRNAs and corresponding duplex/small temporal
RNAs were introduced as 3-nucleotide (nt) loops into GU-rich portions of the
3'UTR Gli-1 sequence. One particular miRNA (miRNA Gli-1-3548) and its
corresponding duplex (Duplex 3548) significantly inhibited proliferation of
Gli-1+ ovarian (SK-OV-3) and pancreatic (MiaPaCa-2) tumor cells by delaying cell 
division and activating late apoptosis in MiaPaCa-2 cells. Here, we describe the 
design of effective miRNA sequences and their applications as anti-gene agents.

PMID: 19301660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Eur Spine J. 2009 Jul;18(7):1013-21. doi: 10.1007/s00586-009-0936-6. Epub 2009
Mar 20.

Segmental in vivo vertebral motion during functional human lumbar spine
activities.

Li G(1), Wang S, Passias P, Xia Q, Li G, Wood K.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org

Quantitative data on the range of in vivo vertebral motion is critical to enhance
our understanding of spinal pathology and to improve the current surgical
treatment methods for spinal diseases. Little data have been reported on the
range of lumbar vertebral motion during functional body activities. In this
study, we measured in vivo 6 degrees-of-freedom (DOF) vertebral motion during
unrestricted weightbearing functional body activities using a combined MR and
dual fluoroscopic imaging technique. Eight asymptomatic living subjects were
recruited and underwent MRI scans in order to create 3D vertebral models from L2 
to L5 for each subject. The lumbar spine was then imaged using two fluoroscopes
while the subject performed primary flexion-extension, left-right bending, and
left-right twisting. The range of vertebral motion during each activity was
determined through a previously described imaging-model matching technique at
L2-3, L3-4, and L4-5 levels. Our data revealed that the upper vertebrae had a
higher range of flexion than the lower vertebrae during flexion-extension of the 
body (L2-3, 5.4 +/- 3.8 degrees ; L3-4, 4.3 +/- 3.4 degrees ; L4-5, 1.9 +/- 1.1
degrees , respectively). During bending activity, the L4-5 had a higher (but not 
significant) range of left-right bending motion (4.7 +/- 2.4 degrees ) than both 
L2-3 (2.9 +/- 2.4 degrees ) and L3-4 (3.4 +/- 2.1 degrees ), while no statistical
difference was observed in left-right twisting among the three vertebral levels
(L2-3, 2.5 +/- 2.3 degrees ; L3-4, 2.4 +/- 2.6 degrees ; and L4-5, 2.9 +/- 2.1
degrees , respectively). Besides the primary rotations reported, coupled motions 
were quantified in all DOFs. The coupled translation in left-right and
anterior-posterior directions, on average, reached greater than 1 mm, while in
the proximal-distal direction this was less than 1 mm. Overall, each vertebral
level responds differently to flexion-extension and left-right bending, but
similarly to the left-right twisting. This data may provide new insight into the 
in vivo function of human spines and can be used as baseline data for
investigation of pathological spine kinematics.

PMCID: PMC2899583
PMID: 19301040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Orthop Surg Res. 2009 Mar 16;4:7. doi: 10.1186/1749-799X-4-7.

Function of anterior talofibular and calcaneofibular ligaments during in-vivo
motion of the ankle joint complex.

de Asla RJ(1), Kozánek M, Wan L, Rubash HE, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)The Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street - GRJ 
1215, Boston, MA 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: Despite the numerous in-vitro studies on the mechanical properties
and simulated injury mechanisms of the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) and
calcaneofibular ligament (CFL), the in-vivo biomechanical behavior of these two
ligaments has not yet been described.
METHODS: Apparent length of the ATFL and CFL was measured in four ankles in
healthy male subjects between 32 and 45 years of age (two left and two right)
during a dorsiflexion-plantarflexion and supination-pronation arc of motion using
a combined dual-orthogonal fluoroscopic and magnetic resonance imaging technique.
RESULTS: The ATFL elongated from the neutral position at 16.3 +/- 3.0 mm to 20.8 
+/- 2.7 mm at maximal plantarflexion and shortened significantly from the neutral
position to 13.9 +/- 2.9 mm at maximal dorsiflexion (p = 0.01). The CFL shortened
from the neutral position at 28.0 +/- 2.9 mm to 26.6 +/- 2.2 mm at maximal
plantarflexion (p = 0.08) and elongated significantly from the neutral position
to 29.9 +/- 3.0 mm at maximal dorsiflexion (p = 0.003). The ATFL elongated
significantly from 14.8 +/- 2.5 mm at maximal pronation to 17.4 +/- 3.0 mm at
maximal supination (p = 0.08). At the same time, the CFL shortened from 31.0 +/- 
3.8 mm at maximal pronation to 26.9 +/- 3.6 mm at maximal supination (p = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: The results showed that the ATFL elongates more during plantarflexion
and supination whereas the CFL increases in length with dorsiflexion and
pronation. Concurrently, these data also demonstrated the reciprocal function
between the two ligaments. While one shortens, the other one elongates. The
different elongation of the ATFL and CFL during the same motion arc suggests that
under excessive loading conditions the ATFL might be more vulnerable in
plantarflexion and supination while the CFL might be more susceptible to injury
in dorsiflexion and pronation. Furthermore, in the case of surgical
reconstruction the grafts used to reconstruct the two ligaments may need to be
tensioned at different positions of the ankle in order to reproduce their natural
in vivo function.

PMCID: PMC2666648
PMID: 19291289  [PubMed]


59. J Orthop Surg Res. 2009 Mar 13;4:6. doi: 10.1186/1749-799X-4-6.

New fluoroscopic imaging technique for investigation of 6DOF knee kinematics
during treadmill gait.

Li G(1), Kozanek M, Hosseini A, Liu F, Van de Velde SK, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, GRJ 1215, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit 
Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org.

INTRODUCTION: This report presents a new imaging technique for non-invasive study
of six degrees of freedom (DOF) knee kinematics during treadmill gait.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A treadmill was integrated into a dual fluoroscopic
imaging system (DFIS) to formulate a gait analysis system. To demonstrate the
application of the system, a healthy subject walked on the treadmill at four
different speeds (1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 MPH) while the DFIS captured the knee
motion during three strides under each speed. Characters of knee joint motion
were analyzed in 6DOF during the treadmill walking.
RESULTS: The speed of the knee motion was lower than that of the treadmill.
Flexion amplitudes increased with increasing walking speed. Motion patterns in
other DOF were not affected by increase in walking speed. The motion character
was repeatable under each treadmill speed.
CONCLUSION: The presented technique can be used to accurately measure the 6DOF
knee kinematics at normal walking speeds.

PMCID: PMC2669052
PMID: 19284658  [PubMed]


60. Virchows Arch. 2009 Apr;454(4):369-79. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0753-7. Epub 2009 
Mar 12.

Hedgehog signaling is involved in differentiation of normal colonic tissue rather
than in tumor proliferation.

Alinger B(1), Kiesslich T, Datz C, Aberger F, Strasser F, Berr F, Dietze O,
Kaserer K, Hauser-Kronberger C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, General Hospital, Paracelsus Medical University
Salzburg, Muellner Hauptstrasse 48, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is a main regulation cascade in embryonic
differentiation. It is also present in adult tissues and unusual expression has
been associated with formation of benign and malignant lesions. We examined the
presence of the Hedgehog pathway in normal and pathological human colon tissue.
Components investigated include Sonic (Shh), Indian (Ihh), and Desert Hedgehog
(Dhh), Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and Patched (Ptch). Pathological tissue samples
comprised 23 benign and 20 malignant lesions of human colon. The influence of the
Hedgehog pathway on differentiation and proliferation has been investigated by
analyzing the effect of the pathway inhibitor Cyclopamine on human colon cancer
cell lines HT29 and CaCo2. In normal colon, we detected expression of Shh and Dhh
within the lining epithelium and Patched, Gli1, and Gli2 along the whole crypts. 
Within all benign lesions, positive staining of Shh, Dhh, Gli1, Gli2, and Ptch
was detected. Expression of Shh and Dhh was restricted to single cell aggregates.
Malignant lesions also displayed focal staining pattern for Shh and Dhh but to a 
much lesser extent. We conclude that Hedgehog signaling is involved rather in
constant differentiation and renewing of the colonic lining epithelium than in
cancer formation, growth, or proliferation.

PMID: 19280222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neurosurg Spine. 2009 Feb;10(2):171-6. doi: 10.3171/2008.10.SPI08231.

Endogenous stem cell proliferation induced by intravenous hedgehog agonist
administration after contusion in the adult rat spinal cord.

Bambakidis NC(1), Horn EM, Nakaji P, Theodore N, Bless E, Dellovade T, Ma C, Wang
X, Preul MC, Coons SW, Spetzler RF, Sonntag VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, and Neurological Institute, University Hospitals Case Medical Center,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

OBJECT: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a glycoprotein molecule that upregulates the
transcription factor Gli1. The Shh protein plays a critical role in the
proliferation of endogenous neural precursor cells when directly injected into
the spinal cord after a spinal cord injury in adult rodents. Small-molecule
agonists of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway were used in an attempt to reproduce these 
findings through intravenous administration.
METHODS: The expression of Gli1 was measured in rat spinal cord after the
intravenous administration of an Hh agonist. Ten adult rats received a moderate
contusion and were treated with either an Hh agonist (10 mg/kg, intravenously) or
vehicle (5 rodents per group) 1 hour and 4 days after injury. The rats were
killed 5 days postinjury. Tissue samples were immediately placed in fixative.
Samples were immunohistochemically stained for neural precursor cells, and these 
cells were counted.
RESULTS: Systemic dosing with an Hh agonist significantly upregulated Gli1
expression in the spinal cord (p < 0.005). After spinal contusion, animals
treated with the Hh agonist had significantly more nestin-positive neural
precursor cells around the rim of the lesion cavity than in vehicle-treated
controls (means +/- SDs, 46.9 +/- 12.9 vs 20.9 +/- 8.3 cells/hpf, respectively, p
< 0.005). There was no significant difference in the area of white matter injury 
between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: An intravenous Hh agonist at doses that upregulate spinal cord Gli1 
transcription also increases the population of neural precursor cells after
spinal cord injury in adult rats. These data support previous findings based on
injections of Shh protein directly into the spinal cord.

PMID: 19278333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gastroenterology. 2009 Jun;136(7):2195-2203.e1-7. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.02.068. Epub 2009 Mar 6.

Depletion of the colonic epithelial precursor cell compartment upon conditional
activation of the hedgehog pathway.

van Dop WA(1), Uhmann A, Wijgerde M, Sleddens-Linkels E, Heijmans J, Offerhaus
GJ, van den Bergh Weerman MA, Boeckxstaens GE, Hommes DW, Hardwick JC, Hahn H,
van den Brink GR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. w.a.vandop@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The intestinal epithelium is a homeostatic system in which
differentiated cells are in dynamic equilibrium with rapidly cycling precursor
cells. Wnt signaling regulates intestinal epithelial precursor cell fate and
proliferation. Homeostatic systems exist by virtue of negative feedback loops,
and we have previously identified the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway as a potential
negative feedback signal in the colonic epithelium. Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is
produced by the differentiated enterocytes and negatively regulates Wnt signaling
in intestinal precursor cells. We studied the role of members of the Hh signaling
family in the intestine using a conditional genetic approach.
METHODS: We inactivated the Hh receptor Patched1 (Ptch1) in adult mice, resulting
in constitutive activation of the Hh signaling pathway. Effects on colonic
mucosal homeostasis were examined. Colon tissues were examined by
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, transmission electron microscopy,
and real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Ihh but not Sonic hedgehog (Shh) was expressed in colonic epithelium.
Expression of Ptch1 and Gli1 was restricted to the mesenchyme. Constitutive
activation of Hh signaling resulted in accumulation of myofibroblasts and colonic
crypt hypoplasia. A reduction in the number of epithelial precursor cells was
observed with premature development into the enterocyte lineage and inhibition of
Wnt signaling. Activation of Hh signaling resulted in induction of the expression
of bone morphogenetic proteins (Bmp) and increased Bmp signaling in the
epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Hh signaling acts in a negative feedback loop from differentiated
cells via the mesenchyme to the colonic epithelial precursor cell compartment in 
the adult mouse.

PMID: 19272384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cancer. 2009 Mar 2;8:12. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-12.

Paracrine sonic hedgehog signalling by prostate cancer cells induces osteoblast
differentiation.

Zunich SM(1), Douglas T, Valdovinos M, Chang T, Bushman W, Walterhouse D,
Iannaccone P, Lamm ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Children's Memorial Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.
SZunich@childrensmemorial.org

BACKGROUND: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and components of its signalling pathway have
been identified in human prostate carcinoma and increased levels of their
expression appear to correlate with disease progression and metastasis. The
mechanism through which Shh signalling could promote metastasis in bone, the most
common site for prostate carcinoma metastasis, has not yet been investigated. The
present study determined the effect of Shh signalling between prostate cancer
cells and pre-osteoblasts on osteoblast differentiation, a requisite process for 
new bone formation that characterizes prostate carcinoma metastasis.
RESULTS: LNCaP human prostate cancer cells modified to overexpress Shh
(designated LNShh cells) and MC3T3 mouse pre-osteoblasts were maintained as mixed
populations within the same culture chamber. In this non-conventional mixed
culture system, LNShh cells upregulated the expression of Shh target genes Gli1
and Patched 1 (Ptc1) in MC3T3 cells and this was inhibited by cyclopamine, a
specific chemical inhibitor of hedgehog signalling. Concomitantly, MC3T3 cells
exhibited time-dependent decreased cell proliferation, upregulated alkaline
phosphatase Akp2 gene expression, and increased alkaline phosphatase activity
indicative of early phase osteoblast differentiation. LNShh cell-induced
differentiation was inhibited in MC3T3 cells stably transfected with a dominant
negative form of Gli1, a transcription factor that mediates Shh signalling.
Interestingly, LNShh cells did not significantly increase the endogenous
expression of the osteoblast differentiation transcription factor Runx2 and its
target genes osteocalcin and osteopontin. Consistent with these results,
exogenous Shh peptide did not upregulate Runx2 expression in MC3T3 cells.
However, Runx2 levels were increased in MC3T3 cells by ascorbic acid, a known
stimulator of osteoblast differentiation.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, these data demonstrate that Shh-expressing prostate
cancer cells can directly and specifically induce differentiation in
pre-osteoblasts via a Gli1-dependent mechanism that does not require
transcriptional upregulation of Runx2. Paracrine activation of the Shh pathway in
osteoblast progenitors and subsequent induction of osteoblast differentiation
could be a mechanism through which high levels of Shh expression in prostate
carcinoma contribute to bone metastasis. Targeting of paracrine Shh signalling
may provide an effective therapeutic strategy against prostate carcinoma
metastasis in bone.

PMCID: PMC2654862
PMID: 19254376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):506-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.017. Epub 2009 
Feb 24.

A SHH-independent regulation of Gli3 is a significant determinant of
anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud.

Hill P(1), Götz K, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

The family of GLI proteins (GLI1-3) comprises the intracellular mediators of the 
hedgehog pathway, which regulates a myriad of developmental processes, one of
which is limb development. Whereas GLI1 and GLI2 seem to be dispensable during
limb development, GLI3 is especially crucial since all GLI3-associated human
congenital diseases comprise limb malformations. Furthermore, Gli3(-/-) mouse
embryos exhibit pronounced polydactyly in conjunction with a loss of digit
identities. Here we examined how the quantity of GLI3 contributes to its function
by using different Gli3 mutants in order to vary overall GLI3 levels. In
addition, we made use of the Gli3(Delta699) allele, which encodes a C-terminally 
truncated version of GLI3, thus mimicking the processed GLI3 isoform (GLI3R). The
Gli3(Delta699) mutant made it feasible to analyze isoform-specific contributions 
of GLI3 within the context of anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud. We
revealed a so far unappreciated variation in the quantitative demand for GLI3
within different phases and aspects of distal limb formation. In addition, our
analyses provide evidence that unprocessed full-length GLI3 is dispensable for
anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud. Instead, digit identities are most
likely defined by GLI3 repressor activity alone. Furthermore, we present evidence
that the anteroposterior grading of GLI3 activity by the action of SHH is
supported by a prototype patterning, which regulates Gli3 independently from SHH.

PMID: 19248778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 15;69(6):2550-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1808. Epub
2009 Feb 24.

Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway is activated in ALK-positive anaplastic large
cell lymphoma.

Singh RR(1), Cho-Vega JH, Davuluri Y, Ma S, Kasbidi F, Milito C, Lennon PA,
Drakos E, Medeiros LJ, Luthra R, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology and School of Health Sciences, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Deregulation of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway has been implicated in
several cancers but has not been explored in T-cell lymphomas. Here, we report
that the SHH/GLI1 signaling pathway is activated in anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK)-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL). We show that SHH, but not
its transcriptional effector GLI1, is amplified in ALK+ ALCL tumors and cell
lines, and that SHH and GLI1 proteins are highly expressed in ALK+ ALCL tumors
and cell lines. We also show that inhibition of SHH/GLI1 signaling with
cyclopamine-KAAD, as well as silencing GLI1 gene expression by small interfering 
(si)RNA, decreased cell viability and clonogenicity of ALK+ ALCL cells.
Transfection of wild-type or mutant NPM-ALK into 293T cells showed that only
wild-type NPM-ALK increased GLI1 protein levels and activated SHH/GLI1 signaling 
as shown by increase of CCND2 mRNA levels. Inhibition of ALK tyrosine kinase and 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT or forced expression of pAKT
down-regulated or up-regulated SHH/GLI1 signaling, respectively. Inhibition of
GSK3beta in 293T cells also increased protein levels of GLI1. In conclusion, the 
SHH/GLI1 signaling pathway is activated in ALK+ ALCL. SHH/GLI1 activation is the 
result of SHH gene amplification and is further mediated by NPM-ALK through
activation of PI3K/AKT and stabilization of GLI1 protein. There is a positive
synergistic effect between the SHH/GLI1 and PI3K/AKT pathways that contributes to
the lymphomagenic effect of NPM-ALK.

PMID: 19244133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cancer Lett. 2009 Jun 28;279(1):13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.01.016. Epub
2009 Feb 15.

Isolation and characterization of cancer stem like cells in human glioblastoma
cell lines.

Qiang L(1), Yang Y, Ma YJ, Chen FH, Zhang LB, Liu W, Qi Q, Lu N, Tao L, Wang XT, 
You QD, Guo QL.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Intervention, China
Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tongjiaxiang, Nanjing 210009, PR China.

To identify and compare the features of stem like cells in human glioblastoma
cell lines U251, U87MG, A172 with primary cultured glioblastoma stem cells, the
ratio of CD133+ cells, the ability of tumor sphere formation, and self-renewing
capacity of U251, U87MG, A172 cells in serum free medium plus EGF, bFGF and B27
supplement were detected. The results suggested that there might be more cancer
stem like cells in U251 cells compared with others. CD133+ cells enriched in SP
cells and in U251 cells cultured with the serum free medium. They expressed the
neural stem cell markers CD133 and Nestin, but lacked of neuronal and astrocyte
marker MAP2, beta-III tubulin and GFAP. They could apparently generate both
neurons and glial cells after serum retrieved in vitro. Gli1, Bmi1, Notch2 and
PTEN were also found expressed highly in them. Moreover, CD133+ cells were more
resistant to hypoxia, irradiations and some chemotherapeutics than CD133-cells.
So we suggested that glioblastoma stem like cells were existed in CD133+ cells in
U251 cell line with characteristics of self-renew and generation of an unlimited 
progeny of non-tumorigenic cells. Molecular and functional characterization of
such a tumorigenic population may be exploited in the development of novel cancer
therapeutic drugs.

PMID: 19232461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncogene. 2009 Apr 2;28(13):1639-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.10. Epub 2009 Feb 16.

Cooperation between GLI and JUN enhances transcription of JUN and selected GLI
target genes.

Laner-Plamberger S(1), Kaser A, Paulischta M, Hauser-Kronberger C, Eichberger T, 
Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

Sustained Hedgehog (HH) signaling is implicated in basal cell carcinoma of the
skin and other types of cancer. Here we show that GLI1 and GLI2, the main
transcriptional activators of the HH pathway, directly regulate expression of the
activator protein 1 (AP-1) family member JUN, a transcription factor controlling 
keratinocyte proliferation and skin homeostasis. Activation of the JUN promoter
by GLI is dependent on a GLI-binding site and the AP-1 sites known to be involved
in self-activation of JUN. Transcription of JUN is greatly enhanced in the
presence of GLI and requires activated JUN protein. GLI2act is a more potent
activator than GLI1 in these experiments and physical interaction with
phosphorylated JUN was only detected for GLI2act. The synergistic effect of GLI
and JUN extends to the activation of further GLI target genes as shown by
shRNA-mediated knockdown of JUN in human keratinocytes. Some of these
cooperatively activated genes are involved in cell-cycle progression, which is
consistent with a significant reduction of the proliferative potential of GLI in 
the absence of JUN. These results suggest a novel connection between HH/GLI
pathway activity and JUN, which may contribute to the oncogenic activity of
HH/GLI signaling in skin.

PMID: 19219074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. EMBO J. 2009 Mar 18;28(6):663-76. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.16. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

A GLI1-p53 inhibitory loop controls neural stem cell and tumour cell numbers.

Stecca B(1), Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland.

How cell numbers are determined is not understood. Hedgehog-Gli activity is
involved in precursor cell proliferation and stem cell self-renewal, and its
deregulation sustains the growth of many human tumours. However, it is not known 
whether GLI1, the final mediator of Hh signals, controls stem cell numbers, and
how its activity is restricted to curtail tumourigenesis. Here we have altered
the levels of GLI1 and p53, the major tumour suppressor, in multiple systems. We 
show that GLI1 expression in Nestin+ neural progenitors increases precursor and
clonogenic stem cell numbers in vivo and in vitro. In contrast, p53 inhibits
GLI1-driven neural stem cell self-renewal, tumour growth and proliferation.
Mechanistically, p53 inhibits the activity, nuclear localisation and levels of
GLI1 and in turn, GLI1 represses p53, establishing an inhibitory loop. We also
find that p53 regulates the phosphorylation of a novel N' truncated putative
activator isoform of GLI1 in human cells. The balance of GLI1 and p53 functions, 
thus, determines cell numbers, and prevalence of p53 restricts GLI1-driven stem
cell expansion and tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2647769
PMID: 19214186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2009 Jan;17(1):33-7.

[The effects of Hedgehog-Gli 1 signaling pathway on proliferation and apoptosis
of hepatic stellate cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu J(1), Xu XF, Yang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University, 
Shanghai 200072, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of Hedgehog-Gli1 signaling pathway on
proliferation, apoptosis and activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) in
vitro.
METHODS: The expression of Shh, Smo, Ptc and Gli-1 in HSC-T6 cells was analyzed
by RT-PCR. HSC-T6 cells were incubated with various concentration of cyclopamine 
(0, 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 mumol/L) for 24 hours, cell viability was checked by
MTT colorimetric assay, cell cycle was analyzed by flow cytometry, apoptosis was 
assayed by agarose electrophoresis of DNA and PI-Annexin V fluorescent staining, 
and the mRNA levels of Gli-1, TGF beta 1, PDGF and Bcl-2 were quantified by
real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: RT-PCR indicated that the components of the Hedgehog-Gli1 signaling
pathway were expressed in HSC-T6 cells. MTT assay indicated that cyclopamine
inhibited cell viability in a concentration dependant manner (F = 636.81, P less 
than 0.01). Flow cytometry indicated that cells were piled up at G0/G1 phase in
cyclopamine treated cells (65.08%+/-1.50%) as compared to control cells
(55.41%+/-2.54%, t = -8.05, P less than 0.01). Cyclopamine treatment resulted in 
apoptosis as indicated by DNA fragmentation and PI-Annexin V staining. The mRNA
levels of Gli-1, TGF beta 1, PDGF and Bcl-2 in cyclopamine treated cells were
significantly lower than that in control cells (P less than 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Cyclopamine may inhibit the Hedgehog-Gli1 signaling, and hence
repress proliferation and promote apoptosis in hepatic stellate cells.

PMID: 19203449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Lung Cancer. 2009 Oct;66(1):64-74. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.01.007. Epub 2009 
Feb 6.

Overexpression of hedgehog pathway molecules and FOXM1 in non-small cell lung
carcinomas.

Gialmanidis IP(1), Bravou V, Amanetopoulou SG, Varakis J, Kourea H, Papadaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Patras, 26500 Rio
Patras, Greece. gialmanidis nikea@yahoo.com

The hedgehog (HH)-signaling pathway is implicated in developmental processes and 
its aberrant activation in adult tissues has been associated with malignancy. The
aim of this study was to determine the expression pattern of HH-signaling
molecules in non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC), as well as the involvement
of the transcription factor FOXM1, that controls cell proliferation, in this
process. Paraffin-embedded tissue sections of 80 NSCLC cases and adjacent
non-neoplastic lung parenchyma were immunohistochemically analyzed with anti-SHH,
anti-Patched1 (PTCH1), anti-Smoothened (SMO), anti-GLI1, anti-GLI2 and anti-FOXM1
antibodies. Correlations of HH molecules with clinicopathological parameters and 
FOXM1 expression were evaluated. All the HH-signaling molecules examined were
overexpressed in NSCLC compared with the adjacent non-neoplastic lung parenchyma.
HH pathway activity and expression of PTCH1 and SMO were significantly higher in 
squamous cell carcinomas compared to other NSCLC histological types. Activation
of HH pathway and PTCH1 expression were correlated with tumor grade being higher 
in low grade tumors. There was a significant correlation of lymph node metastases
with expression of SMO in all NSCLC histological types and with nuclear GLI1
immunolocalization only in adenocarcinomas. Overexpression of FOXM1 in NSCLC was 
also significantly correlated with PTCH1, SMO and GLI1 expression. In conclusion,
HH-signaling pathway is activated in NSCLC and correlates with histological type,
prognostic parameters of the tumors as well as with the increased expression of
FOXM1.

PMID: 19200615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Jan;119(1):39-51. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0323-3.
Epub 2009 Feb 4.

Expression of Gli1 correlates with the transition of breast cancer cells to
estrogen-independent growth.

Zhao J(1), Chen G, Cao D, Li Y, Diao F, Cai H, Jin Y, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
China.

The failure of breast cancer treatment is largely due to the development of
estrogen independence. Current data illustrate that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling may
play an important role in breast cancer development. Here, we show that the
expression of the Hh effector protein, Gli1 was significantly higher in
estrogen-independent breast cancer cells than in estrogen-dependent cells. Our
data showed for the first time that stable expression of Gli1 in ER positive
breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and T47D can induce estrogen-independent
proliferation and promote G1/S phase transition, which associated with cyclin-Rb 
axi. Gli1 can also attenuate the response of proliferation to estrogenic
stimulation, which was correlated with down-regulation of expression of ERalpha
and PR, as well as down-regulation of transactivation of ERalpha. Our results
suggest that up-regulation of Gli1 in breast cancer cells may be one of the
mechanisms responsible for developing estrogen independence and this process may 
be regulated through down-regulation of expression and transactivation of
ERalpha.

PMID: 19191023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 15;69(4):1284-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2331. Epub
2009 Feb 3.

Epidermal growth factor receptor signaling synergizes with Hedgehog/GLI in
oncogenic transformation via activation of the MEK/ERK/JUN pathway.

Schnidar H(1), Eberl M, Klingler S, Mangelberger D, Kasper M, Hauser-Kronberger
C, Regl G, Kroismayr R, Moriggl R, Sibilia M, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

Persistent activation of the Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signaling pathway has been
implicated in the development of a number of human cancers. The GLI zinc finger
transcription factors act at the end of the HH signaling cascade to control gene 
expression, and recent studies have shown that the activity of GLI proteins can
be additionally modified by integration of distinct signals, such as the
MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and phosphinositide-3 kinase
(PI3K)/AKT pathway. However, little is known about the identity of the upstream
activators of these HH/GLI interacting signaling pathways in cancer. Here, we
provide evidence that integration of the HH/GLI and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) pathway synergistically induces oncogenic transformation, which
depends on EGFR-mediated activation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK but not of the
PI3K/AKT pathway. EGFR/MEK/ERK signaling induces JUN/activator protein 1
activation, which is essential for oncogenic transformation, in combination with 
the GLI activator forms GLI1 and GLI2. Furthermore, pharmacologic inhibition of
EGFR and HH/GLI efficiently reduces growth of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) cell
lines derived from mice with activated HH/GLI signaling. The results identify the
synergistic integration of GLI activator function and EGFR signaling as a
critical step in oncogenic transformation and provide a molecular basis for
therapeutic opportunities relying on combined inhibition of the HH/GLI and
EGFR/MEK/ERK/JUN pathway in BCC.

PMCID: PMC3035872
PMID: 19190345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9074-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806233200. Epub 2009
Feb 3.

GLI1 is a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein.

Beauchamp E(1), Bulut G, Abaan O, Chen K, Merchant A, Matsui W, Endo Y, Rubin JS,
Toretsky J, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, D C 20057, USA.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) is an undifferentiated neoplasm of the bone
and soft tissue. ESFT is characterized by a specific chromosomal translocation
occurring between chromosome 22 and (in most cases) chromosome 11, which
generates an aberrant transcription factor, EWS-FLI1. The function of EWS-FLI1 is
essential for the maintenance of ESFT cell survival and tumorigenesis. The
Hedgehog pathway is activated in several cancers. Oncogenic potential of the
Hedgehog pathway is mediated by increasing the activity of the GLI family of
transcription factors. Recent evidence suggests that EWS-FLI1 increases
expression of GLI1 by an unknown mechanism. Our data from chromatin
immunoprecipitation and promoter reporter studies indicated GLI1 as a direct
transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1. Expression of EWS-FLI1 in non-ESFT cells
increased GLI1 expression and GLI-dependent transcription. We also detected high 
levels of GLI1 protein in ESFT cell lines. Pharmacological inhibition of GLI1
protein function decreased proliferation and soft agar colony formation of ESFT
cells. Our results establish GLI1 as a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 
and suggest a potential role for GLI1 in ESFT tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2666556
PMID: 19189974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Hepatology. 2009 Feb;49(2):482-90. doi: 10.1002/hep.22649.

Blocking the hedgehog pathway inhibits hepatoblastoma growth.

Eichenmüller M(1), Gruner I, Hagl B, Häberle B, Müller-Höcker J, von Schweinitz
D, Kappler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Federal Republic of Germany.

Recent evidence has indicated that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling significantly
contributes to liver development and regeneration and that activation of the
pathway may contribute to growth of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in adults.
However, the role of Hh signaling in pediatric liver tumors remains to be
elucidated. In this study, we show that Hh signaling is activated in
hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common liver tumor in childhood, with most
occurrences before the age of 3 years. The Hh target genes glioma-associated
oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) and Patched (PTCH1) showed increased transcript levels 
in 65% and 30% of HB samples, respectively, compared with normal liver tissues.
Most interestingly, the gene encoding the hedgehog interacting protein (HHIP) is 
transcriptionally silenced by cytosine-phospho-guanosine (CpG) island promoter
hypermethylation in 26% of HB cases and treatment with the DNA-demethylating
agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine partially restored HHIP expression. Blocking Hh
signaling with the antagonist cyclopamine had a strong inhibitory effect on cell 
proliferation of HB cell lines with an activated pathway. We further demonstrate 
that this decrease in cell viability is caused by a massive induction of
apoptosis, as shown by morphological changes and phosphatidylserine membrane
asymmetry. In cyclopamine-exposed HB cells, caspase 3 and poly(adenosine
diphosphate-ribose) polymerase proteins were specifically activated by their
proteolytic cleavage.CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates, for the first time, the
frequent occurrence of GLI1 and PTCH1 overexpression and HHIP promoter
methylation in early childhood HB, thus indicating a key role for Hh signaling
activation in the malignant transformation of embryonal liver cells.

PMID: 19177589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Clin Invest. 2009 Feb;119(2):267-77. doi: 10.1172/JCI36376. Epub 2009 Jan 26.

Hedgehog signaling has a protective effect in glucocorticoid-induced mouse
neonatal brain injury through an 11betaHSD2-dependent mechanism.

Heine VM(1), Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Institute for
Regeneration Medicine, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2009 Feb;119(2):243-6.

Glucocorticoids (GCs) are administered to human fetuses at risk of premature
delivery and to infants with life-threatening respiratory and cardiac conditions.
However, there are ongoing concerns about adverse effects of GC treatment on the 
developing human brain, although the precise molecular mechanisms underlying
GC-induced brain injury are unclear. Here, we identified what we believe to be
novel cross-antagonistic interactions of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and GC signaling in
proliferating mouse cerebellar granule neuron precursors (CGNPs). Chronic GC
treatment (from P0 through P7) in mouse pups inhibited Shh-induced proliferation 
and upregulation of expression of N-myc, Gli1, and D-type cyclin protein in
CGNPs. Conversely, acute GC treatment (on P7 only) caused transient apoptosis.
Shh signaling antagonized these effects of GCs, in part by induction of
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11betaHSD2). Importantly, 11betaHSD2 
antagonized the effects of the GCs corticosterone, hydrocortisone, and
prednisolone, but not the synthetic GC dexamethasone. Our findings indicate that 
Shh signaling is protective in the setting of GC-induced mouse neonatal brain
injury. Furthermore, they led us to propose that 11betaHSD2-sensitive GCs (e.g., 
hydrocortisone) should be used in preference to dexamethasone in neonatal human
infants because of the potential for reduced neurotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC2631296
PMID: 19164857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jan 1;8(1):149-57.

Androgenic regulation of hedgehog signaling pathway components in prostate cancer
cells.

Chen M(1), Tanner M, Levine AC, Levina E, Ohouo P, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, The Ordway Research Institute, 150 New Scotland Avenue, Albany,
NY 12208, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is thought to play a role in several human cancers including
prostate cancer. Although prostate cancer cells express many of the gene products
involved in hedgehog signaling, these cells are refractory to the canonical
signaling effects of exogenous hedgehog ligands or to activated Smoothened, the
hedgehog-regulated mediator of Gli transcriptional activation. Here, we show that
the expression of hedgehog ligands and some hedgehog target genes are regulated
by androgen in the human prostate cancer cell line, LNCaP and its more metastatic
variants (C4-2 and C4-2B). Androgen (R1881) strongly suppressed the expression of
hedgehog ligands in these cells and their prolonged maintenance in
androgen-deficient medium upregulated Sonic and Indian hedgehog mRNA and protein 
levels by up to 30,000-fold. Hedgehogs were released into the conditioned medium 
of androgen-deprived LNCaP cells and this medium was able to increase hedgehog
target gene expression in hedgehog-responsive mouse fibroblasts (MC3T3-E1).
Moreover, this activity was accompanied by increased expression of Gli target
genes, Patched 1 and Gli2, in LNCaP that could be suppressed by cyclopamine,
indicating that chronic androgen-deprivation also re-awakens the autocrine
responsiveness of the cancer cells to hedgehog. In contrast to the suppressive
effects of R1881 on hedgehog ligand and Gli2 expression, we found that Gli1
expression in LNCaP cells was induced by R1881. Given the ability of androgen to 
modulate the expression and release of hedgehog ligands and the activity of the
autocrine hedgehog signaling pathway in these prostate cancer cells, our results 
imply that chronic androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) for prostate cancer might
create a hedgehog signaling environment in the region of the tumor that could
ultimately impact on the long term effectiveness of this treatment. This
consideration supports the idea of clinically testing hedgehog-blocking drugs in 
conjunction with ADT in patients with advanced prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2633936
PMID: 19158486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Neural Dev. 2009 Jan 16;4:3. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-3.

Adenomatous polyposis coli is required for early events in the normal growth and 
differentiation of the developing cerebral cortex.

Ivaniutsin U(1), Chen Y, Mason JO, Price DJ, Pratt T.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Centre for Integrative Physiology, School of
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
u.ivaniutsin@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) is a large multifunctional protein
known to be important for Wnt/beta-catenin signalling, cytoskeletal dynamics, and
cell polarity. In the developing cerebral cortex, Apc is expressed in
proliferating cells and its expression increases as cells migrate to the cortical
plate. We examined the consequences of loss of Apc function for the early
development of the cerebral cortex.
RESULTS: We used Emx1(Cre) to inactivate Apc specifically in proliferating
cerebral cortical cells and their descendents starting from embryonic day 9.5. We
observed reduction in the size of the mutant cerebral cortex, disruption to its
organisation, and changes in the molecular identity of its cells. Loss of Apc
leads to a decrease in the size of the proliferative pool, disrupted interkinetic
nuclear migration, and increased apoptosis. beta-Catenin, pericentrin, and
N-cadherin proteins no longer adopt their normal high concentration at the apical
surface of the cerebral cortical ventricular zone, indicating that cell polarity 
is disrupted. Consistent with enhanced Wnt/beta-catenin signalling resulting from
loss of Apc we found increased levels of TCF/LEF-dependent transcription and
expression of endogenous Wnt/beta-catenin target genes (Axin2 (conductin), Lef1, 
and c-myc) in the mutant cerebral cortex. In the Apc mutant cerebral cortex the
expression of transcription factors Foxg1, Pax6, Tbr1, and Tbr2 is drastically
reduced compared to normal and many cells ectopically express Pax3, Wnt1, and Wt1
(but not Wnt2b, Wnt8b, Ptc, Gli1, Mash1, Olig2, or Islet1). This indicates that
loss of Apc function causes cerebral cortical cells to lose their normal identity
and redirect to fates normally found in more posterior-dorsal regions of the
central nervous system.
CONCLUSION: Apc is required for multiple aspects of early cerebral cortical
development, including the regulation of cell number, interkinetic nuclear
migration, cell polarity, and cell type specification.

PMCID: PMC2649069
PMID: 19149881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Aug;48(8):703-12. doi: 10.1002/mc.20516.

Regulation of the hedgehog signaling by the mitogen-activated protein kinase
cascade in gastric cancer.

Seto M(1), Ohta M, Asaoka Y, Ikenoue T, Tada M, Miyabayashi K, Mohri D, Tanaka Y,
Ijichi H, Tateishi K, Kanai F, Kawabe T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The hedgehog and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways
regulate growth in many tumors, suggesting cooperation between these two pathways
in the regulation of cell proliferation. However, interactions between these
pathways have not been extensively studied. We assessed cross-talk between
hedgehog and MAPK signaling in the regulation of cell proliferation in gastric
cancer. We showed that PTCH expression was significantly correlated with
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 phosphorylation (P = 0.016) as
well as SHH expression (P = 0.034) in the 35 gastric cancers assessed by
immunohistochemistry. Indeed, MAPK signaling increased the GLI transcriptional
activity and induced the expression of hedgehog target genes in gastric cancer
cells. The inductive effect of activated KRAS and mitogen-activated
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase (MEK) 1 was blocked by the
suppressor of fused (SUFU), indicating that MAPK signaling regulates GLI activity
via a SUFU-independent process. Moreover, the deletion of the NH2-terminal domain
of GLI1 gene resulted in reduced response to MEK1 stimulation. Our results
suggest that the KRAS-MEK-ERK cascade has a positive regulatory role in GLI
transcriptional activity in gastric cancer.

PMID: 19142899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Genes Dev. 2009 Jan 1;23(1):24-36. doi: 10.1101/gad.1753809.

GLI1 is regulated through Smoothened-independent mechanisms in neoplastic
pancreatic ducts and mediates PDAC cell survival and transformation.

Nolan-Stevaux O(1), Lau J, Truitt ML, Chu GC, Hebrok M, Fernández-Zapico ME,
Hanahan D.

Author information: 
(1)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California at
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by the deregulation of
the hedgehog signaling pathway. The Sonic Hedgehog ligand (Shh), absent in the
normal pancreas, is highly expressed in pancreatic tumors and is sufficient to
induce neoplastic precursor lesions in mouse models. We investigated the
mechanism of Shh signaling in PDAC carcinogenesis by genetically ablating the
canonical bottleneck of hedgehog signaling, the transmembrane protein Smoothened 
(Smo), in the pancreatic epithelium of PDAC-susceptible mice. We report that
multistage development of PDAC tumors is not affected by the deletion of Smo in
the pancreas, demonstrating that autocrine Shh-Ptch-Smo signaling is not required
in pancreatic ductal cells for PDAC progression. However, the expression of Gli
target genes is maintained in Smo-negative ducts, implicating alternative means
of regulating Gli transcription in the neoplastic ductal epithelium. In PDAC
tumor cells, we find that Gli transcription is decoupled from upstream
Shh-Ptch-Smo signaling and is regulated by TGF-beta and KRAS, and we show that
Gli1 is required both for survival and for the KRAS-mediated transformed
phenotype of cultured PDAC cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2632164
PMID: 19136624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Gut. 2009 May;58(5):679-87. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.152652. Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Forkhead box M1B is a determinant of rat susceptibility to hepatocarcinogenesis
and sustains ERK activity in human HCC.

Calvisi DF(1), Pinna F, Ladu S, Pellegrino R, Simile MM, Frau M, De Miglio MR,
Tomasi ML, Sanna V, Muroni MR, Feo F, Pascale RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Experimental Pathology and
Oncology, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Previous studies indicate unrestrained cell cycle
progression in liver lesions from hepatocarcinogenesis-susceptible Fisher 344
(F344) rats and a block of G(1)-S transition in corresponding lesions from
resistant Brown Norway (BN) rats. Here, the role of the Forkhead box M1B (FOXM1) 
gene during hepatocarcinogenesis in both rat models and human hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) was assessed.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Levels of FOXM1 and its targets were determined by
immunoprecipitation and real-time PCR analyses in rat and human samples. FOXM1
function was investigated by either FOXM1 silencing or overexpression in human
HCC cell lines. Activation of FOXM1 and its targets (Aurora Kinose A, Cdc2,
cyclin B1, Nek2) occurred earlier and was most pronounced in liver lesions from
F344 than BN rats, leading to the highest number of Cdc2-cyclin B1 complexes
(implying the highest G(2)-M transition) in F344 rats. In human HCC, the level of
FOXM1 progressively increased from surrounding non-tumorous livers to HCC,
reaching the highest levels in tumours with poorer prognosis (as defined by
patients' length of survival). Furthermore, expression levels of FOXM1 directly
correlated with the proliferation index, genomic instability rate and microvessel
density, and inversely with apoptosis. FOXM1 upregulation was due to
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and glioblastoma-associated oncogene 
1 (GLI1) combined activity, and its overexpression resulted in increased
proliferation and angiogenesis and reduced apoptosis in human HCC cell lines.
Conversely, FOXM1 suppression led to decreased ERK activity, reduced
proliferation and angiogenesis, and massive apoptosis of human HCC cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXM1 upregulation is associated with the acquisition of a
susceptible phenotype in rats and influences human HCC development and prognosis.

PMID: 19136513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008 Dec;1150:43-5. doi: 10.1196/annals.1447.024.

Hedgehog signaling during expansion of human pancreatic islet-derived precursors.

Gallo R(1), Grieco FA, Marselli L, Ferretti E, Gulino A, Marchetti P, Dotta F.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrine and Metabolic
Sciences and Biochemistry, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

A detailed understanding of the molecular process involved in the proliferation
of pancreatic precursor cells would provide key elements for developing new
therapeutic strategies to cure type 1 diabetes. In the present study we
investigated the potential involvement of hedgehog signaling in proliferating
human pancreatic islet-derived mesenchymal (hPIDM) cells, a population of cells
that can be successfully expanded and induced to differentiate into an
insulin-secreting phenotype. Here we report that in these precursor cells a
hedgehog signaling pathway is activated, as shown by Gli1 expression, and that a 
dose-dependent inhibition of such a pathway by cyclopamine results in a
significant reduction of cell proliferation.

PMID: 19120265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jan 27;100(2):389-98. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604846. Epub 2008
Dec 23.

Cross talk between hedgehog and epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathways in
gastric pit cells and in diffuse-type gastric cancers.

Ohta H(1), Aoyagi K, Fukaya M, Danjoh I, Ohta A, Isohata N, Saeki N, Taniguchi H,
Sakamoto H, Shimoda T, Tani T, Yoshida T, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

We previously reported hedgehog (Hh) signal activation in the mucus-secreting pit
cell of the stomach and in diffuse-type gastric cancer (GC).
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to be involved in tumour
malignancy. However, little is known about whether and how both signallings
cooperatively act in diffuse-type GC. By microarray and reverse
transcription-PCR, we investigated the expression of those Hh and EMT signalling 
molecules in pit cells and in diffuse-type GCs. How both signallings act
cooperatively in those cells was also investigated by the treatment of an
Hh-signal inhibitor and siRNAs of Hh and EMT transcriptional key regulator genes 
on a mouse primary culture and on human GC cell lines. Pit cells and diffuse-type
GCs co-expressed many Hh and EMT signalling genes. Mesenchymal-related genes
(WNT5A, CDH2, PDGFRB, EDNRA, ROBO1, ROR2, and MEF2C) were found to be activated
by an EMT regulator, SIP1/ZFHX1B/ZEB2, which was a target of a primary
transcriptional regulator GLI1 in Hh signal. Furthermore, we identified two
cancer-specific Hh targets, ELK1 and MSX2, which have an essential role in GC
cell growth. These findings suggest that the gastric pit cell exhibits
mesenchymal-like gene expression, and that diffuse-type GC maintains expression
through the Hh-EMT pathway. Our proposed extensive Hh-EMT signal pathway has the 
potential to an understanding of diffuse-type GC and to the development of new
drugs.

PMCID: PMC2634717
PMID: 19107131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 27;284(9):5620-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809172200. Epub 2008
Dec 18.

Sonic hedgehog-responsive genes in the fetal prostate.

Yu M(1), Gipp J, Yoon JW, Iannaccone P, Walterhouse D, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Molecular and Environmental Toxicology
Center, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an important role in prostate
development and appears to play an equally important role in promoting growth of 
advanced prostate cancer. During prostate development, epithelial cells in the
urogenital sinus (UGS) express Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and secrete Shh peptide. The 
secreted Hh peptide acts on adjacent mesenchymal cells to activate the Hh signal 
transduction pathway and elicit paracrine effects on epithelial proliferation and
differentiation. To identify mesenchymal targets of Shh signaling, we performed
microarray analysis on a Shh-responsive, immortalized urogential sinus
mesenchymal cell line. We found 68 genes that were up-regulated by Shh and 21
genes that were down-regulated. Eighteen of those were selected for further study
with Ptc1 and Gli1 serving as reference controls. We found 10 of 18 were also
Hh-regulated in primary UGS mesenchymal cells and 13 of 18 in the cultured UGS.
Seven of 18 exhibited Shh-regulated expression in both assays (Igfbp-6, Igfbp-3, 
Fbn2, Ntrk3, Agpt4, Dmp1, and Mmp13). Three of the 18 genes contained putative
Gli binding motifs that bound Gli1 peptide in electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. With the exception of Tiam1, target gene expression generally showed no
differences in the concentration dependence of ligand-induced expression, but we 
observed strikingly different responses to direct pathway activation by
transfection with activated Smo, Gli1, and Gli2.

PMCID: PMC2645820
PMID: 19095649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. HNO. 2009 Apr;57(4):345-50. doi: 10.1007/s00106-008-1842-7.

[Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling in keratocystic odontogenic tumors].

[Article in German]

Freier K(1), Pungs S, Flechtenmacher C, Hofele C.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Mund-, Kiefer- und Gesichtschirurgie, Universitätsklinikum
Heidelberg, Heidelberg. Kolja.Freier@med.uni-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Keratocystic odontogenic tumors are benign neoplasms of the
viscerocranium that occur sporadically as well as in association with
Gorlin-Goltz syndrome. Multiple basal cell carcinomas of the skin are another
typical feature of Gorlin-Goltz syndrome. Aberrant activation of sonic hedgehog
signaling has been reported for sporadic and hereditary basal cell carcinoma
caused by specific genetic mutations, but for keratocystic odontogenic tumors,
the role of aberrant sonic hedgehog signaling has not yet been evaluated in
detail.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, 131 keratocystic odontogenic tumors 
were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for the expression of sonic hedgehog
signaling proteins SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, and NMYC on tissue microarray sections.
RESULTS: High expression of the analyzed proteins-between 67.3% (PTCH1) and 92.9%
(SHH)-was found in the epithelial compartment of the keratocystic odontogenic
tumors analyzed. In the stromal compartment of the tumors, high expression of the
target proteins was found significantly less frequently (all p-values <0.001).
CONCLUSION: Aberrant sonic hedgehog signaling is critically involved in the
molecular pathogenesis of keratocystic odontogenic tumors. This finding
underlines the neoplastic character of this intraosseous lesion. Because of high 
recurrence rates after local excision, more radical surgical approaches are
recommended for treating keratocystic odontogenic tumors.

PMID: 19082818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Dermatol Sci. 2009 Apr;54(1):52-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2008.10.006. Epub
2008 Dec 9.

Tacrolimus causes reduced GLI1 expression and phenotypic changes in the TE 354.T 
basal cell carcinoma cell line.

Di Gennaro P, Sestini R, Bacci S, Pacini A, Pinzani P, Domenici L, Toscano A,
Massi D, Carli P, Genuardi M, Romagnoli P.

PMID: 19081230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Pancreatology. 2009;9(1-2):116-26. doi: 10.1159/000178882. Epub 2008 Dec 13.

The expression pattern of PDX-1, SHH, Patched and Gli-1 is associated with
pathological and clinical features in human pancreatic cancer.

Quint K(1), Stintzing S, Alinger B, Hauser-Kronberger C, Dietze O, Gahr S, Hahn
EG, Ocker M, Neureiter D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine 1, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Pancreatic cancer cells have been shown to possess
stem-cell-like properties, especially by reactivating embryonic transcription
factors involved in tissue differentiation. We therefore investigated if and to
what extent developmental genes of the human pancreas are expressed in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinomas and precursor lesions, pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanIN), and if this correlates or predicts response to treatment and
overall survival.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Invasive ductal adenocarcinomas of the pancreas [UICC
pT3pN0 (n = 13) vs. pT3pN1 (n = 25)] and tumors after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
[5-fluorouracil (FU)/folic-acid and gemcitabine; UICC ypN0 (n = 7) vs. ypN1 (n = 
6)] resected between 1997 and 2003 were characterized histochemically and
immunohistochemically [pancreas duodenum homeobox 1 (PDX-1), Sonic hedgehog
protein (SHH), Patched (Ptc) and Gli-1]. Gene distribution was compared with
morphological patterns of the pancreatic carcinoma and PanIN as well as with
peritumorous reactions of normal pancreas.
RESULTS: The overall expression of PDX-1, SHH, Ptc and Gli-1 was low, but showed 
a distinctive and topographic linkage inside pancreatic carcinomas as well as
inside PanINs. Additionally, a topographic and significant association of these
markers with nodal status (PDX-1, Ptc, Gli-1), tumor size (PDX-1, Gli-1) and R
status (PDX-1) was found. After stratification with the strongest outcome
predictor, grading, survival analysis revealed that Ptc expression in grade 2 and
PDX-1 expression in grade 3 carcinomas are independent survival factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Markers of pancreas development are reexpressed in invasive ductal
adenocarcinomas and their expression is essentially associated with general
clinical and pathological features such as survival or nodal status.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel and IAP.

PMID: 19077462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1928-36. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0142.

Hedgehog-induced survival of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells in a
stromal cell microenvironment: a potential new therapeutic target.

Hegde GV(1), Peterson KJ, Emanuel K, Mittal AK, Joshi AD, Dickinson JD,
Kollessery GJ, Bociek RG, Bierman P, Vose JM, Weisenburger DD, Joshi SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6395, USA.

B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is characterized by an accumulation
of neoplastic B cells due to their resistance to apoptosis and increased
survival. Among various factors, the tumor microenvironment is known to play a
role in the regulation of cell proliferation and survival of many cancers.
However, it remains unclear how the tumor microenvironment contributes to the
increased survival of B-CLL cells. Therefore, we studied the influence of bone
marrow stromal cell-induced hedgehog (Hh) signaling on the survival of B-CLL
cells. Our results show that a Hh signaling inhibitor, cyclopamine, inhibits bone
marrow stromal cell-induced survival of B-CLL cells, suggesting a role for Hh
signaling in the survival of B-CLL cells. Furthermore, gene expression profiling 
of primary B-CLL cells (n = 48) indicates that the expression of Hh signaling
molecules, such as GLI1, GLI2, SUFU, and BCL2, is significantly increased and
correlates with disease progression of B-CLL patients with clinical outcome. In
addition, SUFU and GLI1 transcripts, as determined by real-time PCR, are
significantly overexpressed and correlate with adverse indicators of clinical
outcome in B-CLL patients, such as cytogenetics or CD38 expression. Furthermore, 
selective down-regulation of GLI1 by antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (GLI1-ASO)
results in decreased BCL2 expression and cell survival, suggesting that GLI1 may 
regulate BCL2 and, thereby, modulate cell survival in B-CLL. In addition, there
was significantly increased apoptosis of B-CLL cells when cultured in the
presence of GLI1-ASO and fludarabine. Together, these results reveal that Hh
signaling is important in the pathogenesis of B-CLL and, hence, may be a
potential therapeutic target.

PMID: 19074837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS Med. 2008 Dec 9;5(12):e239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050239.

Analysis of germline GLI1 variation implicates hedgehog signalling in the
regulation of intestinal inflammatory pathways.

Lees CW(1), Zacharias WJ, Tremelling M, Noble CL, Nimmo ER, Tenesa A, Cornelius
J, Torkvist L, Kao J, Farrington S, Drummond HE, Ho GT, Arnott ID, Appelman HD,
Diehl L, Campbell H, Dunlop MG, Parkes M, Howie SE, Gumucio DL, Satsangi J.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Molecular Medicine Centre, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) are polygenic
chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) of high prevalence that are associated 
with considerable morbidity. The hedgehog (HH) signalling pathway, which includes
the transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), plays vital
roles in gastrointestinal tract development, homeostasis, and malignancy. We
identified a germline variation in GLI1 (within the IBD2 linkage region, 12q13)
in patients with IBD. Since this IBD-associated variant encodes a GLI1 protein
with reduced function and our expression studies demonstrated down-regulation of 
the HH response in IBD, we tested whether mice with reduced Gli1 activity
demonstrate increased susceptibility to chemically induced colitis.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Using a gene-wide haplotype-tagging approach, germline GLI1
variation was examined in three independent populations of IBD patients and
healthy controls from Northern Europe (Scotland, England, and Sweden) totalling
over 5,000 individuals. On log-likelihood analysis, GLI1 was associated with IBD,
predominantly UC, in Scotland and England (p < 0.0001). A nonsynonymous SNP
(rs2228226C-->G), in exon 12 of GLI1 (Q1100E) was strongly implicated, with
pooled odds ratio of 1.194 (confidence interval = 1.09-1.31, p = 0.0002). GLI1
variants were tested in vitro for transcriptional activity in luciferase assays. 
Q1100E falls within a conserved motif near the C terminus of GLI1; the variant
GLI protein exhibited reduced transactivation function in vitro. In complementary
expression studies, we noted the colonic HH response, including GLI1, patched
(PTCH), and hedgehog-interacting protein (HHIP), to be down-regulated in patients
with UC. Finally, Gli1(+/lacZ) mice were tested for susceptibility to dextran
sodium sulphate (DSS)-induced colitis. Clinical response, histology, and
expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines were recorded. Gli1(+/lacZ)
mice rapidly developed severe intestinal inflammation, with considerable
morbidity and mortality compared with wild type. Local myeloid cells were shown
to be direct targets of HH signals and cytokine expression studies revealed
robust up-regulation of IL-12, IL-17, and IL-23 in this model.
CONCLUSIONS: HH signalling through GLI1 is required for appropriate modulation of
the intestinal response to acute inflammatory challenge. Reduced GLI1 function
predisposes to a heightened myeloid response to inflammatory stimuli, potentially
leading to IBD.

PMCID: PMC2596854
PMID: 19071955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 1;326(1):143-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.006. Epub 2008
Nov 20.

A dynamic Gli code interprets Hh signals to regulate induction, patterning, and
endocrine cell specification in the zebrafish pituitary.

Devine CA(1), Sbrogna JL, Guner B, Osgood M, Shen MC, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is necessary for the induction and functional patterning 
of the pituitary placode, however the mechanisms by which Hh signals are
interpreted by placodal cells are unknown. Here we show distinct temporal
requirements for Hh signaling in endocrine cell differentiation and describe a
dynamic Gli transcriptional response code that interprets these Hh signals within
the developing adenohypophysis. Gli1 is required for the differentiation of
selected endocrine cell types and acts as the major activator of Hh-mediated
pituitary induction, while Gli2a and Gli2b contribute more minor activator
functions. Intriguingly, this Gli response code changes as development proceeds. 
Gli1 continues to be required for the activation of the Hh response anteriorly in
the pars distalis. In contrast, Gli2b is required to repress Hh target gene
expression posteriorly in the pars intermedia. Consistent with these changing
roles, gli1, gli2a, and gli2b, but not gli3, are expressed in pituitary precursor
cells at the anterior neural ridge. Later in development, gli1 expression is
maintained throughout the adenohypophysis while gli2a and gli2b expression are
restricted to the pars intermedia. Given the link between Hh signaling and
pituitary adenomas in humans, our data suggest misregulation of Gli function may 
contribute to these common pituitary tumors.

PMID: 19056374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jan;30(1):131-40. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn230. Epub 2008 Nov 
20.

Aberrant activation of hedgehog signaling pathway in ovarian cancers: effect on
prognosis, cell invasion and differentiation.

Liao X(1), Siu MK, Au CW, Wong ES, Chan HY, Ip PP, Ngan HY, Cheung AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

Aberrant activation of hedgehog (HH) pathway has been implicated in the
development of human malignancies. This study aimed at investigating the role of 
HH molecules in human ovarian carcinogenesis. The expression profiles of HH
molecules were examined in ovarian tumor samples and ovarian cancer cell lines
and the in vitro effects of HH molecules on cell proliferation, apoptosis,
migration, invasion and cell differentiation as well as related downstream target
genes were assessed. Overexpression of Patched and Gli1 protein in ovarian
cancers correlated with poor survival of the patients (P = 0.008; P = 0.004).
Significantly elevated expression of Sonic hedgehog messenger RNA was observed in
ovarian cancers compared with normal tissues and benign ovarian tumors and such
differential expression was specific to histological types (P < 0.05). Ectopic
Gli1 overexpression in ovarian cancer cells conferred increased cell
proliferation, cell mobility, invasiveness and change in differentiation in
association with increased expression of E-cadherin, vimentin, Bcl-2, caspases as
well as beta1 integrin, membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Treatment with
3-keto-N-(aminoethyl-aminocaproyl-dihydrocinnamoyl)-cyclopamine induced cancer
cell apoptosis, suppressed cell growth, mobility and invasiveness and induced
cancer cell dedifferentiation with decreased expression of E-cadherin,
cytokeratin 7, Snail, calretinin, vimentin, Bcl-2, caspases, beta1 integrin,
MT1-MMP and VEGF. Our data suggested that abnormal HH signaling activation plays 
important roles in the development and progression of ovarian cancers. Gli1
expression is an independent prognostic marker. Inhibition of the HH pathway
molecules might be a valid therapeutic strategy for ovarian cancers.

PMID: 19028702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Dec;22(6):787-92.

Characteristic overexpression of the forkhead box transcription factor Foxf1 in
Patched-associated tumors.

Wendling DS(1), Lück C, von Schweinitz D, Kappler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany.

Patients with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome carry germline mutations in
the tumor suppressor gene Patched 1 (PTCH1) and are predisposed to develop basal 
cell carcinoma (BCC), medulloblastoma (MB), and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). These
tumors are also present in the murine model for Ptch1 deficiency, the
Ptch1neo67/+ mouse. Previous studies, including those from our laboratory, have
shown that the forkhead box transcription factor Foxf1 is highly expressed in RMS
of human and murine origin. We report on a more common role of Foxf1 in
Ptch1-associated tumorigenesis, since we found a striking up-regulation of Foxf1 
expression in Ptch1-associated BCC and MB compared with the respective
non-neoplastic tissue. This overexpression was accompanied by increased levels of
the Hedgehog target gene Gli1 as well as the putative Foxf1 targets Bmi1 and
Notch2 in these tumors. We also describe a striking Foxf1 activation in Ptch1
null embryos. In contrast, basal expression levels of Foxf1, Gli1, Bmi1 and
Notch2 were detected in a variety of adult mouse tissues, such as liver, kidney, 
spleen, lung, heart and brain. In conclusion, our study suggests that Foxf1
expression is characteristically up-regulated in tumors with a constitutively
activated Hedgehog signaling pathway thereby defining a key role for Foxf1 in
Hedgehog-associated tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19020777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 23;284(4):2150-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803235200. Epub 2008
Nov 17.

Protein kinase Cdelta negatively regulates hedgehog signaling by inhibition of
Gli1 activity.

Cai Q(1), Li J, Gao T, Xie J, Evers BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology, The University of
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-0536, USA.

Constitutive activation of the hedgehog pathway is implicated in the development 
of many human malignancies; hedgehog targets, PTCH1 and Gli1, are markers of
hedgehog signaling activation and are expressed in most hedgehog-associated
tumors. Protein kinase Cdelta (PKCdelta) generally slows proliferation and
induces cell cycle arrest of various cell lines. In this study, we show that
activated PKCdelta (wild-type PKCdelta stimulated by phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate or constitutively active PKCdelta) decreased Gli-luciferase reporter
activity in NIH/3T3 cells, as well as the endogenous hedgehog-responsive gene
PTCH1. In human hepatoma (i.e. Hep3B) cells, wild-type PKCdelta and
constitutively active PKCdelta decreased the expression levels of endogenous Gli1
and PTCH1. In contrast, PKCdelta siRNA increased the expression levels of these
target genes. Silencing of PKCdelta by siRNA rescued the inhibition of cell
growth by KAAD-cyclopamine, an antagonist of hedgehog signaling element
Smoothened, suggesting that PKCdelta acts downstream of Smoothened. The
biological relevance of our study is shown in hepatocellular carcinoma where we
found that hepatocellular carcinoma with detectable hedgehog signaling had weak
or no detectable expression of PKCdelta, whereas PKCdelta highly expressing
tumors had no detectable hedgehog signaling. Our results demonstrate that
PKCdelta alters hedgehog signaling by inhibition of Gli protein transcriptional
activity. Furthermore, our findings suggest that, in certain cancers, PKCdelta
plays a role as a negative regulator of tumorigenesis by regulating hedgehog
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2629106
PMID: 19015273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cancer Lett. 2009 Jan 18;273(2):266-72. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.08.028. Epub
2008 Nov 11.

Cathepsin B is a target of Hedgehog signaling in pancreatic cancer.

Hwang JH(1), Lee SH, Lee KH, Lee KY, Kim H, Ryu JK, Yoon YB, Kim YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, 28 Yungon-dong Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-744,
Republic of Korea.

This study investigated the influence of cathepsin B (CATB), a downstream target 
of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, in pancreatic cancer. Cyclopamine (Hh signal
inhibitor) suppressed expression of Shh, as well as Hh-induced transcription
factor Gli1, and induced apoptosis in Shh-positive pancreatic cancer cell line
(PANC-1). Microarray analysis revealed CATB as a gene downregulated by Hh.
Cyclopamine reduced CATB protein and mRNA levels. Cyclopamine or CATB inhibitor
reduced PANC-1 cell invasiveness (P<0.05). CATB expression in human pancreatic
cancer tissues tended to correlate with Shh expression (P=0.053). Conclusively,
Hh targets CATB and Hh signaling through CATB might influence pancreatic cancer
cell invasiveness.

PMID: 19004543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2009 Jan 29;28(4):492-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.403. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Hedgehog signaling promotes the degradation of tumor suppressor Sufu through the 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Yue S(1), Chen Y, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu, PR
China.

Sustained Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway activity is associated with tumorigenesis 
in a wide variety of tissues. Mutational inactivation of Shh receptor Patched
(Ptch) and a downstream gene Suppressor of fused (Sufu), both of which are
negative regulators of the pathway, increases susceptibility to cerebellum cancer
in humans and mice. Sufu is a binding partner of Shh pathway transcription factor
Gli. Recent data indicate that inactivation of Sufu, through either gene
targeting in mice or RNAi-mediated silencing in cultured fibroblasts, is
sufficient to turn on Shh target gene expression. Here, we report that Sufu is
degraded rapidly in certain cancer cells and we show that Shh signaling promotes 
ubiquitination of Sufu, which leads to its destruction in the proteasomes. We
identified an ubiquitin attachment site on K257 of Sufu, and showed that
Sufu-K257R mutant is more potent as a transcription repressor and cell growth
inhibitor because of increased stability. These results indicate that Shh
signaling regulates Sufu activity by inducing its turnover via the
ubiquitin-proteasome system.

PMID: 18997815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Ann Neurol. 2008 Oct;64(4):417-27. doi: 10.1002/ana.21457.

Paradoxical dysregulation of the neural stem cell pathway sonic hedgehog-Gli1 in 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis.

Wang Y(1), Imitola J, Rasmussen S, O'Connor KC, Khoury SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Neurovascular niches have been proposed as critical components of the 
neural stem cell (NSC) response to acute central nervous system injury; however, 
it is unclear whether these potential reparative niches remain functional during 
chronic injury. Here, we asked how central nervous system inflammatory injury
regulates the intrinsic properties of NSCs and their niches.
METHODS: We investigated the sonic hedgehog (Shh)-Gli1 pathway, an important
signaling pathway for NSCs, in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE)
and multiple sclerosis (MS), and its regulation by inflammatory cytokines.
RESULTS: We show that Shh is markedly upregulated by reactive and perivascular
astroglia in areas of injury in MS lesions and during EAE. Astroglia outside the 
subventricular zone niche can support NSC differentiation toward neurons and
oligodendrocytes, and Shh is a critical mediator of this effect. Shh induces
differential upregulation of the transcription factor Gli1, which mediates
Shh-induced NSC differentiation. However, despite the increase in Shh and the
fact that Gli1 was initially increased during early inflammation of EAE and
active lesions of MS, Gli1 was significantly decreased in spinal cord
oligodendrocyte precursor cells after onset of EAE, and in chronic active and
inactive lesions from MS brain. The Th1 cytokine interferon-gamma was unique in
inducing Shh expression in astroglia and NSCs, while paradoxically suppressing
Gli1 expression in NSCs and inhibiting Shh-mediated NSC differentiation.
INTERPRETATION: Our data suggest that endogenous repair potential during chronic 
injury appears to be limited by inflammation-induced alterations in intrinsic NSC
molecular pathways such as Gli1.

PMCID: PMC2757750
PMID: 18991353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Cell Biol. 2008 Nov 3;183(3):385-91. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200804042. Epub 2008 Oct 
27.

Sonic Hedgehog signaling impairs ionizing radiation-induced checkpoint activation
and induces genomic instability.

Leonard JM(1), Ye H, Wetmore C, Karnitz LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathway plays important roles in embryogenesis, stem
cell maintenance, tissue repair, and tumorigenesis. Haploinsufficiency of
Patched-1, a gene that encodes a repressor of the Shh pathway, dysregulates the
Shh pathway and increases genomic instability and the development of spontaneous 
and ionizing radiation (IR)-induced tumors by an unknown mechanism. Here we show 
that Ptc1(+/-) mice have a defect in the IR-induced activation of the ATR-Chk1
checkpoint signaling pathway. Likewise, transient expression of Gli1, a
downstream target of Shh signaling, disrupts Chk1 activation in human cells by
preventing the interaction of Chk1 with Claspin, a Chk1 adaptor protein that is
required for Chk1 activation. These results suggest that inappropriate Shh
pathway activation promotes tumorigenesis by disabling a key signaling pathway
that helps maintain genomic stability and inhibits tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2575780
PMID: 18955550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jan 1;124(1):109-19. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23929.

Defining a role for Sonic hedgehog pathway activation in desmoplastic
medulloblastoma by identifying GLI1 target genes.

Yoon JW(1), Gilbertson R, Iannaccone S, Iannaccone P, Walterhouse D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

A subgroup of medulloblastomas shows constitutive activation of the Sonic
hedgehog pathway with expression of GLI1. We identified the subset of GLI1
transforming target genes specifically expressed in medulloblastomas by comparing
GLI1 targets in RK3E cells transformed by GLI1 with the gene expression profile
of Sonic hedgehog signature medulloblastomas. We identified 1,823 genes whose
expression was altered more than 2-fold in 2 independent RK3E + GLI1 cell lines. 
We identified 25 whose expression was altered similarly in medulloblastomas
expressing GLI1. We identified potential GLI binding elements in the regulatory
regions of 10 of these genes, confirmed that GLI1 binds the regulatory regions
and activates transcription of select genes, and showed that GLI1 directly
represses transcription of Krox-20. We identified upregulation of CXCR4, a
chemokine receptor that plays roles in the proliferation and migration of granule
cell neuron precursors during development, supporting the concept that
reinitiation of developmental programs may contribute to medulloblastoma
tumorigenesis. In addition, the targets suggest a pathway through which GLI1 may 
ultimately affect medulloblastoma cell proliferation, survival and genomic
stability by converging on p53, SGK1, MGMT and NTRK2. We identify a p53 mutation 
in RK3E + GLI1 cells, suggesting that p53 mutations may sometimes shift the
balance toward dysregulated tumor cell survival.

PMCID: PMC3889649
PMID: 18924150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):258-63. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.067926. Epub 2008
Oct 8.

Identification of Hedgehog signaling outcomes in mouse testis development using a
hanging drop-culture system.

Szczepny A(1), Hogarth CA, Young J, Loveland KL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria
3168, Australia.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway affects fetal testis growth. Recently, we
described the dynamic cellular production of Hh signaling pathway components in
juvenile and adult rodent testes. The Hh signaling is understood to regulate cord
formation in the fetal testis, but minimal knowledge exists regarding how Hh
signaling impacts the postnatal testis. To investigate this, we employed hanging 
drop cultures, which are used routinely in embryoid body formation. This approach
has the advantage of using small media volume, and we examined its suitability
for short-term culture of both murine embryonic gonads and adult testis tubules. 
The effects of cyclopamine, a specific Hh signaling inhibitor, were examined
following culture of Embryonic Day 11.5 urogenital ridges (as control) and adult 
seminiferous tubule fragments for 24-48 h using histological, cell proliferation,
and gene expression analyses. Cultured embryonic testes displayed generally
normal cord structure, anti-Müllerian hormone (Amh) expression, and cell
proliferation; known Hh target gene expression (Gli1, osteopontin, official
symbol Spp1, and Amh) was altered in response to cyclopamine. Cultured adult
tubules exhibited some loss of seminiferous epithelium organization over 48 h.
Spermatogonia continued to proliferate, however, and no significant loss of
viability was noted overall. Addition of cyclopamine significantly affected
levels of Gli1, Igfbp6, Ccnd2 (cyclin D2), Ccnb1 (cyclin B1), Spp1, Kit, and Amh 
mRNAs; these genes have been shown previously to be expressed in Sertoli and germ
cells. These novel results identify Hh target genes in the testis and demonstrate
this signaling pathway likely affects cell survival and differentiation in the
context of normal adult testis.

PMCID: PMC2848731
PMID: 18843087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Nov 1;16(21):9420-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2008.09.053. Epub
2008 Sep 24.

Hedgehog/GLI-mediated transcriptional inhibitors from Zizyphus cambodiana.

Arai MA(1), Tateno C, Hosoya T, Koyano T, Kowithayakorn T, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, 
Japan.

The aberrant hedgehog (Hh)/GLI signaling pathway causes the formation and
progression of a variety of tumors. By screening tropical plant extracts by using
our screening system, Zizyphus cambodiana was found to include Hh/GLI signaling
inhibitors. Bioassay-guided fractionation of this plant extract led to the
isolation of three active pentacyclic triterpenes, colubrinic acid (1), betulinic
acid (2) and alphitolic acid (3), as potent inhibitors. The inhibition of
GLI-related protein expression with 1 or 2 was observed in HaCaT cells with
exogenous GLI1, or human pancreatic cancer cells (PANC1), which express Hh/GLI
components aberrantly. The expressions of GLI-related proteins PTCH and BCL2 were
clearly inhibited by 1 or 2. We also examined the cytotoxicity of these active
compounds against PANC1, human prostate cancer cells (DU145) and mouse embryo
fibroblast cells (C3H10T1/2). The cytotoxicity against cancer cells (PANC1 and
DU145) by 1 or 2 would be caused by inhibition of the expression of the
anti-apoptosis protein BCL2. These pentacyclic triterpene inhibitors showed an
important relationship between Hh/GLI signaling inhibition, the decrease of BCL2,
and cytotoxicity against cancer cells.

PMID: 18842418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Cell. 2008 Oct 7;14(4):281-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.09.007.

Therapeutic inhibition of Hedgehog-GLI signaling in cancer: epithelial, stromal, 
or stem cell targets?

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland. ariel.ruizaltaba@unige.ch

Hedgehog (HH)-GLI signaling is a developmental patterning pathway used by many
tumors for bulk proliferation that has been shown also to regulate cancer stem
cell self-renewal and survival. Surprisingly, a recent study by Yauch et al.
(2008) proposes that HH-GLI signaling acts only on the tumor stroma. The mode of 
action of HH-GLI signaling in cancer may shape the development of therapeutic
antagonists.

PMID: 18835029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;68(19):7723-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6661.

SCL/TAL1 interrupting locus derepresses GLI1 from the negative control of
suppressor-of-fused in pancreatic cancer cell.

Kasai K(1), Inaguma S, Yoneyama A, Yoshikawa K, Ikeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Promoting Center for Clinical Research, Aichi
Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.
kkasai@amugw.aichi-med-u.ac.jp

As a physically binding protein of GLI1 transcription factor, Suppressor-of-Fused
(SUFU) has been placed in the center of negative regulation of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling. SUFU tethers GLI1 in cytoplasm, and in some circumstances, it moves
into the nucleus in association with GLI1, leading to the suppression of GLI1
target gene expression by recruiting a corepressor complex. The activated
transcriptional function of GLI1 is important for cellular proliferation in a
variety of human cancers. However, it has not been revealed how GLI1 is
derepressed from SUFU-mediated suppression. Here, we show SCL/TAL1 interrupting
locus (SIL) product, a cytoplasmic protein overexpressed in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA), is responsible for the derepression of GLI1. We found SIL
associated with the carboxyl terminus of SUFU, one of two distinct GLI1-binding
domains, and this association was responsible for cytoplasmic tethering of SUFU. 
Overexpressed SIL attenuated SUFU-mediated cytoplasmic tethering and target gene 
suppression of GLI1. Knockdown of SIL in PDA cells conversely induced the nuclear
accumulation of SUFU in association with GLI1 and the transcriptional suppression
of GLI1 target genes. Importantly, we also showed that oncogenic K-RAS, and not
Sonic hedgehog, enhanced the SIL association with the amino-terminus of SUFU, the
other GLI1-binding domain that led to further increase of nuclear translocation
of GLI1. These results uncover the role of SIL in derepressing GLI1 from the
negative control of SUFU, which is a crucial step for activating Hh signaling in 
cancer cells.

PMID: 18829525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int J Oncol. 2008 Oct;33(4):881-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on GLI2: mechanism of Hedgehog priming through basal
GLI2 expression, and interaction map of stem cell signaling network with P53.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Hedgehog-binding to Patched family receptors results in Smoothened-mediated
activation of MAP3K10 (MST) and inactivation of SUFU. MAP3K10-induced DYRK2
phosphorylation combined with SUFU inhibition results in the stabilization and
nuclear accumulation of GLI2 for transcriptional activation of GLI1, CCND1,
CCND2, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXP3, FOXQ1, RUNX2, and JAG2. Here, integrative genomic
analyses on GLI2 orthologs were carried out. Rat Gli2 complete coding sequence
was determined by assembling nucleotide sequences of exons 1, 2, and 5'-truncated
rat Gli2 RefSeq (NM_001107169.1). GLI2 orthologs were more related to GLI3
orthologs than to GLI1 orthologs lacking the N-terminal repressor domain.
betaTRCP1 (FBXW1)-binding DSYxxxS motif was conserved in GLI2 and GLI3 orthologs,
while betaTRCP2 (FBXW11)-binding DSGxxxxxxxxxS motif in GLI2 and GLI1 orthologs. 
Human GLI2 mRNA was expressed in ES cells, NT2 cells, fetal lung, fetal heart,
regenerating liver, gastric cancer, and other tumors. Mouse Gli2 mRNA was
expressed in unfertilized egg, ES cells, and EG cells. Tandem RRRCWWGYYY motifs
for P53, P63 or P73, and also four conserved bHLH-binding sites were identified
within GLI2 proximal promoter region. Interaction map of P53 and stem cell
signaling network were then constructed. P53-induced NOTCH1 upregulation leads to
HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 or HEYL upregulation for the repression of tissue specific
bHLH transcriptional activators. DYRK2 functions as a positive regulator of
P53-mediated apoptosis, and also as a negative regulator of the Hedgehog
signaling cascade. GLI2 expression is regulated based on the balance of P53,
Notch, and TGF-beta signaling, and Hedgehog signaling activation results in cell 
survival and proliferation due to transcriptional activation of Hedgehog-target
genes, and also partly due to perturbation of P53-mediated transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 18813803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Sep;7(9):2725-35. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0573.

An orally bioavailable small-molecule inhibitor of Hedgehog signaling inhibits
tumor initiation and metastasis in pancreatic cancer.

Feldmann G(1), Fendrich V, McGovern K, Bedja D, Bisht S, Alvarez H, Koorstra JB, 
Habbe N, Karikari C, Mullendore M, Gabrielson KL, Sharma R, Matsui W, Maitra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, CRB2,
Room 316, 1550 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. gfeldma4@jhmi.edu

Recent evidence suggests that blockade of aberrant Hedgehog signaling can be
exploited as a therapeutic strategy for pancreatic cancer. Our previous studies
using the prototype Hedgehog small-molecule antagonist cyclopamine had shown the 
striking inhibition of systemic metastases on Hedgehog blockade in spontaneously 
metastatic orthotopic xenograft models. Cyclopamine is a natural compound with
suboptimal pharmacokinetics, which impedes clinical translation. In the present
study, a novel, orally bioavailable small-molecule Hedgehog inhibitor,
IPI-269609, was tested using in vitro and in vivo model systems. In vitro
treatment of pancreatic cancer cell lines with IPI-269609 resembled effects
observed using cyclopamine (i.e., Gli-responsive reporter knockdown,
down-regulation of the Hedgehog target genes Gli1 and Ptch, as well as abrogation
of cell migration and colony formation in soft agar). Single-agent IPI-269609
profoundly inhibited systemic metastases in orthotopic xenografts established
from human pancreatic cancer cell lines, although Hedgehog blockade had minimal
effect on primary tumor volume. The only discernible phenotype observed within
the treated primary tumor was a significant reduction in the population of
aldehyde dehydrogenase-bright cells, which we have previously identified as a
clonogenic tumor-initiating population in pancreatic cancer. Selective ex vivo
depletion of aldehyde dehydrogenase-bright cells with IPI-269609 was accompanied 
by significant reduction in tumor engraftment rates in athymic mice.
Pharmacologic blockade of aberrant Hedgehog signaling might prove to be an
effective therapeutic strategy for inhibition of systemic metastases in
pancreatic cancer, likely through targeting subsets of cancer cells with
tumor-initiating ("cancer stem cell") properties.

PMCID: PMC2605523
PMID: 18790753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. BMC Cell Biol. 2008 Sep 13;9:49. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-9-49.

Establishment and characterization of immortalized Gli-null mouse embryonic
fibroblast cell lines.

Lipinski RJ(1), Bijlsma MF, Gipp JJ, Podhaizer DJ, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. lipinski@surgery.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is a conserved morphogenetic pathway which
plays critical roles in embryonic development, with emerging evidence also
supporting a role in healing and repair processes and tumorigenesis. The Gli
family of transcription factors (Gli1, 2 and 3) mediate the Hedgehog
morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of downstream target genes. We 
previously characterized the individual and cooperative roles of the Gli proteins
in Hh target gene regulation using a battery of primary embryonic fibroblasts
from Gli null mice.
RESULTS: Here, we describe the establishment of spontaneously immortalized mouse 
embryonic fibroblast (iMEF) cell lines lacking single and multiple Gli genes.
These non-clonal cell lines recapitulate the unique ligand mediated
transcriptional response of primary MEFs. While loss of Gli1 had no effect on
target gene induction, Gli2 null cells demonstrated reduced target gene induction
while Gli3 null cells exhibited elevated basal and ligand-induced expression.
Target gene response in Gli1-/-2-/-iMEFs was severely reduced while
Gli2-/-3-/-iMEFs were incapable of ligand-induced transcriptional response.
However, we found that both Gli1-/-2-/- and Gli2-/-3-/-iMEFs exhibited robust
leukotriene synthesis-dependent migration responses to Hh ligand, demonstrating
that this response is not transcriptionally-dependent.
CONCLUSION: This study provides fundamental characterizations of the
transcriptional and non-transcriptional Hh responsiveness of a battery of
Gli-null iMEFs. Moving forward, these cell lines should prove a valuable tool set
to study the unique functional regulation of the Gli proteins in a Hh-responsive 
cell-type.

PMCID: PMC2542994
PMID: 18789160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Carcinog. 2009 May;48(5):408-19. doi: 10.1002/mc.20479.

Tumor suppressor gene co-operativity in compound Patched1 and suppressor of fused
heterozygous mutant mice.

Svärd J(1), Rozell B, Toftgård R, Teglund S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden.

Dysregulation of the Hedgehog signaling pathway is central to the development of 
certain tumor types, including medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma (BCC).
Patched1 (Ptch1) and Suppressor of fused (Sufu) are two essential negative
regulators of the pathway with tumor suppressor activity. Ptch1(+/-) mice are
predisposed to developing medulloblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma, while Sufu(+/-)
mice develop a skin phenotype characterized by basaloid epidermal proliferations.
Here, we have studied tumor development in Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice to determine 
the effect of compound heterozygosity on the onset, incidence, and spectrum of
tumors. We found significantly more (2.3-fold) basaloid proliferations in
Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) compared to Sufu(+/-) female, but not male, mice. For
medulloblastoma, the cumulative 1-yr incidence was 1.5-fold higher in
Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) compared to Ptch1(+/-) female mice but this strong trend was 
not statistically significant. Together this suggests a weak genetic interaction 
of the two tumor suppressor genes. We noted a few rhabdomyosarcomas and
pancreatic cysts in the Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice, but the numbers were not
significantly different from the single heterozygous mice. Hydrocephalus
developed in approximately 20% of the Ptch1(+/-) and Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) but not 
in Sufu(+/-) mice. Interestingly, most of the medulloblastomas from the
Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice had lost expression of the remaining Ptch1 wild-type
allele but not the Sufu wild-type allele. On the contrary, Sufu as well as Gli1
and Gli2 expression was upregulated in the medulloblastomas compared to adult
cerebellum in Ptch1(+/-) and Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice. This suggests that Sufu
expression may be regulated by Hedgehog pathway activity and could constitute
another negative feedback loop in the pathway.

PMCID: PMC2674531
PMID: 18781608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Neurobiol Dis. 2008 Nov;32(2):273-80. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.07.011. Epub 2008
Jul 29.

Niaspan treatment improves neurological functional recovery in experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis mice.

Zhang J(1), Chen J, Li Y, Cui X, Zheng X, Roberts C, Lu M, Elias SB, Chopp M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

We investigated the treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) 
in mice with Niaspan, an agent used to elevate high-density lipoprotein (HDL).
EAE mice were treated with Niaspan starting on the immunization or clinical onset
day. Neurological functional recovery was significantly increased in the Niaspan 
treated mice (100 mg/kgbw) compared to the controls. Inflammatory infiltrates
were significantly reduced in the Niaspan treatment group compared to the EAE
controls. HDL level, intact myelin area, newly formed oligodendrocytes,
regenerating axons, gene and protein levels of sonic hedgehog (Shh)/Gli1 were
significantly increased in the Niaspan treated mice compared to EAE controls.
These data indicate that Niaspan treatment improved functional recovery after
EAE, possibly, via reducing inflammatory infiltrates and demyelination areas, and
stimulating oligodendrogenesis and axonal regeneration. Niaspan-mediated
activation of Shh/Gli1 pathway may promote functional recovery post-EAE.

PMCID: PMC2593648
PMID: 18778774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2008 Sep;40(9):819-29.

Down-regulation of Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway activity is involved in
5-fluorouracil-induced apoptosis and motility inhibition in Hep3B cells.

Wang Q(1), Huang S, Yang L, Zhao L, Yin Y, Liu Z, Chen Z, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China.

The Sonic hedgehog (SHh) pathway plays a critical role in normal embryogenesis
and carcinogenesis, but its function in cancer cells treated with 5-fluorouracil 
(5-FU) remains unknown. We examined the expression of a subset of SHh signaling
pathway genes, including SHh, SMO, PTC1, Su(Fu) and HIP in human hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cell lines, Hep3B and HepG2, treated with 5-FU by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Using trypan blue analysis,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated digoxigenin-dUTP nick-end labeling assay,
we also detected the apoptosis of Hep3B cells resulting from the transfection of 
pCS2-Gli1 expression vector combined with 5-FU treatment. The motility of the
cells was detected by scratch wound closure assay. The expression and subcellular
location of PTC1 protein in Hep3B cells treated by 5-FU were also investigated by
Western blot analysis and immunofluorescent microscopy. The results indicated
that the expression of SHh pathway target molecules at both messenger RNA and
protein levels are evidently down-regulated in Hep3B cells treated with 5-FU. The
overexpression of Gli1 restores cell viability and, to some extent, the migration
abilities inhibited by 5-FU. Furthermore, 5-FU treatment affects the subcellular 
localization of PTC1 protein, a key member in SHh signaling pathway. Our data
showed that the down-regulation of SHh signaling pathway activity was involved in
5-FU-induced apoptosis and the inhibition of motility in hedgehog-activated HCC
cell lines. This implies that the combination of SHh signaling pathway inhibitor 
and 5-FU-based chemotherapy might represent a more promising strategy against
HCC.

PMID: 18776995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. EMBO J. 2008 Oct 8;27(19):2616-27. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.172. Epub 2008 Aug 28.

Concerted microRNA control of Hedgehog signalling in cerebellar neuronal
progenitor and tumour cells.

Ferretti E(1), De Smaele E, Miele E, Laneve P, Po A, Pelloni M, Paganelli A, Di
Marcotullio L, Caffarelli E, Screpanti I, Bozzoni I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Roma, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are crucial post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression 
and control cell differentiation and proliferation. However, little is known
about their targeting of specific developmental pathways. Hedgehog (Hh)
signalling controls cerebellar granule cell progenitor development and a
subversion of this pathway leads to neoplastic transformation into
medulloblastoma (MB). Using a miRNA high-throughput profile screening, we
identify here a downregulated miRNA signature in human MBs with high Hh
signalling. Specifically, we identify miR-125b and miR-326 as suppressors of the 
pathway activator Smoothened together with miR-324-5p, which also targets the
downstream transcription factor Gli1. Downregulation of these miRNAs allows high 
levels of Hh-dependent gene expression leading to tumour cell proliferation.
Interestingly, the downregulation of miR-324-5p is genetically determined by
MB-associated deletion of chromosome 17p. We also report that whereas miRNA
expression is downregulated in cerebellar neuronal progenitors, it increases
alongside differentiation, thereby allowing cell maturation and growth
inhibition. These findings identify a novel regulatory circuitry of the Hh
signalling and suggest that misregulation of specific miRNAs, leading to its
aberrant activation, sustain cancer development.

PMCID: PMC2567402
PMID: 18756266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Mar;129(3):635-40. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.266. Epub 2008
Aug 28.

Lack of evidence for activation of the hedgehog pathway in psoriasis.

Gudjonsson JE(1), Aphale A, Grachtchouk M, Ding J, Nair RP, Wang T, Voorhees JJ, 
Dlugosz AA, Elder JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. johanng@med.umich.edu

Recent reports have suggested that the hedgehog (Hh) pathway is activated in
lesional psoriatic skin, and that treatment with the Hh pathway antagonist
cyclopamine may lead to rapid resolution of the disease. To assess Hh pathway
activity in psoriasis, we isolated RNA from lesional and uninvolved skin of 58
psoriatic patients, and from 63 normal control subjects, and subjected these
samples to global gene expression profiling on Affymetrix HU133 Plus 2.0 gene
arrays. We were especially interested in Hh target genes (PTCH1 and GLI1), whose 
expression is elevated in response to Hh signaling. The microarray data
demonstrated downregulation of PTCH1 expression in uninvolved and lesional skin
(1.1-fold and 2-fold, respectively; P<0.0001). Additionally GLI1 mRNA was
downregulated in lesional skin (1.7 fold; P<0.05). No significant changes were
observed between lesional and uninvolved skin for the Hh ligands or Smoothened.
Quantitative PCR confirmed these findings. In situ hybridization for GLI1 and
PTCH1 was positive in basal cell carcinoma tumor cells, but was negligible in
uninvolved or lesional psoriatic skin. The absence of elevated Hh target gene
expression in lesional psoriatic skin indicates that the Hh pathway is not
activated in this disease, raising questions regarding the proposed use of Hh
antagonists as antipsoriatic agents.

PMCID: PMC2771222
PMID: 18754037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Development. 2008 Sep;135(18):3137-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.020479.

Gsk3beta/PKA and Gli1 regulate the maintenance of neural progenitors at the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary in concert with E(Spl) factor activity.

Ninkovic J(1), Stigloher C, Lillesaar C, Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Department of Zebrafish Neurogenetics, Institute of Developmental Genetics,
Ingolstaedter Landstrasse 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

Neuronal production in the midbrain-hindbrain domain (MH) of the vertebrate
embryonic neural tube depends on a progenitor pool called the ;intervening zone' 
(IZ), located at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary. The progressive recruitment of 
IZ progenitors along the mediolateral (future dorsoventral) axis prefigures the
earlier maturation of the MH basal plate. It also correlates with a lower
sensitivity of medial versus lateral IZ progenitors to the neurogenesis
inhibition process that maintains the IZ pool. This role is performed in
zebrafish by the E(Spl) factors Her5 and Her11, but the molecular cascades
cooperating with Her5/11, and those accounting for their reduced effect in the
medial IZ, remain unknown. We demonstrate here that the kinases Gsk3beta and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) are novel determinants of IZ formation and 
cooperate with E(Spl) activity in a dose-dependent manner. Similar to E(Spl), we 
show that the activity of Gsk3beta/PKA is sensed differently by medial versus
lateral IZ progenitors. Furthermore, we identify the transcription factor Gli1,
expressed in medial IZ cells, as an antagonist of E(Spl) and Gsk3beta/PKA, and
demonstrate that the neurogenesis-promoting activity of Gli1 accounts for the
reduced sensitivity of medial IZ progenitors to neurogenesis inhibitors and their
increased propensity to differentiate. We also show that the expression and
activity of Gli1 in this process are, surprisingly, independent of Hedgehog
signaling. Together, our results suggest a model in which the modulation of
E(Spl) and Gsk3beta/PKA activities by Gli1 underlies the dynamic properties of IZ
maintenance and recruitment.

PMID: 18725518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):271-5.

Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and miRNA (review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-003, Japan.

SHH, IHH, and DHH are lipid-modified secreted proteins binding to Patched
receptors, and CDON, BOC or GAS1 co-receptors. In the absence of Hedgehog
signaling, GLI1 is transcriptionally repressed, GLI2 is phosphorylated by GSK3
and CK1 for the FBXW11 (betaTRCP2)-mediated degradation, and GLI3 is processed to
a cleaved repressor. In the presence of Hedgehog signaling, Smoothened is
relieved from Patched-mediated suppression due to the Hedgehog-dependent
internalization of Patched, which leads to MAP3K10 (MST) activation and SUFU
inactivation for the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of GLI family
members. GLI activators then upregulate CCND1, CCND2 for cell cycle acceleration,
FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXP3, POU3F1, RUNX2, SOX13, TBX2 for cell
fate determination, JAG2, INHBC, and INHBE for stem cell signaling regulation.
Hedgehog signals also upregulate SFRP1 in mesenchymal cells for WNT signaling
regulation. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during embryogenesis,
adult tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis is characterized by class switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin. SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), SNAI3, ZEB1, ZEB2 (SIP1), 
KLF8, TWIST1, and TWIST2 are EMT regulators repressing CDH1 gene encoding
E-cadherin. Hedgehog signals induce JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSL-mediated
SNAI1 upregulation, and also induce TGFbeta1 secretion for ZEB1 and ZEB2
upregulation via TGFbeta receptor and NF-kappaB. TGFbeta-mediated downregulation 
of miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR-429 results in
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly 
leads to EMT through FGF, Notch, TGFbeta signaling cascades, and miRNA regulatory
networks. miRNAs targeted to stem cell signaling components or EMT regulators are
potent drug targets; however, off-target effects should be strictly controlled
before clinical application of synthetic miRNA. Peptide mimetic and RNA aptamer
could also be utilized as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors or EMT suppressors.

PMID: 18698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncogene. 2008 Nov 20;27(51):6601-6. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.260. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Heterozygous mutations in the tumor suppressor gene PATCHED provoke basal cell
carcinoma-like features in human organotypic skin cultures.

Brellier F(1), Bergoglio V, Valin A, Barnay S, Chevallier-Lagente O, Vielh P,
Spatz A, Gorry P, Avril MF, Magnaldo T.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.

Basal cell carcinoma of the skin is the most common type of cancer in humans. The
majority of these tumors displays aberrant activation of the SONIC HEDGEHOG
(SHH)/PATCHED pathway, triggered by mutations in the PATCHED tumor suppressor
gene, which encodes a transmembrane receptor of SHH. In this study, we took
advantage of the natural genotype (PATCHED(+/-)) of healthy keratinocytes
expanded from patients with the nevoid basal cell carcinoma or Gorlin syndrome to
mimic heterozygous somatic mutations thought to occur in the PATCHED gene early
upon basal cell carcinoma development in the general population. PATCHED(+/-)
epidermis developed on a dermal equivalent containing wild-type (WT) PATCHED(+/+)
fibroblasts exhibited striking invasiveness and hyperproliferation, as well as
marked differentiation impairment. Deciphering the phenotype of PATCHED(+/-)
keratinocytes revealed slight increases of the transcriptional activators GLI1
and GLI2-the latter known to provoke basal cell carcinoma-like tumors when
overexpressed in transgenic mice. PATCHED(+/-) keratinocytes also showed a
substantial increase of the cell cycle regulator cyclin D1. These data show for
the first time the physiological impact of constitutive heterozygous PATCHED
mutations in primary human keratinocytes and strongly argue for a yet elusive
mechanism of haploinsufficiency leading to cancer proneness.

PMID: 18679421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Oncol Rep. 2008 Aug;20(2):347-52.

Hedgehog-Patched pathway aberrations in a malignant triton tumor case study.

Bura M(1), Musani V, Cretnik M, Botica I, Levanat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Clinical Hospital
Center 'Rebro', 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.

Transition from malignant schwannoma to malignant triton tumor is analyzed in a
case report on a patient with recurring cancers and suspected familial
predisposition. It is hypothesized that rhabdomyoblastic differentiation, which
distinguishes triton from schwannoma, might be attributable to Hedgehog-Patched
pathway malfunctioning. Loss of one Patched gene allele was found in the tissue
of advanced triton, but the retained allele had no exon or promoter mutations.
Protein levels at early cancer stages indicated possible Patched response to the 
pathway activation in the first occurrence of triton tumor. Later, in the
recurring triton, Patched expression was several times lower than in the control 
tissue, suggesting that haploinsufficiency was aided by silencing of the
remaining allele, although its promoter was not hypermethylated. These findings
may justify further investigation of the Hedgehog-Patched pathway role in triton 
malignancies, especially because of the recent research on the therapeutical
potential of the pathway.

PMID: 18636196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Brain Res. 2008 Sep 4;1228:27-42. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.06.058. Epub 2008 
Jun 24.

Control of glial precursor cell development in the mouse optic nerve by sonic
hedgehog from retinal ganglion cells.

Dakubo GD(1), Beug ST, Mazerolle CJ, Thurig S, Wang Y, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8L6.

The development of glial precursor cells in the mammalian optic nerve depends on 
retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons, but the signals that mediate this
neuron-to-glia interaction have not been fully characterized. Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) is expressed by RGCs, and we showed previously that it is required for the 
specification of astrocyte lineage cells at the optic disc. To study the role of 
RGC-derived Shh on astrocyte development at later developmental stages, we
generated mice with a conditional ablation of Shh in the peripheral retina and
analyzed gene expression and glial cell development in the optic nerve. Astrocyte
development was initiated in the optic nerves of these mutant mice; however, the 
expression of Hedgehog (Hh) target genes, Gli1 and Ptch1 and cell cycle genes,
Ccnd1 and Cdc25b in the optic nerves were downregulated. Astrocyte proliferation 
was markedly reduced. Oligodendrocyte precursor cells were fewer in the optic
nerves of mutant mice, possibly as a consequence of reduced secretion of growth
factors by astrocytes. At a later developmental stage, optic nerve axons
displayed signs of Wallerian degeneration, including reduction of astrocyte
processes, degenerating glial cells and formation of distended axons. We also
demonstrate that the Hh pathway can be activated in optic nerve-derived
astrocytes in vitro, but fails to induce cell cycle gene expression and
proliferation. RGC-derived Shh signalling isthus necessary in vivo for
maintenance of astrocyte proliferation, affecting both axo-glial and normal glial
cell development in the optic nerve.

PMID: 18625210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Reprod Dev. 2008 Oct;54(5):340-5. Epub 2008 Jul 8.

Expression of hedgehog family genes in the rat uterus during early pregnancy.

Kubota K(1), Yamauchi N, Matsumoto K, Watanabe R, Oozono S, Aramaki S, Wood C,
Soh T, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) plays a pivotal role in various tissues during embryonic
development, tissue homeostasis and tumorigenesis. In mammals, Hh exists in three
homologs: Desert hedgehog (Dhh), Indian hedgehog (Ihh) and Sonic hedgehog (Shh). 
In this study, we cloned full-length cDNAs encoding Dhh and Ihh from the rat
uterus. Their amino acid sequences have a high homology with those of the mouse
and human. In addition, the changes of Hh gene expression in the rat uterus
during early pregnancy were analyzed. The results showed that all three hedgehog 
mRNAs were detected in the rat uterus at the proestrus stage and during early
pregnancy (1.5, 3.5, 5.5 and 7.5 days post coitus: dpc). Ihh mRNA expression
varied and peaked at 3.5 dpc in the luminal and glandular epithelium. Expression 
was decreased on 5.5 dpc with the exception of sustained expression in the
glandular epithelium. Despite such Ihh variability, the expressions of Dhh and
Shh mRNA remained unchanged. This indicated that Ihh was mainly expressed in the 
rat uterus during early pregnancy. Moreover, the Hh target gene
(glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1; Gli1) was also highly expressed at 3.5 dpc
in the epithelium and periepithelial stroma in a manner similar to the temporal
pattern of Ihh expression. This suggests that Ihh signaling axis play a role in
the rat uterus during early pregnancy. In summary, our results elucidate that Ihh
is a predominant Hh protein in the rat uterus during early pregnancy and that
other Hhs have the potential to be expressed. This observation will help to
elucidate the basic molecular mechanism of rat uterus during early pregnancy.

PMID: 18612197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4658-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6174.

Protein phosphatase 2A and rapamycin regulate the nuclear localization and
activity of the transcription factor GLI3.

Krauss S(1), Foerster J, Schneider R, Schweiger S.

Author information: 
(1)Charité University Hospital, Department of Dermatology and Max-Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Gain-of-function alterations to the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling cascade have
been found in a wide range of tumors. Three SHH effectors, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, 
regulate transcription of diverse genes involved in cell growth and cell
proliferation. Here, we show that protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), its regulatory
subunit, alpha4, and rapamycin, an inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin
kinase complex 1 (mTORC1), regulate the nuclear localization and transcriptional 
activity of GLI3. An increase in PP2A activity or treatment with rapamycin leads 
to cytosolic retention of GLI3 and, consequently, reduced transcription of the
GLI3 target gene and cell cycle regulator, cyclin D1. Conversely, inhibition of
PP2A results in increased expression of cyclin D1. In summary, our findings
reveal the existence of a hitherto unrecognized molecular cross-talk between the 
oncogenic SHH pathway and the tumor suppressor PP2A and suggest a novel mechanism
underlying the anticancerogenic effects of rapamycin.

PMID: 18559511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 2008 Jul;135(13):2221-5. doi: 10.1242/dev.020123.

Sonic hedgehog signalling from foregut endoderm patterns the avian nasal capsule.

Benouaiche L(1), Gitton Y, Vincent C, Couly G, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 5166, Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

Morphogenesis of the facial skeleton depends on inductive interactions between
cephalic neural crest cells and cephalic epithelia, including the foregut
endoderm. We show that Shh expression in the most rostral zone of the endoderm,
endoderm zone I (EZ-I), is necessary to induce the formation of the ventral
component of the avian nasal capsule: the mesethmoid cartilage. Surgical removal 
of EZ-I specifically prevented mesethmoid formation, whereas grafting a
supernumerary EZ-I resulted in an ectopic mesethmoid. EZ-I ablation was rescued
by Shh-loaded beads, whereas inhibition of Shh signalling suppressed mesethmoid
formation. This interaction between the endoderm and cephalic neural crest cells 
was reproduced in vitro, as evidenced by Gli1 induction. Our work bolsters the
hypothesis that early endodermal regionalisation provides the blueprint for
facial morphogenesis and that its disruption might cause foetal craniofacial
defects, including those of the nasal region.

PMID: 18539922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Jun;7(6):1450-60. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2118. Epub 
2008 Jun 4.

Targeting of sonic hedgehog-GLI signaling: a potential strategy to improve
therapy for mantle cell lymphoma.

Hegde GV(1), Munger CM, Emanuel K, Joshi AD, Greiner TC, Weisenburger DD, Vose
JM, Joshi SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Anatomy, Center for Research in
Leukemia and Lymphoma, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198-6395, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) has one of the worst clinical outcomes among the
B-cell lymphomas, with a median survival of only 3 to 4 years. Therefore, a
better understanding of the underlying mechanisms that regulate MCL
proliferation/survival is needed to develop an effective therapy. Because sonic
hedgehog (Shh)-GLI signaling has been shown to be important in the proliferation 
and survival of several cancers, and no such information is available for MCL,
this study was undertaken. Our results show that the molecules associated with
Shh-GLI signaling, such as PTCH and SMO receptors, and GLI1 and GLI2 target
transcription factors were expressed in the human MCL cell lines and primary MCL 
cells from patients. Perturbation of this signaling in the presence of exogenous 
Shh/cyclopamine significantly (P < 0.001) influenced the proliferation of JVM2
MCL cells. Furthermore, down-regulation of GLI transcription factors using
antisense oligonucleotides not only resulted in significantly (P < 0.001)
decreased proliferation of the MCL cells but also significantly (P < 0.05)
increased their susceptibility to chemotherapeutic drug, doxorubicin. Also,
down-regulation of GLI decreased cyclin D1 and BCL2 transcript levels, which
suggests that these key molecules might be regulated by GLI in MCL. Thus, our
results indicate a significant role for Shh-GLI signaling in the proliferation of
MCL, and molecular targeting of GLI is a potential therapeutic approach to
improve the treatment for MCL.

PMID: 18524848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Gut. 2008 Oct;57(10):1398-405. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.148395. Epub 2008 Jun 3.

Regional variation in gene expression in the healthy colon is dysregulated in
ulcerative colitis.

Noble CL(1), Abbas AR, Cornelius J, Lees CW, Ho GT, Toy K, Modrusan Z, Pal N,
Zhong F, Chalasani S, Clark H, Arnott ID, Penman ID, Satsangi J, Diehl L.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Molecular Medicine Centre, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK. noblecolin@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate differential intestinal gene expression in patients
with ulcerative colitis and in controls.
DESIGN: Genome-wide expression study (41,058 expression sequence tags, 215
biopsies).
SETTING: Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK, and Genentech, San Francisco,
USA.
PATIENTS: 67 patients with ulcerative colitis and 31 control subjects (23 normal 
subjects and 8 patients with inflamed non-inflammatory bowel disease biopsies).
INTERVENTIONS: Paired endoscopic biopsies were taken from 5 specific anatomical
locations for RNA extraction and histology. The Agilent microarray platform was
used and confirmation of results was undertaken by real time polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In healthy control biopsies, cluster analysis showed differences in gene
expression between the right and left colon. (chi(2) = 25.1, p<0.0001).
Developmental genes, homeobox protein A13 (HOXA13), (p = 2.3x10(-16)), HOXB13
(p<1x10(-45)), glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) (p = 4.0x10(-24)), and GLI3 (p
= 2.1x10(-28)) primarily drove this separation. When all ulcerative colitis
biopsies and control biopsies were compared, 143 sequences had a fold change of
>1.5 in the ulcerative colitis biopsies (0.01>p>10(-45)) and 54 sequences had a
fold change of <-1.5 (0.01>p>10(-20)). Differentially upregulated genes in
ulcerative colitis included serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) (p<10(-45)) the alpha
defensins 5 and 6 (DEFA5 and 6) (p = 0.00003 and p = 6.95x10(-7), respectively), 
matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP3) (p = 5.6x10(-10)) and MMP7 (p = 2.3x10(-7)).
Increased DEFA5 and 6 expression was further characterised to Paneth cell
metaplasia by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridisation. Sub-analysis of the
inflammatory bowel disease 2 (IBD2) and IBD5 loci, and the ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporter genes revealed a number of differentially regulated genes in
the ulcerative colitis biopsies.
CONCLUSIONS: Key findings are the expression gradient in the healthy adult colon 
and the involvement of novel gene families, as well as established candidate
genes in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis.

PMID: 18523026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Gut. 2008 Oct;57(10):1420-30. doi: 10.1136/gut.2007.148189. Epub 2008 May 30.

Hedgehog inhibition prolongs survival in a genetically engineered mouse model of 
pancreatic cancer.

Feldmann G(1), Habbe N, Dhara S, Bisht S, Alvarez H, Fendrich V, Beaty R,
Mullendore M, Karikari C, Bardeesy N, Ouellette MM, Yu W, Maitra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21210, USA.
gfeldma4@jhmi.edu

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Pancreatic cancer is among the most dismal of human
malignancies. Current therapeutic strategies are virtually ineffective in
controlling advanced, metastatic disease. Recent evidence suggests that the
Hedgehog signalling pathway is aberrantly reactivated in the majority of
pancreatic cancers, and that Hedgehog blockade has the potential to prevent
disease progression and metastatic spread.
METHODS: Here it is shown that the Hedgehog pathway is activated in the
Pdx1-Cre;LsL-Kras(G12D);Ink4a/Arf(lox/lox) transgenic mouse model of pancreatic
cancer. The effect of Hedgehog pathway inhibition on survival was determined by
continuous application of the small molecule cyclopamine, a smoothened
antagonist. Microarray analysis was performed on non-malignant human pancreatic
ductal cells overexpressing Gli1 in order to screen for downstream Hedgehog
target genes likely to be involved in pancreatic cancer progression.
RESULTS: Hedgehog inhibition with cyclopamine significantly prolonged median
survival in the transgenic mouse model used here (67 vs 61 days; p = 0.026). In
vitro data indicated that Hedgehog activation might at least in part be ascribed 
to oncogenic Kras signalling. Microarray analysis identified 26 potential
Hedgehog target genes that had previously been found to be overexpressed in
pancreatic cancer. Five of them, BIRC3, COL11A1, NNMT, PLAU and TGM2, had been
described as upregulated in more than one global gene expression analysis before.
CONCLUSION: This study provides another line of evidence that Hedgehog signalling
is a valid target for the development of novel therapeutics for pancreatic cancer
that might be worth evaluating soon in a clinical setting.

PMCID: PMC2707354
PMID: 18515410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Pancreatology. 2008;8(3):227-9. doi: 10.1159/000134271. Epub 2008 May 22.

Primers on molecular pathways GLI: more than just Hedgehog?

Fernández-Zapico ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. fernandezzapico.martin@mayo.edu

GLI proteins, highly conserved in vertebrates and invertebrates, are critical in 
modulating embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis. These proteins are
zinc-finger-containing transcription factors that were originally identified by
genetic screening of embryonic lethal mutants of Drosophila melanogaster.
Alterations in GLI activity can lead to tumor development in tissues of different
origin including the pancreas. GLI activity is mainly regulated by the Hedgehog
pathway, via a ligand-receptor complex that triggers a signaling cascade that
activates GLI transcription factors, which in turn regulate gene expression, an
essential step of Hedgehog-mediated cellular effects. Interestingly, recent
reports show the ability of other signaling cascades to modulate GLI function in 
cancer cells including RAS and TGF-beta, two pathways implicated in pancreatic
carcinogenesis. Thus, these findings suggest that GLI proteins are not an
exclusive downstream target of Hedgehog but rather a common effector of a network
of signaling pathways controlling pancreatic carcinogenesis. and IAP.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2718430
PMID: 18497536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Br J Haematol. 2008 Jun;142(2):216-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07176.x.
Epub 2008 May 19.

Splenic marginal zone lymphomas are characterized by loss of interstitial regions
of chromosome 7q, 7q31.32 and 7q36.2 that include the protection of telomere 1
(POT1) and sonic hedgehog (SHH) genes.

Vega F(1), Cho-Vega JH, Lennon PA, Luthra MG, Bailey J, Breeden M, Jones D,
Medeiros LJ, Luthra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. fvegava@mdanderson.org

To further characterize the genotypic features of splenic (S) and nodal (N)
marginal zone lymphomas (MZL) we compared eight SMZL and five NMZL by array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). Arbitrarily, aberrations were divided
into major imbalances, defined as gains or losses involving five or more
contiguous genetic loci, and minor imbalances, defined as those involving four or
fewer loci. SMZL, but not NMZL, demonstrated major imbalances. These included
deletions involving various lengths of 7q (three cases), and 14q23q24 (one case) 
and gains of 9p13p21 (one case), 13q21q33 (one case) and 16p13.1 (one case).
Common minor imbalances in SMZL were: loss of sonic hedgehog gene (SHH) at 7q36.2
(four cases), loss of protection of telomere 1 gene (POT1) at 7q31.32 (three
cases), and gain of glioma associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) at 12q13.2 (three cases).
Common minor alterations in NMZL were: loss of the fas-associated via death
domain gene (FADD) at 11q13.2 (three cases) and gain of GLI1 (five cases). In
conclusion, SMZL, but not NMZL, demonstrates large genomic imbalances and
frequent loss of the 7q31.32 and 7q36.2 regions involving POT1 and SHH,
respectively. In NMZL, loss of FADD and gain of GLI1 are frequent events.

PMID: 18492102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 18;372(1):260-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.029. Epub 2008 May 16.

Hedgehog-mediated paracrine interaction between hepatic stellate cells and
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Lin N(1), Tang Z, Deng M, Zhong Y, Lin J, Yang X, Xiang P, Xu R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology, The Third Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Tianhe
Road 600, Guangzhou City 510630, Guangdong Province, China. linnancn@gmail.com

During liver injury, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can
migrate and differentiate into hepatocytes. Hepatic stellate cell (SC) activation
is a pivotal event in the development of liver fibrosis. Therefore, we
hypothesized that SCs may play an important role in regulating MSC proliferation 
and differentiation through the paracrine signaling pathway. We demonstrate that 
MSCs and SCs both express hedgehog (Hh) pathway components, including its
ligands, receptors, and target genes. Transwell co-cultures of SCs and MSCs
showed that the SCs produced sonic hedgehog (Shh), which enhanced the
proliferation and differentiation of MSCs. These findings demonstrate that SCs
indirectly modulate the activity of MSCs in vitro via the Hh pathway, and provide
a plausible explanation for the mechanisms of transplanted MSCs in the treatment 
of liver fibrosis.

PMID: 18486597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 May;7(5):1275-84. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2043.

Pharmacologic retinoid signaling and physiologic retinoic acid receptor signaling
inhibit basal cell carcinoma tumorigenesis.

So PL(1), Fujimoto MA, Epstein EH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, 5700 Martin Luther King Jr.
Way, Oakland, CA 94609, USA. pso@chori.org

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common human cancer. Patients with basal
cell nevus syndrome (Gorlin syndrome) are highly susceptible to developing many
BCCs as a result of a constitutive inactivating mutation in one allele of PATCHED
1, which encodes a tumor suppressor that is a major inhibitor of Hedgehog
signaling. Dysregulated Hedgehog signaling is a common feature of both hereditary
and sporadic BCCs. Recently, we showed remarkable anti-BCC chemopreventive
efficacy of tazarotene, a retinoid with retinoic acid receptor (RAR) beta/gamma
specificity, in Ptch1+/- mice when treatment was commenced before carcinogenic
insults. In this study, we assessed whether the effect of tazarotene against BCC 
carcinogenesis is sustained after its withdrawal and whether tazarotene is
effective against preexisting microscopic BCC lesions. We found that BCCs did not
reappear for at least 5 months after topical drug treatment was stopped and that 
already developed, microscopic BCCs were susceptible to tazarotene inhibition. In
vitro, tazarotene inhibited a murine BCC keratinocyte cell line, ASZ001,
suggesting that its effect in vivo is by direct action on the actual tumor cells.
Down-regulation of Gli1, a target gene of Hedgehog signaling and up-regulation of
CRABPII, a target gene of retinoid signaling, were observed with tazarotene
treatment. Finally, we investigated the effects of topical applications of other 
retinoid-related compounds on BCC tumorigenesis in vivo. Tazarotene was the most 
effective of the preparations studied, and its effect most likely was mediated by
RARgamma activation. Furthermore, inhibition of basal RAR signaling in the skin
promoted BCC carcinogenesis, suggesting that endogenous RAR signaling restrains
BCC growth.

PMCID: PMC4457328
PMID: 18483315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2008 Aug;233(8):980-8. doi: 10.3181/0802-RM-48. Epub 2008
May 14.

Polydactyly in mice lacking HDAC9/HDRP.

Morrison BE(1), D'Mello SR.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, 2601 N.
Floyd Road, Richardson, TX 75080, USA.

Mice lacking histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9) and its truncated variant, HDRP,
exhibit post-axial polydactyly that manifests as an extra big toe on the right
hind foot. Polydactyly in HDAC9/ HDRP knockout mice occurs with incomplete
penetrance and affects both genders similarly. Because polydactyly can result
from overactivity of sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, we investigated whether HDRP
acted as a negative regulator of the Shh pathway. We find that Gli1, a
transcription factor and downstream mediator of Shh signaling, is expressed at
substantially higher levels in the feet of perinatal HDAC9/ HDRP-/- mice as
compared with wild-type littermates. To more directly examine whether HDRP
negatively-regulates Shh signaling we utilized cell lines that express components
of the Shh pathway and that respond to the Shh agonist purmorphamine. We find
that purmorphamine-mediated stimulation of Gli1 in the NIH 3T3 and HT22 cell
lines is inhibited by the expression of HDRP. In HT22 cells, purmorphamine
treatment leads to an increase in the rate of cell proliferation, which is also
inhibited by HDRP. This inhibitory effect of HDRP on purmorphamine-mediated cell 
proliferation was also observed in primary cultures of glial cells. Although the 
mechanism by which it inhibits Gli1 induction and cell proliferation by
purmorphamine is not clear, HDRP localizes to the nucleus suggesting it acts just
upstream of Gli3 activation in the signaling cascade activated by Shh. Taken
together our results suggest that HDRP acts as a negative regulator of the Shh
pathway and that the absence of HDRP results in hyper-activation of this pathway 
resulting in polydactyly.

PMCID: PMC2656257
PMID: 18480421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Br J Cancer. 2008 May 20;98(10):1670-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604361. Epub 2008
May 13.

Hedgehog signal activation in oesophageal cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant 
chemoradiotherapy.

Yoshikawa R(1), Nakano Y, Tao L, Koishi K, Matsumoto T, Sasako M, Tsujimura T,
Hashimoto-Tamaoki T, Fujiwara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1, Mukogawa-cho,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan. yosikr2s@hyo-med.ac.jp

Comment in
    Br J Cancer. 2008 Oct 7;99(7):1195; author reply 1196.

The zinc finger protein glioma-associated oncogene homologue 1 (Gli-1) is a
critical component of the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway, which is essential
for morphogenesis and stem-cell renewal, and is dysregulated in many cancer
types. As data were not available on the role of Gli-1 expression in oesophageal 
cancer progression, we analysed whether it could be used to predict disease
progression and prognosis in oesophageal cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy (CRT). Among 69 patients with histologically confirmed
oesophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs), 25 showed a pathological complete
response after preoperative CRT. Overall survival (OS) was significantly
associated with lymph-node metastasis, distant metastasis, and CRT, and was
further correlated with the absence of both Gli-1 nuclear expression and residual
tumour. All patients with Gli-1 nuclear expression (10.1%) had distant or
lymph-node metastasis, and six out of seven died within 13 months. Furthermore,
patients with Gli-1 nuclear-positive cancers showed significantly poorer
prognoses than those without (disease-free survival: mean DFS time 250 vs 1738
months, 2-year DFS 0 vs 54.9%, P=0.009; OS: mean OS time 386 vs 1742 months,
2-year OS 16.7 vs 54.9%, P=0.001). Our study provides the first evidence that
Gli-1 nuclear expression is a strong and independent predictor of early relapse
and poor prognosis in ESCC after CRT. These findings suggest that Hh signal
activation might promote cancer regrowth and progression after CRT.

PMCID: PMC2391133
PMID: 18475300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;68(9):3295-303. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0174.

alpha vbeta 6 Integrin promotes the invasion of morphoeic basal cell carcinoma
through stromal modulation.

Marsh D(1), Dickinson S, Neill GW, Marshall JF, Hart IR, Thomas GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour Biology, Institute of Cancer, The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most prevalent cancer in the Western world and 
its incidence is increasing. The pathogenesis of BCC involves deregulated Sonic
hedgehog signaling, leading to activation of the Gli transcription factors. Most 
BCCs have a nodular growth pattern, and are indolent, slow-growing, and
considered "low-risk" lesions. In contrast, the "high-risk" morphoeic variant,
which causes significant morbidity, has an infiltrative growth pattern, and is
so-called because of its densely fibrous stroma. As alpha v beta 6 is capable of 
promoting both carcinoma invasion and fibrosis, we examined the expression of
this integrin in BCCs and found that the morphoeic type showed significantly
higher alpha v beta 6 expression than the nodular type (P = 0.0009). In order to 
examine the function of alpha v beta 6, we transfected the transcription factors 
Gli1 or Gli2 into NTERT, human keratinocytes to generate a BCC model. These cells
expressed alpha v beta 6 and were invasive, although inhibition of alpha v beta 6
had no direct effect on cell invasion. However, the cells showed alpha v beta
6-dependent activation of transforming growth factor-beta1, which induced
transdifferentiation of human fibroblasts into myofibroblasts. Paracrine
secretion of hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor by these myofibroblasts
promoted c-Met-dependent tumor invasion in both Transwell and three-dimensional
organotypic assays. These experimental in vitro findings were confirmed using
human clinical samples in which we showed that the stroma of morphoeic BCC is
myofibroblast-rich compared with nodular BCC (P = 0.0036), that myofibroblasts
express hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor, and that morphoeic BCCs are
strongly c-Met-positive. These data suggest that alpha v beta 6-dependent
transforming growth factor-beta1 activation induces both the infiltrative growth 
pattern and fibrotic stroma so characteristic of morphoeic BCC.

PMID: 18451156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Dyn. 2008 May;237(5):1359-72. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21536.

Ventral specification and perturbed boundary formation in the mouse midbrain in
the absence of Hedgehog signaling.

Fogel JL(1), Chiang C, Huang X, Agarwala S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712-0248, USA.

Although Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays a critical role in patterning the ventral 
midbrain, its role in early midbrain specification is not known. We examined the 
midbrains of sonic hedgehog (Shh) and smoothened (Smo) mutant mice where HH
signaling is respectively attenuated and eliminated. We show that some ventral
(Evx1+) cell fates are specified in the Shh-/- mouse in a Ptc1- and
Gli1-independent manner. HH-independent ventral midbrain induction was further
confirmed by the presence of a Pax7-negative ventral midbrain territory in both
Shh-/- and Smo-/- mice at and before embryonic day (E) 8.5. Midbrain signaling
centers are severely disrupted in the Shh-/- mutant. Interestingly, dorsal
markers are up-regulated (Wnt1, Gdf7, Pax7), down-regulated (Lfng), or otherwise 
altered (Zic1) in the Shh-/- midbrain. Together with the increased cell death
seen specifically in Shh-/- dorsal midbrains (E8.5-E9), our results suggest
specific regulation of dorsal patterning by SHH, rather than a simple
deregulation due to its absence.

PMCID: PMC2586936
PMID: 18429041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncol Rep. 2008 May;19(5):1185-90.

Expression of Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway correlates with the tumorigenesis 
of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas.

Satoh K(1), Kanno A, Hamada S, Hirota M, Umino J, Masamune A, Egawa S, Motoi F,
Unno M, Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Miyagi 980-8574, Japan. ksatoh@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is frequently expressed in pre-cancerous lesions and
carcinoma of the pancreas. A recent study revealed that its expression was higher
in the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas than in the
pancreatic carcinoma. However, the correlation between its signaling pathway and 
tumorigenesis of IPMN has not yet been well documented. We investigated the
expression of mRNA and protein of SHH as well as its downstream transcription
factor Gli1 in 19 microdissected lesions from 15 cases and in 75 lesions from 33 
cases of the IPMN by one-step quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry, respectively.
SHH and Gli1 mRNAs were detected in all the examined lesions and 8 out of 19
lesions in IPMNs, respectively. SHH and Gli1 mRNAs were likely to be up-regulated
from the adenoma and from borderline to carcinoma cells, respectively.
Immunohistochemical analysis also reported that SHH and Gli1 expression was
correlated with the grade of cell atypia. These findings suggested that HH
signaling was activated in IPMNs and contributed to tumorigenesis in these types 
of neoplasms.

PMID: 18425375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Sci. 2008 Jul;99(7):1377-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00822.x. Epub
2008 Apr 11.

Gli1 contributes to the invasiveness of pancreatic cancer through matrix
metalloproteinase-9 activation.

Nagai S(1), Nakamura M, Yanai K, Wada J, Akiyoshi T, Nakashima H, Ohuchida K,
Sato N, Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been reported to be associated with the
growth of pancreatic cancer, but its role in the invasive phenotype is poorly
understood. Therefore, we investigated the role of the Hh pathway in pancreatic
cancer cell invasiveness using a Matrigel invasion assay. Blockade of the Hh
pathway by cyclopamine inhibited pancreatic cancer cell invasion in association
with a decreased expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9. By contrast,
activation of the Hh pathway by the addition of exogenous Sonic hedgehog
increased cell invasion and MMP-9 expression. Stable transfection of pancreatic
cancer cells with Gli1 increased their invasiveness, which was associated with
activation of MMP-9. We also showed that inhibition of MMP-9 by small interfering
RNA blocked the increased invasiveness of Gli1-transfected cells. Furthermore,
inhibition of Gli1 by small interfering RNA suppressed the invasiveness and MMP-9
expression of pancreatic cancer cells. Taken together, these findings suggest
that members of the Hh pathway, especially Gli1, play an important role in the
invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells through the regulation of MMP-9
expression.

PMID: 18410405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biomech. 2008;41(7):1616-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.01.034. Epub 2008 Apr
3.

Validation of a non-invasive fluoroscopic imaging technique for the measurement
of dynamic knee joint motion.

Li G(1), Van de Velde SK, Bingham JT.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org

Comment in
    J Biomech. 2008 Nov 14;41(15):3290-1: author reply 3292-3.

The accurate measurement of the in vivo knee joint kinematics in six
degrees-of-freedom (6DOF) remains a challenge in biomedical engineering. We have 
adapted a dual fluoroscopic imaging system (DFIS) to investigate the various in
vivo dynamic knee joint motions. This paper presents a thorough validation of the
accuracy and repeatability of the DFIS system when used to measure 6DOF dynamic
knee kinematics. First, the validation utilized standard geometric spheres made
from different materials to demonstrate the capability of the DFIS technique to
determine the object positions under changing speeds. The translational pose of
the spheres could be recreated to less than 0.15+/-0.09 mm for velocities below
300 mm/s. Next, tantalum beads were inserted into the femur and tibia of two
fresh frozen cadaver knees to compare the dynamic kinematics measured by matching
knee models to the kinematics from the tantalum bead matching-a technique similar
to Roentgen stereophotogrammetric analysis (RSA). Each cadaveric knee was
attached to the crosshead of a tensile testing machine and vertically translated 
at a rate of 16.66 mm/s while images were captured with the DFIS. Subsequently,
the tibia was held fixed and the femur manually flexed from full extension to 90 
degrees of flexion, as the DFIS acquired images. In vitro translation of the
cadaver knee using the tensile testing machine deviated from predicted values by 
0.08+/-0.14 mm for the matched knee models. The difference between matching the
knee and tantalum bead models during the dynamic flexion-extension motion of the 
knee was 0.1+/-0.65 degrees /s in flexion speed; 0.24+/-0.16 mm in posterior
femoral translation; and 0.16+/-0.61 degrees in internal-external tibial
rotation. Finally, we applied the method to investigate the knee kinematics of a 
living subject during a step ascent and treadmill gait. High repeatability was
demonstrated for the in vivo application. Thus, the DFIS provides an easy and
powerful tool for accurately determining 6DOF positions of the knee when
performing daily functional activities.

PMID: 18394629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2241-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6350.

Gli activity correlates with tumor grade in platelet-derived growth
factor-induced gliomas.

Becher OJ(1), Hambardzumyan D, Fomchenko EI, Momota H, Mainwaring L, Bleau AM,
Katz AM, Edgar M, Kenney AM, Cordon-Cardo C, Blasberg RG, Holland EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA.

Gli signaling is critical for central nervous system development and is
implicated in tumorigenesis. To monitor Gli signaling in gliomas in vivo, we
created platelet-derived growth factor-induced gliomas in a Gli-luciferase
reporter mouse. We find that Gli activation is found in gliomas and correlates
with grade. In addition, we find that sonic hedgehog (SHH) is expressed in these 
tumors and also correlates with grade. We identify microvascular proliferation
and pseudopalisades, elements that define high-grade gliomas as SHH-producing
microenvironments. We describe two populations of SHH-producing stromal cells
that reside in perivascular niche (PVN), namely low-cycling astrocytes and
endothelial cells. Using the Ptc-LacZ knock-in mouse as a second Gli responsive
reporter, we show beta-galactosidase activity in the PVN and in some tumors
diffusely throughout the tumor. Lastly, we observe that SHH is similarly
expressed in human gliomas and note that an intact tumor microenvironment or
neurosphere conditions in vitro are required for Gli activity.

PMID: 18381430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 23;283(21):14345-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800299200. Epub 2008
Mar 31.

Novel human glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) splice variants reveal distinct
mechanisms in the terminal transduction of the hedgehog signal.

Shimokawa T(1), Tostar U, Lauth M, Palaniswamy R, Kasper M, Toftgård R,
Zaphiropoulos PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden. tash@biosci.ki.se

Hedgehog (HH) signaling is one of the key pathways with major significance for
embryogenesis, tumorigenesis, and stem cell maintenance. Glioma-associated
oncogene 1 (GLI1) is a transcription factor that acts as the terminal signaling
effector but also represents a pathway target gene. Here we report the
identification and functional properties of novel GLI1 splice variants generated 
by skipping exons 2 and 3 and encoding an N-terminal truncated GLI1 protein
(GLI1DeltaN). Analysis of the GLI1DeltaN mRNAs in adult human tissues revealed
comparable expression levels to the full-length GLI1 (GLI1FL), whereas in tumor
cell lines a generally lower and more variable expression pattern was observed.
Furthermore, GLI1DeltaN is up-regulated by HH signaling to the same extent as
GLI1FL but has a weaker capacity to activate transcription. However, in specific 
cellular contexts GLI1DeltaN may be more potent than GLI1FL in activating
endogenous gene expression. Moreover, the dual-specificity tyrosine
phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1 (Dyrk1) potentiates the transcriptional
activity of GLI1FL but not GLI1DeltaN. Interestingly, GLI1FL, in contrast to
GLI1DeltaN, is localized solely at the nucleus, in line with its increased
transcriptional capacity. The negative regulator of the pathway, Suppressor of
Fused (SUFU), elicits a cytoplasmic retention of the GLI1 isoforms, which is more
pronounced for GLI1FL, as this contains an N-terminal SUFU binding domain.
Collectively, our findings reveal that the activation mechanism of the terminal
transducer of the pathway, GLI1, is mediated not only by GLI1FL but also by the
GLI1DeltaN variant.

PMCID: PMC2386930
PMID: 18378682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 25;105(12):4838-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712216105. Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Hedgehog signaling overrides p53-mediated tumor suppression by activating Mdm2.

Abe Y(1), Oda-Sato E, Tobiume K, Kawauchi K, Taya Y, Okamoto K, Oren M, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8533, Japan.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates the development of many organs in
mammals, and activation of this pathway is widely observed in human cancers.
Although it is known that Hh signaling activates the expression of genes involved
in cell growth, the precise role of the Hh pathway in cancer development is still
unclear. Here, we show that constitutively activated mutants of Smoothened (Smo),
a transducer of the Hh signaling pathway, inhibit the accumulation of the tumor
suppressor protein p53. This inhibition was also observed in the presence of Hh
ligand or with the overexpression of the transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2,
downstream effectors of Smo, indicating that this inhibition is specific for the 
Hh pathway. We also report that Smo mutants augment p53 binding to the E3
ubiquitin-protein ligase Mdm2 and promote p53 ubiquitination. Furthermore, Hh
signaling induced the phosphorylation of human Mdm2 protein on serines 166 and
186, which are activating phosphorylation sites of Mdm2. Smo mutants enhanced the
proliferation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) while inducing a DNA-damage
response. Moreover, Smo partially inhibited p53-dependent apoptosis and cell
growth inhibition in oncogene-expressing MEFs. We also found that accumulation of
p53 is inhibited by Hh signaling in several human cancer cell lines. Therefore,
the Hh pathway may be a powerful accelerator of oncogenesis by activating cell
proliferation and inhibiting the p53-mediated anti-cancer barrier induced by
oncogenic stress.

PMCID: PMC2290789
PMID: 18359851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Chembiochem. 2008 May 5;9(7):1082-92. doi: 10.1002/cbic.200700511.

Naturally occurring small-molecule inhibitors of hedgehog/GLI-mediated
transcription.

Hosoya T(1), Arai MA, Koyano T, Kowithayakorn T, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, 
Japan.

The aberrant hedgehog (Hh)/GLI signaling pathway causes the formation and
progression of a variety of tumors. To search for Hh/GLI inhibitors, we screened 
for naturally occurring inhibitors of the transcriptional activator GLI1 by using
a cell-based assay. We identified zerumbone (1), zerumbone epoxide (2),
staurosporinone (9), 6-hydroxystaurosporinone (10), arcyriaflavin C (11) and
5,6-dihydroxyarcyriaflavin A (12) as inhibitors of GLI-mediated transcription. In
addition, we isolated physalins F (17) and B (18) from Physalis minima, which are
also potent inhibitors. These compounds also inhibited GLI2-mediated
transactivation. Semiquantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting analysis further
revealed that 1, 9, 17, and 18 decreased Hh-related component expressions. We
also show that inhibitors of GLI-mediated transactivation reduce the level of the
antiapoptosis Bcl2 expression. Finally, these identified compounds were cytotoxic
to PANC1 pancreatic cancer cells, which express Hh/GLI components. These results 
strongly suggest that the cytotoxicity of the compounds to PANC1 cells correlates
with their inhibition of GLI-mediated transcription.

PMID: 18357592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):722-7. doi: 10.1101/gad.1636408.

Post-transcriptional down-regulation of Atoh1/Math1 by bone morphogenic proteins 
suppresses medulloblastoma development.

Zhao H(1), Ayrault O, Zindy F, Kim JH, Roussel MF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):693-9.

Bone morphogenic proteins 2 and 4 (BMP2 and BMP4) inhibit proliferation and
induce differentiation of cerebellar granule neuron progenitors (GNPs) and
primary GNP-like medulloblastoma (MB) cells. This occurs through rapid
proteasome-mediated degradation of Math1 (Atoh1), a transcription factor
expressed in proliferating GNPs. Ectopic expression of Atoh1, but not of Sonic
hedgehog (Shh)-regulated Gli1 or Mycn, cancels these BMP-mediated effects and
restores Shh-dependent proliferation of GNPs and MB cells in vitro and in vivo.
Genes regulating the BMP signaling pathway are down-regulated in mouse MBs. Thus,
BMPs are potent inhibitors of MB and should be considered as novel therapeutic
agents.

PMCID: PMC2275424
PMID: 18347090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jun;83(6):1476-83. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1107792. Epub 2008 Mar
11.

Survival and function of human thymic dendritic cells are dependent on autocrine 
Hedgehog signaling.

Varas A(1), Hernández-López C, Valencia J, Mattavelli S, Martínez VG, Hidalgo L, 
Gutiérrez-Frías C, Zapata AG, Sacedón R, Vicente A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Ciudad Universitaria,
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain. avaras@bio.ucm.es

The Hedgehog (Hh) family of signaling molecules functions in the development of
numerous tissues during embryogenesis and has also been involved in adult
self-renewing tissues. Recent results have demonstrated that the different
components of the Hh signaling pathway are expressed in the human thymus. In this
study, we investigate whether thymic dendritic cells (DCs) are cell targets for
Hh signaling. Both components of the Hh receptor, Patched and Smoothened, as well
as other Hh-binding proteins with modulating functions, are expressed by human
thymic DCs. The expression of Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 transcription factors suggests
that the Hh signaling pathway is active in thymic DCs, and approximately one-half
of thymic DCs produces Sonic Hh (Shh). The culture of thymic DCs with Shh
protects them from apoptosis [similarly to CD40 ligand (CD40L)], and these
antiapoptotic effects are related to an up-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L)
protein expression. The addition of the Hh pathway inhibitor, cyclopamine,
decreases DC viability and impairs their allostimulatory function in vitro. In
addition, the blockade of the Hh signaling pathway by cyclopamine treatment
abrogates the up-regulation of HLA-DR, CD86, CD80, and CD83 expression induced by
CD40L on thymic DCs. Finally, we also show that after activation with CD40L
thymic DCs down-regulate the expression of Hh receptor components as well as Shh 
production. Taken together, these results suggest that the survival and function 
of thymic DCs are regulated by an autocrine Hh signaling.

PMID: 18334540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Cell Biol. 2008 Mar 10;180(5):897-904. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200706028.

Human embryonic stem cells in culture possess primary cilia with hedgehog
signaling machinery.

Kiprilov EN(1), Awan A, Desprat R, Velho M, Clement CA, Byskov AG, Andersen CY,
Satir P, Bouhassira EE, Christensen ST, Hirsch RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are potential therapeutic tools and models of 
human development. With a growing interest in primary cilia in signal
transduction pathways that are crucial for embryological development and tissue
differentiation and interest in mechanisms regulating human hESC differentiation,
demonstrating the existence of primary cilia and the localization of signaling
components in undifferentiated hESCs establishes a mechanistic basis for the
regulation of hESC differentiation. Using electron microscopy (EM),
immunofluorescence, and confocal microscopies, we show that primary cilia are
present in three undifferentiated hESC lines. EM reveals the characteristic 9 + 0
axoneme. The number and length of cilia increase after serum starvation.
Important components of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway, including smoothened, patched 
1 (Ptc1), and Gli1 and 2, are present in the cilia. Stimulation of the pathway
results in the concerted movement of Ptc1 out of, and smoothened into, the
primary cilium as well as up-regulation of GLI1 and PTC1. These findings show
that hESCs contain primary cilia associated with working Hh machinery.

PMCID: PMC2265400
PMID: 18332216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 2;283(18):12426-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707117200. Epub 2008 
Mar 3.

GLI2-specific transcriptional activation of the bone morphogenetic
protein/activin antagonist follistatin in human epidermal cells.

Eichberger T(1), Kaser A, Pixner C, Schmid C, Klingler S, Winklmayr M,
Hauser-Kronberger C, Aberger F, Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, Austria.

Hedgehog (HH) signaling in the epidermis is primarily mediated by the zinc finger
transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2. Exquisite regulation of HH/GLI signaling is 
crucial for proper specification of the epidermal lineage and development of its 
derivatives, whereas dysregulation of HH/GLI signaling disrupts tissue
homeostasis and causes basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Similarly, bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) and activins have been described as key signaling factors in the 
complex regulation of epidermal fate decisions, although their precise interplay 
with HH/GLI is largely elusive. Here we show that, in human epidermal cells,
expression of the activin/BMP antagonist follistatin (FST) is predominantly
up-regulated by the HH effector GLI2. Consistently, we found strong FST
expression in the outer root sheath of human hair follicles and BCC. Detailed
promoter analysis showed that two sequences with homology to the GLI consensus
binding site are required for GLI2-mediated activation. Interestingly, activation
of the FST promoter is highly GLI2-specific, because neither GLI1 nor GLI3 can
significantly increase FST transcription. GLI2 specificity requires the presence 
of a 518-bp fragment in the proximal FST promoter region. On the protein level,
sequences C-terminal to the zinc finger are responsible for GLI2-specific
activation of FST transcription, pointing to the existence of GLI-interacting
cofactors that modulate GLI target specificity. Our results reveal a key role of 
GLI2 in activation of the activin/BMP antagonist FST in response to HH signaling 
and provide new evidence for a regulatory interaction between HH and activin/BMP 
signaling in hair follicle development and BCC.

PMCID: PMC2430996
PMID: 18319260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Oncol Rep. 2008 Mar;19(3):681-8.

Hedgehog signalling in medulloblastoma, glioblastoma and neuroblastoma.

Shahi MH(1), Lorente A, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biología de Tumores Cerebrales, Universidad de Navarra, 31008
Pamplona, Spain.

We investigated a role for Hedgehog signalling in glioblastoma, neuroblastoma and
medulloblastoma by studying the transcription of PTCH, SMO, GLI1 and GLI3 in a
total of 25 cell lines by standard RT-PCR and qRT-PCR, before and after
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and trichostatin A (TSA) treatments. Also 25 glioblastoma 
samples were tested by qRT-PCR. We also performed real-time methylated specific
PCR (qMSP) of the SMO promoter region in DNA from 80 tumor samples (40
glioblastomas and 40 neuroblastomas) and from the 25 cell lines. We detected SMO 
promoter methylation in more than half of the cell lines and tumor samples. PTCH 
expression in cell lines was lower than in normal controls, just the opposite to 
GLI1. SMO and GLI3 expression were high and fully correlated in glioblastoma and 
medulloblastoma, although partially in neuroblastoma. Our results support the
existence of Hedgehog signalling in glioblastoma and medulloblastoma, and to a
lesser extent, in neuroblastoma.

PMID: 18288402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Med Genet. 2008 May;45(5):303-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.055343. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

A missense mutation in PTCH2 underlies dominantly inherited NBCCS in a Chinese
family.

Fan Z(1), Li J, Du J, Zhang H, Shen Y, Wang CY, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Laboratory for Gene Therapy, Capital Medical University School of
Stomatology, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Naevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is a pleiotropic,
autosomal dominant disease. Growing evidence suggests that the disorder may
result from mutations in genes of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signalling pathway.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the pathogenic gene in a Chinese Han family with NBCCS.
METHODS: Mapping and mutation screening were used to investigate the candidate
genes SHH, PTCH, PTCH2 and SMO. A GLI1 reporter gene and a cell growth curve were
used to examine functional consequences of the detected mutant.
RESULTS: One novel mutation, a G-->A transition (2157G-->A) in exon 15 of the
PTCH2 gene, was identified in this family with NBCCS by direct sequencing and
digestion with the AvaI restriction enzyme. The mutation was not found in normal 
family members or in 520 controls. The mutation led to an R719Q amino acid
substitution in an extracellular loop of the PTCH2 protein. Functional studies
revealed that the R719Q mutation resulted in inactivation of PTCH2 inhibitory
activities. In contrast to wild type PTCH2, PTCH2-R719Q could not inhibit cell
proliferation.
CONCLUSION: PTCH2 (2157G-->A), a novel missense mutation, underlies NBCCS,
resulting in the loss of PTCH2 inhibitory function in the Shh signalling pathway.

PMID: 18285427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 19;8:15. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-15.

Genetic analysis of the two zebrafish patched homologues identifies novel roles
for the hedgehog signaling pathway.

Koudijs MJ(1), den Broeder MJ, Groot E, van Eeden FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Uppsalalaan 
8, 3584CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands. m.koudijs@nki.nl

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway in
different organisms has shown the importance of this family of morphogens during 
development. Genetic screens in zebrafish have assigned specific roles for Hh in 
proliferation, differentiation and patterning, but mainly as a result of a loss
of its activity. We attempted to fully activate the Hh pathway by removing both
receptors for the Hh proteins, called Patched1 and 2, which are functioning as
negative regulators in this pathway.
RESULTS: Here we describe a splice-donor mutation in Ptc1, called ptc1hu1602,
which in a homozygous state results in a subtle eye and somite phenotype. Since
we recently positionally cloned a ptc2 mutant, a ptc1;ptc2 double mutant was
generated, showing severely increased levels of ptc1, gli1 and nkx2.2a,
confirming an aberrant activation of Hh signaling. As a consequence, a number of 
phenotypes were observed that have not been reported previously using Shh mRNA
overexpression. Somites of ptc1;ptc2 double mutants do not express
anteroposterior polarity markers, however initial segmentation of the somites
itself is not affected. This is the first evidence that segmentation and
anterior/posterior (A/P) patterning of the somites are genetically uncoupled
processes. Furthermore, a novel negative function of Hh signaling is observed in 
the induction of the fin field, acting well before any of the previously reported
function of Shh in fin formation and in a way that is different from the proposed
early role of Gli3 in limb/fin bud patterning.
CONCLUSION: The generation and characterization of the ptc1;ptc2 double mutant
assigned novel and unexpected functions to the Hh signaling pathway.
Additionally, these mutants will provide a useful system to further investigate
the consequences of constitutively activated Hh signaling during vertebrate
development.

PMCID: PMC2275722
PMID: 18284698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Apr;29(4):738-46. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn037. Epub 2008 Feb 
14.

GLI1 repression of ERK activity correlates with colony formation and impaired
migration in human epidermal keratinocytes.

Neill GW(1), Harrison WJ, Ikram MS, Williams TD, Bianchi LS, Nadendla SK, Green
JL, Ghali L, Frischauf AM, O'Toole EA, Aberger F, Philpott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts 
and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AT, 
UK.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin is a highly compact, non-metastatic
epithelial tumour type that may arise from the aberrant propagation of epidermal 
or progenitor stem cell (SC) populations. Increased expression of GLI1 is a
common feature of BCC and is linked to the induction of epidermal SC markers in
immortalized N/Tert-1 keratinocytes. Here, we demonstrate that GLI1
over-expression is linked to additional SC characteristics in N/Tert-1 cells
including reduced epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression and compact 
colony formation that is associated with repressed extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) activity. Colony formation and repressed ERK activity remain evident
when EGFR is increased exogenously to the basal levels in GLI1 cells revealing
that ERK is additionally inhibited downstream of the receptor. Exposure to
epidermal growth factor (EGF) to increase ERK activity and promote migration
negates GLI1 colony formation with cells displaying an elongated, fibroblast-like
morphology. However, as determined by Snail messenger RNA and E-cadherin protein 
expression this is not associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
and GLI1 actually represses induction of the EMT marker vimentin in
EGF-stimulated cells. Instead, live cell imaging revealed that the elongated
morphology of EGF/GLI1 keratinocytes stems from their being 'stretched' due to
migrating cells displaying inefficient cell-cell detachment and impaired tail
retraction. Taken together, these data suggest that GLI1 opposes EGFR signalling 
to maintain the epithelial phenotype. Finally, ERK activity was predominantly
negative in 13/14 BCCs (superficial/nodular), indicating that GLI1 does not
routinely co-operate with ERK to induce the formation of this common skin tumour.

PMID: 18281251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Stem Cells. 2008 Apr;26(4):1027-36. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0879. Epub 2008
Feb 14.

Gli1 induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis in hippocampal but not tumor-derived
neural stem cells.

Galvin KE(1), Ye H, Erstad DJ, Feddersen R, Wetmore C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Neuroscience, The College of Idaho, Caldwell, Idaho, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is necessary for sustaining the proliferation of neural stem
cells (NSCs), yet little is known about its mechanisms. Whereas Gli1, Gli2, and
Gli3, the primary mediators of Shh signaling, were all expressed in hippocampal
neural progenitors, Shh treatment of NSCs induced only Gli1 expression. Acute
depletion of Gli1 in postnatal NSCs by short-hairpin RNA decreased proliferation,
whereas germline deletion of Gli1 did not affect NSC proliferation, suggesting a 
difference in mechanisms of Gli1 compensation that may be developmentally
dependent. To determine whether Gli1 was sufficient to enhance NSC proliferation,
we overexpressed this mitogen and were surprised to find that Gli1 resulted in
decreased proliferation, accumulation of NSCs in the G2/M phase of cell cycle,
and apoptosis. In contrast, Gli1-expressing lineage-restricted neural precursors 
demonstrated a 4.5-fold proliferation enhancement. Expression analyses of
Gli1-expressing NSCs identified significant induction of Gadd45a and decreased
cyclin A2 and Stag1 mRNA, genes involved in the G2-M transition and apoptosis.
Furthermore, Gadd45a overexpression was sufficient to partially recapitulate the 
Gli1-induced G2/M accumulation and cell death of NSCs. In contrast to normal stem
cells, tumor-derived stem cells had markedly higher basal Gli1 expression and did
not undergo apoptosis with further elevation of Gli1. Our data suggest that
Gli1-induced apoptosis may serve as a protective mechanism against premature
mitosis and may give insight into mechanisms by which nonmalignant stem cells
restrain hyperproliferation in the context of potentially transforming mitogenic 
signals. Tumor-derived stem cells apparently lack these mechanisms, which may
contribute to their unrestrained proliferation and malignant potential.

PMID: 18276799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int J Biol Sci. 2008 Jan 26;4(1):29-36.

Reduced white fat mass in adult mice bearing a truncated Patched 1.

Li Z(1), Zhang H, Denhard LA, Liu LH, Zhou H, Lan ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Birth Defects Center, Department of Molecular, Cellular, Craniofacial Biology,
University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling emerges as a potential pathway contributing to fat
formation during postnatal development. In this report, we found that Patched 1
(Ptc1), a negative regulator of Hh signaling, was expressed in the epididymal fat
pad of adult mice. Reduced total white fat mass and epididymal adipocyte cell
size were observed in naturally occurring spontaneous mesenchymal dysplasia (mes)
adult mice (Ptc1(mes/mes)), which carry a deletion of Ptc1 at the
carboxyl-terminal cytoplasmic region. Increased expression of truncated Ptc1,
Ptc2 and Gli1, the indicators of ectopic activation of Hh signaling, was observed
in epididymal fat pads of adult Ptc1(mes/mes) mice. In contrast, expression of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein 
alpha, adipocyte P2 and adipsin were reduced in epididymal fat pads of adult
Ptc1(mes/mes) mice. Taken together, our results indicate that deletion of
carboxyl-terminal tail of Ptc1 can lead to the reduction of white fat mass during
postnatal development.

PMCID: PMC2238183
PMID: 18274621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Dev Biol. 2008 Mar 15;315(2):459-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.01.005. Epub 2008 
Jan 16.

Impaired skin and hair follicle development in Runx2 deficient mice.

Glotzer DJ(1), Zelzer E, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, 188
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor, Runx2, is known to play crucial roles in skeletal and
tooth morphogenesis. Here we document that Runx2 has a regulatory role in skin
and hair follicle development. The expression of Runx2 is restricted to hair
follicles and is dynamic, pari passu with follicle development. Follicle
maturation is delayed in the absence of Runx2 and overall skin and epidermal
thickness of Runx2 null embryos is significantly reduced. The Runx2 null
epidermis is hypoplastic, displaying reduced expression of Keratin 14, Keratin 1 
and markers of proliferation. The expression pattern of Runx2 in the bulb
epithelium of mature hair follicles is asymmetric and strikingly similar to that 
of Sonic hedgehog. This suggests that Runx2 may be a regulator of hedgehog
signaling in skin as it is in bones and teeth. Supporting this possibility, we
demonstrate that Sonic hedgehog, Patched1 and Gli1 transcripts are reduced in the
skin of Runx2 null embryos. Moreover, we document Patched1 expression in
epidermal basal cells and show that the skin of Sonic(+/-) embryos is thinner
than that of wild-type littermates. These observations suggest that Runx2 and
hedgehog signaling are involved in the well known, but unexplained, coupling of
skin thickness to hair follicle development.

PMCID: PMC2280036
PMID: 18262513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cancer Lett. 2008 May 8;263(1):145-56. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2007.12.030. Epub
2008 Feb 20.

Crosstalk of hedgehog and Wnt pathways in gastric cancer.

Yanai K(1), Nakamura M, Akiyoshi T, Nagai S, Wada J, Koga K, Noshiro H, Nagai E, 
Tsuneyoshi M, Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Morphogenic signals like Hedgehog (Hh) and Wnt are reported to play critical
roles in the progression of gastric cancer. We aimed to assess the relationship
between Hh and Wnt signaling pathways. In 58 gastric cancer specimens, Wnt
pathway activation was inversely correlated with Hh pathway activation. When AGS 
gastric cancer cells, in which Wnt signaling was constitutively active, were used
as a target cell line, Gli1 overexpression suppressed Wnt transcriptional
activity, nuclear beta-catenin accumulation and proliferation of AGS cells.
Knock-down of beta-catenin by siRNA suppressed Wnt pathway activity and
proliferation of AGS cells. Our data may provide some clues for the treatment of 
gastric cancer associated with Wnt signaling activation.

PMID: 18243529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. DNA Cell Biol. 2008 May;27(5):251-6. doi: 10.1089/dna.2007.0625.

GLI1 is involved in cell cycle regulation and proliferation of NT2 embryonal
carcinoma stem cells.

Vestergaard J(1), Lind-Thomsen A, Pedersen MW, Jarmer HO, Bak M, Hasholt L,
Tommerup N, Tümer Z, Larsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays a critical role during embryogenesis and regulates 
early development of multiple tissues and organs, including the central nervous
system. Although much has been revealed of the diverse functions of the HH
signaling pathway, it is still unclear how the effects of altered HH signaling
are interpreted by specific cell types. We have investigated the role of the HH
transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) in the human
Ntera2/D1 (NT2) embryonal carcinoma stem cell line. The study revealed that
expression of GLI1 and its direct transcriptional target Patched (PTCH) is
downregulated in the early stages of retinoic acid-induced neuronal
differentiation of NT2 cells. To identify transcriptional targets of the HH
transcription factor GLI1 in NT2 cells, we performed global expression profiling 
following GLI1 RNA interference (RNAi). Of the 8500 transcripts represented on
the microarrays, expression of 88 genes was downregulated and expression of 26
genes was upregulated. Nineteen of these genes are involved in cell cycle and
proliferation. Further, GLI1 RNAi leads to a significant decrease in NT2
proliferation and changes expression of G1 phase cyclins. In conclusion, our
results suggest that GLI1 is involved in cell cycle and proliferation control in 
the embryonal carcinoma stem cell line NT2.

PMID: 18241033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Neoplasia. 2008 Jan;10(1):89-98.

An integrated approach identifies Nhlh1 and Insm1 as Sonic Hedgehog-regulated
genes in developing cerebellum and medulloblastoma.

De Smaele E(1), Fragomeli C, Ferretti E, Pelloni M, Po A, Canettieri G, Coni S,
Di Marcotullio L, Greco A, Moretti M, Di Rocco C, Pazzaglia S, Maroder M,
Screpanti I, Giannini G, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood
arising from deregulated cerebellar development. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathway
plays a critical role in cerebellar development and its aberrant expression has
been identified in MB. Gene expression profiling of cerebella from 1- to
14-day-old mice unveiled a cluster of genes whose expression correlates with the 
levels of Hedgehog (HH) activity. From this cluster, we identified Insm1 and
Nhlh1/NSCL1 as novel HH targets induced by Shh treatment in cultured cerebellar
granule cell progenitors. Nhlh1 promoter was found to be bound and activated by
Gli1 transcription factor. Remarkably, the expression of these genes is also
upregulated in mouse and human HH-dependent MBs, suggesting that they may be
either a part of the HH-induced tumorigenic process or a specific trait of
HH-dependent tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC2213903
PMID: 18231642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2008 Feb;17(2):185-95. doi:
10.1517/13543784.17.2.185.

New developments in medulloblastoma treatment: the potential of a
cyclopamine-lovastatin combination.

Bar EE(1), Stearns D.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, 720
Rutland Avenue, Ross Building 558, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. ebar1@jhmi.edu

Pediatric brain tumors are the most common cause of cancer-related death in
children. Despite advances in neuroimaging, surgical techniques, radiotherapy and
the introduction of new chemotherapeutic agents, up to 30% of all patients
diagnosed with medulloblastoma will die from their disease, thus underscoring the
need for more effective treatments. This review explores the relationship between
cholesterol and cancer in light of a recent study that demonstrated that the
hedgehog (Hh) antagonist cyclopamine blocked expression of the Hh pathway targets
PTCH1 and GLI1, lowered Bcl2 levels and increased apoptosis in medulloblastoma
cells. In addition, Hh pathway blockade sensitized medulloblastoma to the effects
of the proapoptotic, cholesterol-lowering agent lovastatin. The use of Hh pathway
antagonists and cholesterol synthesis inhibitors in medulloblastoma is a novel
and exciting approach as it targets pathways crucial for tumor survival. The
safety of such approach, however, still needs to be tested in animal models of
the disease before its application in human patients.

PMID: 18230052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2007 Nov;34(12):1914-6.

[New therapeutic strategy for cancer targeting the hedgehog signaling pathway].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura M(1), Kubo M, Nagai S, Yamaguchi K, Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway was originally found as an organizer in
embryonic development. The pathway is now implicated in the development of
various tumors. Recently, it has been reported that the pathway activation is
resulted from aberrant expression of the ligand, Sonic Hh (Shh), in pancreatic
cancer and breast cancer. Here we developed a new strategy to control the
activation of the Hh signaling pathway in cancer cells, which have ectopic and
ligand dependent activation of the Hh signaling pathway. Our strategy may
contribute to the development of a new cancer treatment.

PMID: 18219851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 18;283(16):10649-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706795200. Epub 2008
Jan 23.

Rab23 regulates differentiation of ATDC5 chondroprogenitor cells.

Yang L(1), Clinton JM, Blackburn ML, Zhang Q, Zou J, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A,
Tang BL, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Insulin treatment of mouse ATDC5 chondroprogenitors induces these cells to
differentiate into mature chondrocytes. To identify novel factors that are
involved in this process, we carried out mutagenesis of ATDC5 cells through
retroviral insertion and isolated two mutant clones incapable of differentiation.
Inverse PCR analysis of these clones revealed that the retroviral DNA was
inserted into the promoter region of the Rab23 gene, resulting in increased Rab23
expression. To investigate whether an elevated level of Rab23 protein led to
inhibition of chondrogenic differentiation, we characterized ATDC5 cells that
either overexpress endogenous Rab23 or stably express ectopic Rab23. Our results 
revealed that up-regulation of Rab23 can indeed inhibit chondrogenic
differentiation with a concomitant down-regulation of matrix genes such as type
II collagen and aggrecan. In addition, stable small interfering RNA knockdown of 
Rab23 also resulted in inhibition of chondrogenic differentiation as well as
down-regulation of Sox9, a master regulator of chondrogenesis. Interestingly,
Sox9 expression has recently been linked to Gli1, and we found that Rab23
knockdown decreased Gli1 expression in chondrocytes. Because the phenotypes of
Rab23 mutations in mice and humans include defects in cartilage and bone
development, our study suggests that Rab23 is involved in the control of Sox9
expression via Gli1 protein.

PMCID: PMC4178318
PMID: 18218620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Jan 28;14(4):582-9.

Gli-1 siRNA induced apoptosis in Huh7 cells.

Chen XL(1), Cao LQ, She MR, Wang Q, Huang XH, Fu XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080, Guangdong Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the effects of Gli-1 small interference RNA (siRNA) on Huh7
cells, and the change of Bcl-2 expression in Huh7 cells.
METHODS: Human hepatocellular carcinoma cells Huh7 were used. Cell viability was 
analyzed by 3-(4, 5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT)
assay. The expressions of Gli-1 and Bcl-2 family members were detected by RT-PCR 
and Western blot. Apoptosis was detected by Flow cytometry using propidium
iodide, measured by Hoechst 33258 staining using Advanced Fluorescence Microscopy
and caspase-3 enzymatic assay. Cell growth was analyzed after treatment with
Gli-1 siRNA and 5-fluorouracil (5-Fu).
RESULTS: Inhibition of Gli-1 mRNA in Huh7 cells through Gli-1 siRNA reduced cell 
viability. Gli-1 siRNA treatment also induced apoptosis by three criteria,
increase in the sub-G1 cell cycle fraction, nuclear condensation, a morphologic
change typical of apoptosis, and activation of caspase-3. Gli-1 siRNA was also
able to down-regulate Bcl-2. However, Gli-1 siRNA resulted in no significant
changes in Bcl-xl, Bax, Bad, and Bid. Furthermore, Gli-1 siRNA increased the
cytotoxic effect of 5-Fu on Huh7 cell.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of Bcl-2 plays an important role in apoptosis induced
by Gli-1 siRNA in HCC cells. Combination Gli-1 siRNA with chemotherapeutic drug
could represent a more promising strategy against HCC. The effects of the
strategies need further investigation in vivo and may have potential clinical
application.

PMCID: PMC2681150
PMID: 18203291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Oncogene. 2008 May 22;27(23):3282-91. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

The EWS/FLI1 oncogenic transcription factor deregulates GLI1.

Zwerner JP(1), Joo J, Warner KL, Christensen L, Hu-Lieskovan S, Triche TJ, May
WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA, USA.

Ewing family tumors (EFT), classically Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, share a common class of tumor-specific fusion genes
thought to be key mediators of tumor biology. Here we demonstrate that the most
common Ewing's fusion, EWS/FLI1, produces transcriptional upregulation of GLI1
and its direct transcriptional target PATCHED1 in a model transformation system. 
This deregulation of GLI1 is common to other EWS/ets chimera and depends on the
functional transcriptional regulatory domains. Inhibition of GLI1 via RNAi or via
overexpression of endogenous inhibitors results in a reduction of EWS/FLI1
transformation activity. Activation of GLI1 appears to occur in a
Hedgehog-independent fashion as blockade of Hedgehog signaling has only a modest 
effect on EFT cells. We present evidence that EWS/FLI1 upregulation of cMYC may
play a role in the upregulation of GLI1 in EWS/FLI1-transformed NIH3T3 cells.
Finally, we demonstrate that observations made in a model transformation system
translate to an Ewing cellular background. EFT cell lines express GLI1 and
PATCHED and this expression is EWS/FLI1 dependent. Inhibition of GLI1 expression 
via RNAi results in reduced anchorage-independent growth in an EFT cell line.
GLI1 appears to be a transcriptionally deregulated target of EWS/FLI1 that
mediates a portion of its tumorigenic phenotype.

PMID: 18084326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Nov;1116:100-12.

Synovial joint formation during mouse limb skeletogenesis: roles of Indian
hedgehog signaling.

Koyama E(1), Ochiai T, Rountree RB, Kingsley DM, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Iwamoto M,
Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) has been previously found to regulate synovial joint
formation. To analyze mechanisms, we carried out morphological, molecular, and
cell fate map analyses of interzone and joint development in wild-type and
Ihh(-/-) mouse embryo long bones. We found that Ihh(-/-) cartilaginous digit
anlagen remained fused and lacked interzones or mature joints, whereas wrist
skeletal elements were not fused but their joints were morphologically abnormal. 
E14.5 and E17.5 wild-type digit and ankle prospective joints expressed hedgehog
target genes including Gli1 and Gli2 and interzone-associated genes including
Gdf5, Erg, and tenascin-C, but expression of all these genes was barely
detectable in mutant joints. For cell fate map analysis of joint progenitor
cells, we mated Gdf5-Cre(+/-)/Rosa R26R(+/-) double transgenic mice with
heterozygous Ihh(+/-) mice and monitored reporter beta-galactosidase activity and
gene expression in triple-transgenic progeny. In control
Gdf5-Cre(+/-)/R26R(+/-)/Ihh(+/-) limbs, reporter-positive cells were present in
developing interzones, articulating layers, and synovial lining tissue and absent
from underlying growth plates. In mutant Gdf5-Cre(+/-)/R26R(+/-)/Ihh(-/-)
specimens, reporter-positive cells were present also. However, the cells were
mostly located around the prospective and uninterrupted digit joint sites and,
interestingly, still expressed Erg, tenascin-C, and Gdf5. Topographical analysis 
revealed that interzone and associated cells were not uniformly distributed, but 
were much more numerous ventrally. A similar topographical bias was seen for
cavitation process and capsule primordia formation. In sum, Ihh is a critical and
possibly direct regulator of joint development. In its absence, distribution and 
function of Gdf5-expressing interzone-associated cells are abnormal, but their
patterning at prospective joint sites still occurs. The joint-forming functions
of the cells appear to normally involve a previously unsuspected asymmetric
distribution along the ventral-to-dorsal plane of the developing joint.

PMCID: PMC2673545
PMID: 18083924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Jan 1;180(1):47-50.

Methylation of PTCH1, the Patched-1 gene, in a panel of primary medulloblastomas.

Pritchard JI(1), Olson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is aberrantly activated in a subset of the most 
common malignant pediatric brain tumor, medulloblastoma (MB). Shh pathway
activity is measured by expression of the target genes in the GLI family, MYCN
and PTCH1, a tumor suppressor and negative regulator of the pathway. Promoter
methylation of tumor suppressors is implicated in tumor formation by gene
silencing. In this study, we examined whether the proximal promoter of the PTCH1 
gene (variant exon 1B) is methylated in some cases of MB. The cases in which we
anticipated the highest likelihood of methylation were chosen based on gene
expression of indicators of Shh pathway activity. Of 21 primary MBs, four
exhibited robust mRNA expression of GLI1 and MYCN as well as low or absent PTCH1 
expression, suggesting Shh pathway activity in the absence of PTCH1. The
methylation profile of these cases was determined by the bisulfite sequencing
method and compared to the profiles of five unaffected pediatric cerebellum
controls. Contrary to our hypothesis, there was no evidence of methylation in the
PTCH1-1B promoter in the MB cases examined, nor was there methylation in the
control cerebellum samples. Future directions include examination of distal
regions of the PTCHlb promoter as well as alternative exon variants, most notably
the CpG island containing PTCH1-1C promoter.

PMCID: PMC2219922
PMID: 18068533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;19(6):691-6. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

The primary cilia, a 'Rab-id' transit system for hedgehog signaling.

Oro AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
oro@stanford.edu

Intense focus has been centered around how the primary cilia transduces the
hedgehog (Hh) signal from smoothened (Smo) to the Gli transcription factors. New 
data indicate that ligand and signaling lipids help regulate small
GTPase-dependent accumulation and activity of signaling components.

PMCID: PMC3761365
PMID: 18061425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Sports Med. 2008 Mar;36(3):474-9. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Effect of posterior cruciate ligament deficiency on in vivo translation and
rotation of the knee during weightbearing flexion.

Li G(1), Papannagari R, Li M, Bingham J, Nha KW, Allred D, Gill T.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: The effect of posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) deficiency on 6
degrees of freedom in vivo knee-joint kinematics is unclear.
HYPOTHESIS: In addition to constraining anterior-posterior translation, the PCL
also functions to constrain the medial-lateral translation and rotation of the
knee during weightbearing flexion of the knee.
STUDY DESIGN: Controlled laboratory study.
METHODS: Eight patients with a PCL injury in 1 knee and the other intact were
scanned with magnetic resonance imaging, and 3-dimensional models of the femur
and tibia were created for both knees. Each knee was imaged during quasistatic
weight-bearing flexion (from 0 degrees to 105 degrees ) using a dual-orthogonal
fluoroscopic system. The translation and rotation of the PCL-deficient knee were 
compared with the intact contralateral control.
RESULTS: Posterior cruciate ligament deficiency caused an increase in posterior
tibial translation beyond 30 degrees of flexion compared with the intact
contralateral knees. At 90 degrees of flexion, PCL deficiency increased posterior
tibial translation by 3.5 mm (P < .05). In the medial-lateral direction, PCL
deficiency resulted in a 1.1 mm increase in lateral tibial translation at 90
degrees of flexion (P < .05). With regard to rotation, PCL deficiency caused a
significantly lower varus rotation (on average, 0.6 degrees lower) at 90 degrees 
of flexion. Posterior cruciate ligament deficiency caused a decreased internal
tibial rotation throughout the range of flexion, but no significant difference
was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: This study quantitatively describes the effect of PCL injury on 6
degrees of freedom kinematics of the knee during quasistatic weightbearing
flexion. Using the intact contralateral side as a control, we found that PCL
injuries not only affect anterior-posterior tibial translation but also
medial-lateral translation and rotation of the knee.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: These data provide baseline knowledge of the in vivo
kinematics of the knee after PCL injury. Surgical reconstruction of the injured
PCL, either using single-bundle or double-bundle technique, should not only focus
on restoration of posterior stability of the knee but also the medial-lateral
stability as well as the rotational stability. These findings may help to explain
the long-term degenerative changes seen in PCL-deficient knees.

PMID: 18057390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 1;313(1):359-70. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Disruption of the PACAP gene promotes medulloblastoma in ptc1 mutant mice.

Lelievre V(1), Seksenyan A, Nobuta H, Yong WH, Chhith S, Niewiadomski P, Cohen
JR, Dong H, Flores A, Liau LM, Kornblum HI, Scott MP, Waschek JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Research/Mental Retardation
Research Center, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) proteins and cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) generally play
opposing roles in developmental patterning events. Humans and mice heterozygous
for mutations in the sonic hedgehog (Shh) receptor gene patched-1 (ptc1) have an 
increased incidence of certain types of cancer, including medulloblastoma (MB), a
highly aggressive tumor of the cerebellum. Despite the importance of PKA in Hh
signaling, little is known about how PKA activity is regulated in the context of 
Hh signaling, or the consequences of improper regulation. One molecule that can
influence PKA activity is pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP), 
which has been shown to regulate cerebellar granule precursor proliferation in
vitro, a cell population thought to give rise to MB. To test for a PACAP/Hh
interaction in the initiation or propagation of these tumors, we introduced a
PACAP mutation into ptc1 mutant mice. Deletion of a single copy of PACAP
increased MB incidence approximate 2.5-fold, to 66%, thereby demonstrating that
PACAP exerts a powerful inhibitory action on the induction, growth or survival of
these tumors. Tumors from PACAP/ptc1 mutant mice retained PACAP receptor gene
expression, and exhibited superinduction of Hh target genes compared to those
from ptc1+/- mice. Moreover, PACAP inhibited proliferation of cell lines derived 
from tumors in a PKA-dependent manner, and inhibited expression of the Hh target 
gene gli1. The results provide genetic evidence that PACAP acts as a
physiological factor that regulates the pathogenesis of Hh pathway-associated MB 
tumors.

PMCID: PMC2206628
PMID: 18036580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Methods Mol Biol. 2007;397:67-78.

Efficient manipulation of Hedgehog/GLI signaling using retroviral expression
systems.

Kasper M, Regl G, Eichberger T, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Efficient manipulation of Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signaling activity is crucial to the 
analysis of molecular events underlying HH/GLI-regulated cell fate determination 
and tumor growth. In this article, we describe the use of retroviral expression
systems as a valuable tool to activate or repress Hh-pathway activity in a broad 
spectrum of mammalian cells-including human cells-either by forced expression of 
the major Hedgehog-effectors GLI1 and GLI2 or by expression of the short-hairpin 
RNAs-targeting GLI mRNAs. We focus on two distinct retroviral systems that allow 
efficient and sustainable expression of GLI proteins in primary cells and cell
lines of human origin: (i) a Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus-based and (ii) an
HIV-derived lentivirus expression system, which allows transduction of both
dividing and quiescent cells.

PMID: 18025714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Leukemia. 2008 Jan;22(1):226-8. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Differential expression of Sonic hedgehog and Gli1 in hematological malignancies.

Bai LY, Chiu CF, Lin CW, Hsu NY, Lin CL, Lo WJ, Kao MC.

PMID: 17928882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 7;282(49):36090-101. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Targeted expression of GLI1 in the mammary gland disrupts pregnancy-induced
maturation and causes lactation failure.

Fiaschi M(1), Rozell B, Bergström A, Toftgård R, Kleman MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, SE-141
57 Huddinge, Sweden.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway regulates the development and function of numerous
tissues and when mis-regulated causes tumorigenesis. To assess the role of a
deregulated Hedgehog signaling pathway in the mammary gland we targeted the
expression of the Hedgehog effector protein, GLI1, to mammary epithelial cells
using a bigenic inducible system. A constitutively active Hedgehog signaling
pathway resulted with 100% penetrance in an undifferentiated mammary
lobuloalveolar network during pregnancy. GLI1-expressing transgenic females were 
unable to lactate and milk protein gene expression was essentially absent. The
inability to lactate was permanent and independent of continued GLI1 transgene
expression. An increased expression of the GLI1 response gene Snail coupled to
reduced expression of E-cadherin and STAT5 in the transgenic mammary gland
provides a likely molecular explanation, underlying the observed phenotypic
changes. In addition, remodeling of the mammary gland after parturition was
impaired and expression of GLI1 was associated with accumulation of cellular
debris in the mammary ducts during involution, indicating a defect in the
clearance of dead cells. Areas with highly proliferative epithelial cells were
observed in mammary glands with induced expression of GLI1. Within such areas an 
increased frequency of cells expressing nuclear Cyclin D1 was observed. Taken
together the data support the notion that correct regulation of Hedgehog
signaling within the epithelial cell compartment is critical for
pregnancy-induced mammary gland development and remodeling.

PMID: 17928300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2007 Sep;14(3):865-74.

Snail and Sonic Hedgehog activation in neuroendocrine tumors of the ileum.

Fendrich V(1), Waldmann J, Esni F, Ramaswamy A, Mullendore M, Buchholz M, Maitra 
A, Feldmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, John Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. fendrich@med.uni-marbug.de

The transcription factor Snail represses E-cadherin and induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a process also exploited by invasive cancer
cells. Aberrant Hedgehog (Hh) signaling was recently observed in a variety of
epithelial cancers and it has been shown that the Hh target gene Gli1 induces
expression of Snail. In this study, we examined whether Snail and Sonic Hedgehog 
(SHH) are expressed in neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) of the ileum. Using
immunohistochemistry, we found expression of Snail in 22 out of 37 (59%) of
evaluated NET samples, but not in adjacent normal tissues. Snail expression was
mostly restricted to the invasive front of the tumors. Six of seven liver
metastases analyzed were positive for Snail. Intratumoral expression of SHH was
detected in 27 out of 37 (73%) tumors. As opposed to Snail, cells expressing SHH 
were found to be distributed more randomly throughout the tumors. Out of 30
primary NETs, 16 (53%) showed both Snail and SHH expression. Furthermore, we
found downregulation of E-cadherin in Snail-expressing cells by
immunofluorescence. Real-time RT-PCR revealed conservation of the Hh target genes
Gli1, Gli2, and Ptch in the pancreatic carcinoid cell line BON-1, which were
downregulated upon Hh inhibition with cyclopamine. Moreover, Hh inhibition
attenuated in vitro cell growth in a dose-dependent manner. In conclusion, we
describe for the first time that Snail and SHH are overexpressed in a large
subset of NETs of the ileum. Aberrant activation of these pathways might be
involved in invasion and metastatic spread in NETs.

PMID: 17914115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Stem Cells. 2007 Dec;25(12):3069-80. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Sonic hedgehog stimulates mouse embryonic stem cell proliferation by cooperation 
of Ca2+/protein kinase C and epidermal growth factor receptor as well as Gli1
activation.

Heo JS(1), Lee MY, Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Biotherapy Human Resources Center,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Korea.

Hedgehog signaling has an essential role in the control of stem cell growth in
embryonic tissues. Therefore, this study examined the effect of sonic hedgehog
(Shh) on the self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and its related
mechanisms. Shh increased DNA synthesis blocked by the inhibition of the
smoothened receptor. Shh required Gli1 activation to induce the increases in
Notch/Hes-1 and Wnt/beta-catenin. Shh increased the intracellular calcium
concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) and protein kinase C (PKC) activity. We show that the
Shh-induced increase in the Gli1 mRNA level requires [Ca(2+)](i) and PKC. Shh
increased the phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which
is blocked by the matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor. Subsequently, Shh increased
the nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB p65 phosphorylation, which was inhibited by
blocking PKC and EGFR tyrosine kinase. Shh also increased the level of the cell
cycle regulatory proteins in a dose-dependent manner. However, Shh decreased the 
levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitory proteins. The effect of Shh on
these proteins was inhibited by blocking PKC, EGFR, and NF-kappaB as well as
transfection of Gli1 small interfering RNA (siRNA). Finally, Shh-induced
progression of the G1/S-phase was blocked by the inhibition of PKC and EGFR
tyrosine kinase. In conclusion, Shh stimulates mouse ES cell proliferation
through Gli1 activation as well as Ca(2+)/PKC and EGFR. Disclosure of potential
conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 17901397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Pigment Cell Res. 2007 Oct;20(5):341-2.

The HOG-GLI face of melanoma.

Bar-Eli M.

PMID: 17850506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 26;362(3):568-74. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

Activin B mediated induction of Pdx1 in human embryonic stem cell derived
embryoid bodies.

Frandsen U(1), Porneki AD, Floridon C, Abdallah BM, Kassem M.

Author information: 
(1)KMEB Laboratory, Medical Biotechnology Center, Winslevparken 25.1, DK-5000
Odense C, Denmark. ufrandsen@health.sdh.dk

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have the potential to provide alternative
sources for pancreatic islet grafts. In the present study we have investigated
the influence of Activin A and Activin B on the expression of the pancreas marker
gene Pdx1 in hESCs differentiated as embryoid bodies (EBs). We report here that
Activin B in a dose depend manner markedly up-regulates Pdx1 expression as
compared to Activin A and untreated cultures. Pdx1(+) cells co-express FOXA2 but 
lacks, however, co-expression with nkx6.1, a marker combination that in the
present study is shown precisely to identify embryonic and fetal pancreas anlage 
in humans. Pdx1(+) cells are found in cell clusters also expressing Serpina1 and 
FABP1, suggesting activation of intestinal/liver developmental programs.
Moreover, Activin B up-regulates Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and its target Gli1, which 
during normal development is suppressed in the pancreatic anlage. In conclusion, 
Activin B is a potent inducer of Pdx1 as well as Shh in differentiating hESCs.
The data suggest that additional suppression of Shh signaling may be required to 
allow for proper specification of pancreatic cell lineages in hESCs.

PMID: 17761145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Toxicol Sci. 2007 Dec;100(2):456-63. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

Identification and characterization of several dietary alkaloids as weak
inhibitors of hedgehog signaling.

Lipinski RJ(1), Dengler E, Kiehn M, Peterson RE, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53703, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an integral role in the patterning and 
development of diverse structures in the vertebrate embryo. Aberrations in Hh
signaling are associated with a range of developmental defects including failure 
of interhemispheric division of the embryonic forebrain as well as midline facial
dysmorphia including cleft lip/palate and cyclopia, collectively termed
holoprosencephaly (HPE). Postnatally, Hh signaling has been postulated to play a 
pivotal role in healing and repair processes and inappropriate Hh pathway
activation has been implicated in several types of cancers. The Veratrum alkaloid
cyclopamine is a potent inhibitor of Hh signaling and causes HPE-like defects in 
diverse species including sheep, hamster, mouse, and zebra fish. Using murine
cell-based assays, we have determined that a number of dietary alkaloids similar 
in structure to cyclopamine also inhibit Hh signaling but with significantly
lower potency. We found that these dietary compounds act additively through a
mechanism similar to cyclopamine, downstream of Ptc1 and upstream of Gli1. Using 
an embryonic zebra fish developmental assay, we found that while cyclopamine
exposure caused HPE-like defects, exposure to one of these dietary compounds,
solanidine, did not.

PMID: 17728282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cell Cycle. 2007 Oct 15;6(20):2458-63. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

Non-canonical activation of GLI transcription factors: implications for targeted 
anti-cancer therapy.

Lauth M(1), Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Center for Biosciences, Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Novum Research Park, Huddinge, Sweden.

GLI transcription factors constitute the final effectors of the Hedgehog (HH)
signaling pathway. In many tumors, such as those of the pancreas, prostate, skin 
or lung, ectopic activation of GLI proteins has been linked to tumorigenesis. In 
several of these cases, HH ligand- or receptor-induced signaling (canonical HH
signaling) was found to be the cause underlying GLI activation. Recent evidence
points towards additional, noncanonical, mechanisms of GLI activation. Here we
review findings on the crosstalk of two HH-unrelated signaling pathways (RAS and 
Transforming growth factor beta) to the HH pathway downstream of the signaling
component Smoothened. Both pathways stimulate and/or induce GLI1 and GLI2
activity independent of the presence of HH ligands. We also discuss the putative 
roles of these crosstalk mechanisms for tumor cell metastasis. The emerging
picture of GLI transcription factors as an integrative platform of numerous
signaling inputs has important implications for the understanding of tumor
development and argues for inclusion of targets acting downstream of the receptor
level in the design of current drug development programs.

PMID: 17726373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dev Biol. 2007 Sep 15;309(2):273-84. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

Kinesin-2 controls development and patterning of the vertebrate skeleton by
Hedgehog- and Gli3-dependent mechanisms.

Kolpakova-Hart E(1), Jinnin M, Hou B, Fukai N, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Hedgehog signaling plays an essential role in patterning of the vertebrate
skeleton. Here we demonstrate that conditional inactivation of the Kif3a subunit 
of the kinesin-2 intraflagellar transport motor in mesenchymal skeletal
progenitor cells results in severe patterning defects in the craniofacial area,
the formation of split sternum and the development of polydactyly. These
deformities are reminiscent of those previously described in mice with
deregulated hedgehog signaling. We show that in Kif3a-deficient mesenchymal
tissues both the repressor function of Gli3 transcription factor and the
activation of the Shh transcriptional targets Ptch and Gli1 are compromised.
Quantitative analysis of gene expression demonstrates that the Gli1 transcript
level is dramatically reduced, whereas Gli3 expression is not significantly
affected by kinesin-2 depletion. However, the motor appears to be required for
the efficient cleavage of the full-length Gli3 transcription factor into a
repressor form.

PMCID: PMC2062520
PMID: 17698054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Int J Cancer. 2007 Dec 15;121(12):2622-7.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is inactive in colorectal cancer cell lines.

Chatel G(1), Ganeff C, Boussif N, Delacroix L, Briquet A, Nolens G, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Experimental Cancer Research Center, Center of 
Biomedical Integrative Genoproteomics, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an important role in human development.
Abnormal activation of this pathway has been observed in several types of human
cancers, such as the upper gastro-intestinal tract cancers. However, activation
of the Hh pathway in colorectal cancers is controversial. We analyzed the
expression of the main key members of the Hh pathway in 7 colon cancer cell lines
in order to discover whether the pathway is constitutively active in these cells.
We estimated the expression of SHH, IHH, PTCH, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, SUFU and
HHIP genes by RT-PCR. Moreover, Hh ligand, Gli3 and Sufu protein levels were
quantified by western blotting. None of the cell lines expressed the complete set
of Hh pathway members. The ligands were absent from Colo320 and HCT116 cells, Smo
from Colo205, HT29 and WiDr. GLI1 gene was not expressed in SW480 cells nor were 
GLI2/GLI3 in Colo205 or Caco-2 cells. Furthermore the repressive form of Gli3,
characteristic of an inactive pathway, was detected in SW480 and Colo320 cells.
Finally treatment of colon cancer cells with cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of
the Hh pathway, did not downregulate PTCH and GLI1 genes expression in the
colorectal cells, whereas it did so in PANC1 control cells. Taken together, these
results indicate that the aberrant activation of the Hh signaling pathway is not 
common in colorectal cancer cell lines.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17683069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Development. 2007 Aug;134(16):2903-12.

Evc is a positive mediator of Ihh-regulated bone growth that localises at the
base of chondrocyte cilia.

Ruiz-Perez VL(1), Blair HJ, Rodriguez-Andres ME, Blanco MJ, Wilson A, Liu YN,
Miles C, Peters H, Goodship JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Central Parkway, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. vlruiz@iib.uam.es

EVC is a novel protein mutated in the human chondroectodermal dysplasia Ellis-van
Creveld syndrome (EvC; OMIM: 225500). We have inactivated Evc in the mouse and
show that Evc(-/-) mice develop an EvC-like syndrome, including short ribs, short
limbs and dental abnormalities. lacZ driven by the Evc promoter revealed that Evc
is expressed in the developing bones and the orofacial region. Antibodies
developed against Evc locate the protein at the base of the primary cilium. The
growth plate of Evc(-/-) mice shows delayed bone collar formation and advanced
maturation of chondrocytes. Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is expressed normally in the
growth plates of Evc(-/-) mice, but expression of the Ihh downstream genes Ptch1 
and Gli1 was markedly decreased. Recent studies have shown that Smo localises to 
primary cilia and that Gli3 processing is defective in intraflagellar transport
mutants. In vitro studies using Evc(-/-) cells demonstrate that the defect lies
downstream of Smo. Chondrocyte cilia are present in Evc(-/-) mice and Gli3
processing appears normal by western blot analysis. We conclude that Evc is an
intracellular component of the hedgehog signal transduction pathway that is
required for normal transcriptional activation of Ihh target genes.

PMID: 17660199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Sep;79(9):642-51.

Molecular changes associated with teratogen-induced cyclopia.

Loucks EJ(1), Schwend T, Ahlgren SC.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Research Center Program in Developmental Biology, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exposure of zebrafish embryos to a number of teratogens results in
cyclopia, but little is known about the underlying molecular changes.
METHODS: Using zebrafish embryos, we compare the effects cyclopamine, forskolin, 
and ethanol delivered starting just before gastrulation, on gene expression in
early axial tissues and forebrain development.
RESULTS: Although all three teratogens suppress gli1 expression, they do so with 
variable kinetics, suggesting that while suppression of Shh signaling is a common
outcome of these three teratogens, it is not a common cause of the cyclopia.
Instead, all teratogens studied produce a series of changes in the expression of 
gsc and six3b present in early axial development, as well as a later suppression 
of neural crest cell marker dlx3b. Ethanol and forskolin, but not cyclopamine,
exposure reduced anterior markers, which most likely contributes to the cyclopic 
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that each teratogen exposure leads to a unique
set of molecular changes that underlie the single phenotype of cyclopia.

PMID: 17647295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 15;67(14):6981-6.

Induction of sonic hedgehog mediators by transforming growth factor-beta:
Smad3-dependent activation of Gli2 and Gli1 expression in vitro and in vivo.

Dennler S(1), André J, Alexaki I, Li A, Magnaldo T, ten Dijke P, Wang XJ,
Verrecchia F, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U697, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Pavillon Bazin, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux,
75010 Paris, France.

Hedgehog (Hh) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family members are
involved in numerous overlapping processes during embryonic development, hair
cycle, and cancer. Herein, we show that TGF-beta induces the expression of the Hh
signaling molecules Gli1 and Gli2 in various human cell types, including normal
fibroblasts and keratinocytes, as well as various cancer cell lines. Gli2
induction by TGF-beta is rapid, independent from Hh receptor signaling, and
requires a functional Smad pathway. Gli1 expression is subsequently activated in 
a Gli2-dependent manner. In transgenic mice overexpressing TGF-beta1 in the skin,
Gli1 and Gli2 expression is also elevated and depends on Smad3. In pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines resistant to Hh inhibition, pharmacologic blockade of
TGF-beta signaling leads to repression of cell proliferation accompanied with a
reduction in Gli2 expression. We thus identify TGF-beta as a potent
transcriptional inducer of Gli transcription factors. Targeting the cooperation
of Hh and TGF-beta signaling may provide new therapeutic opportunities for cancer
treatment.

PMID: 17638910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Stem Cells. 2007 Oct;25(10):2524-33. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Cyclopamine-mediated hedgehog pathway inhibition depletes stem-like cancer cells 
in glioblastoma.

Bar EE(1), Chaudhry A, Lin A, Fan X, Schreck K, Matsui W, Piccirillo S, Vescovi
AL, DiMeco F, Olivi A, Eberhart CG.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, 720
Rutland Avenue, Ross Building 558, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Brain tumors can arise following deregulation of signaling pathways normally
activated during brain development and may derive from neural stem cells. Given
the requirement for Hedgehog in non-neoplastic stem cells, we investigated
whether Hedgehog blockade could target the stem-like population in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM). We found that Gli1, a key Hedgehog pathway target, was highly
expressed in 5 of 19 primary GBM and in 4 of 7 GBM cell lines. Shh ligand was
expressed in some primary tumors, and in GBM-derived neurospheres, suggesting a
potential mechanism for pathway activation. Hedgehog pathway blockade by
cyclopamine caused a 40%-60% reduction in growth of adherent glioma lines highly 
expressing Gli1 but not in those lacking evidence of pathway activity. When
GBM-derived neurospheres were treated with cyclopamine and then dissociated and
seeded in media lacking the inhibitor, no new neurospheres formed, suggesting
that the clonogenic cancer stem cells had been depleted. Consistent with this
hypothesis, the stem-like fraction in gliomas marked by both aldehyde
dehydrogenase activity and Hoechst dye excretion (side population) was
significantly reduced or eliminated by cyclopamine. In contrast, we found that
radiation treatment of our GBM neurospheres increased the percentage of these
stem-like cells, suggesting that this standard therapy preferentially targets
better-differentiated neoplastic cells. Most importantly, viable GBM cells
injected intracranially following Hedgehog blockade were no longer able to form
tumors in athymic mice, indicating that a cancer stem cell population critical
for ongoing growth had been removed. Disclosure of potential conflicts of
interest is found at the end of this article.

PMCID: PMC2610257
PMID: 17628016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Acta Orthop. 2007 Jun;78(3):355-60.

The effects of ACL deficiency on mediolateral translation and varus-valgus
rotation.

Li G(1), Papannagari R, DeFrate LE, Yoo JD, Park SE, Gill TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School. Boston, MA, USA. gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) constrains the anterior
translation and axial rotation of the tibia. However, the effect of ACL injury on
the mediolateral translation and varus-valgus rotation of the tibia is unknown.
Because of the oblique orientation of the ACL, we hypothesized that ACL
deficiency alters mediolateral translation and varus-valgus rotation.
METHODS: The kinematics of 9 cadavers from full extension to 90 degrees of
flexion under various loading conditions were measured before and after ACL
resection using a robotic testing system.
RESULTS: ACL deficiency increased the medial translation of the tibia and valgus 
rotation, especially at 15 degrees and 30 degrees of flexion. For example, at 15 
degrees, ACL deficiency increased the medial translation from 1.2 (SD 0.9) mm to 
1.8 (SD 1.1) mm in response to a quadriceps load. The valgus rotation also
increased from 0.8 degrees (SD 0.6) to 1.7 degrees (SD 0.8).
INTERPRETATION: ACL deficiency altered both the mediolateral tibial translation
and valgus-varus rotation under various loading conditions. The increased medial 
tibial translation could shift the contact in the medial compartment towards the 
medial tibial spine, a region where degeneration is observed in ACL-deficient
patients. In addition to restoring anterior laxity, ACL reconstruction might need
to restore the mediolateral translation of the tibia and varus-valgus rotation of
the knee.

PMID: 17611849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):405-12.

Hedgehog-independent overexpression of transforming growth factor-beta1 in
rhabdomyosarcoma of Patched1 mutant mice.

Eichenmüller M(1), Bauer R, Von Schweinitz D, Hahn H, Kappler R.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgical Clinic, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, D-80337 Munich, Germany.

The tumor suppressor gene PATCHED1 (PTCH1) is a member of the hedgehog signaling 
pathway and causatively associated with several human sporadic and familial
cancers, including those of the skin, muscle and brain. Inactivation of one Ptch1
allele in the mouse results in the development of medulloblastoma and
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), the latter being a malignant tumor of skeletal muscle
origin. To identify genes involved in the pathogenesis of Ptch1-associated RMS,
we have monitored the expression of 588 genes in RMS and normal skeletal muscle
(SM) of heterozygous Ptch1neo67/+ mice using cDNA array technology. RMS displayed
increased transcript levels of several genes such as transforming growth
factor-beta1 (Tgfb1), insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2), villin 2 (Vil2),
integrin beta1 (Itgb1), Sloan-Kettering viral oncogene homolog (Ski), and
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (Igfbp3), as well as numerous genes 
coding for structural components of myogenic cells such as myosin light
polypeptide 4 (Myl4), myosin light polypeptide 6 (Myl6), and vimentin (Vim).
Detailed promoter analysis revealed a putative Gli binding site in the second
promoter region (P2) of the murine Tgfb1 gene. However, using reporter assay we
show that the P2 promoter is not responsive to hedgehog signaling. We furthermore
describe that Tgfb1 expression could not be activated in C2C12 myoblasts in the
presence of murine Shh-N peptide and that Tgfb1 is equally expressed in both
wild-type and Ptch1-deficient mouse embryos. In line with this, TGFB1 was
strongly expressed in human RMS cell lines independently of the GLI1 expression
status. In summary, our results suggest that aberrant expression of Tgfb1 may be 
involved in RMS development in a way that is independent of hedgehog signaling.

PMID: 17611698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 15;308(2):331-42. Epub 2007 May 31.

Differential gene induction by genetic and ligand-mediated activation of the
Sonic hedgehog pathway in neural stem cells.

Galvin KE(1), Ye H, Wetmore C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
MN 55905, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a secreted morphogen and mitogen, is essential for nervous 
system development and neural stem cell (NSC) self-renewal. As the intracellular 
signal transduction of Shh in NSCs is largely unknown, we sought to characterize 
pathway targets using ligand stimulation and genetic models of activation. NSCs
haploinsufficient for Patched (Ptc), a receptor repressive to Shh signaling,
showed enhanced proliferation of a magnitude similar to Shh-treated wild-type
(Wt) NSCs. Analysis of the Gli zinc-finger transcription factors, primary
mediators of Shh activity, demonstrated differential induction between models of 
pathway activation. Gli1 was significantly induced in Wt NSCs exposed to Shh,
whereas Gli2 was elevated and Gli1 expression did not change in Ptc(+/-) NSCs.
Other Shh targets (Nmyc, Id factors) were induced under both conditions of
pathway activation. Interestingly, Shh-treated Ptc(+/-) NSCs induced expression
of Gli1 but failed to increase proliferation, suggesting that the NSCs may have
reached a physiologic plateau in proliferative capacity. Thus, our data
demonstrate that Ptc(+/-) mice have an expanded progenitor cell niche in vivo and
that NSCs maintain a cell-intrinsic increase in basal proliferation in vitro that
is sustained by a Gli transduction signature distinct from that of exogenous Shh 
stimulation. Additionally, Ptc(+/-) NSCs maintain tight control over mitosis and 
do not further augment proliferation in the presence of mitogenic stimulation.

PMID: 17599824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jun;6(6):832-9. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Dysregulation of stem cell signaling network due to germline mutation, SNP,
Helicobacter pylori infection, epigenetic change and genetic alteration in
gastric cancer.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Cell Biology Section, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045 Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Genetic factors, Helicobacter pylori infection, salt over-uptake, decreased
vegetable/fruit consumption, smoking, and metabolic syndrome are risk factors of 
human gastric cancer. Germline mutations of CDH1 gene, and SNPs of PTPN11 (SHP2),
TLR4, IL1B, TNFA, BMP6, GDF15 and RUNX3 genes are associated with gastric cancer.
Helicobacter pylori activates CagA-SHP2-ERK and peptidoglycan-NOD1-NFkappaB
signaling cascades in gastric epithelial cells using type IV secretion system,
and also TRAF6-MAP3K7-NFkappaB and TRAF6-MAP3K7-AP-1 signaling cascades in
epithelial and immune cells through lipopolysaccharide recognition by TLR2 or
TLR4. IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, TNFalpha and IFNgamma are elevated in gastric mucosa 
with Helicobacter pylori infection. IL-6 and TNFalpha induce upregulation of
WNT5A and WNT10B, respectively. WNT signals are transduced to
beta-catenin-TCF/LEF, RhoA, JNK, PKC, NFAT, and NLK signaling cascades.
WNT-beta-catenin-TCF/LEF signaling induces upregulation of MYC, CCND1, WISP1,
FGF20, JAG1 and DKK1 genes. Notch signals are transduced to CSL-NICD-MAML and
NFkappaB signaling cascades. FGF signals are transduced to ERK, PI3K-AKT, PKC,
and NFAT signaling cascades. Helicobacter pylori infection induces SHH
upregulation in parietal cell lineage, while BMP signals induce IHH upregulation 
in pit cell lineage. Hedgehog signals induce upregulation of GLI1, PTCH1, CCND2, 
FOXL1, JAG2 and SFRP1 genes. JAG1 and JAG2 activate Notch signaling, while DKK1
and SFRP1 inhibit WNT signaling. Stem cell signaling network, consisting of WNT, 
Notch, FGF, Hedgehog and BMP signaling pathways, is activated during chronic
Helicobacter pylori infection. Epigenetic silencing of SFRP1 gene occurs in the
earlier stage of carcinogenesis in the stomach, while amplification and
overexpression of FGFR2 gene in the later stage. Dysregulation of the stem cell
signaling network due to the accumulation of germline mutation, SNP, Helicobacter
pylori infection, epigenetic change and genetic alteration gives rise to gastric 
cancer. SNP typing and custom-made microarray analyses on genes encoding stem
cell signaling molecules could be utilized for the personalized medicine.

PMID: 17568183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Mar 27;87(12):826-8.

[mRNA expression of GLI1 in pancreatic carcinoma and clinical significance
thereof].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo JF(1), Li ZS, Jin ZD, Gao J, Gong YF, Jin J, Man XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mRNA expression of GLI1, a transcription regulator 
of Hedgehog signaling pathway, in human pancreatic carcinoma and to explore its
clinical significance.
METHODS: Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to
detect the mRNA expression of GLI1 in the tumor tissues, tissues near tumor, and 
normal tissues obtained during operation from 25 pancreatic carcinoma patients.
RESULTS: The GLI1 mRNA expression rate of the tumor tissues was 68.0% (17/25),
significantly higher than those of the tissues near tumor, and normal tissues
[24.0% (6/25) and 0 (0/25) respectively, both P < 0.01]. The GLI1 mRNA expression
rate was significantly associated with the differentiation degree of tumor tissue
(P = 0.014), and not significantly associated with the tumor size, invasion, and 
metastasis (all P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: GLI1 mRNA expression is strong in pancreatic carcinoma tissues and is
significantly associated with the differentiation degree of tumor tissue. With
diagnostic implication, GLI1 mRNA expression may be regarded as a parameter of
determining the degree of malignancy and prognosis of pancreatic carcinoma.

PMID: 17565866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Jun;42(6):915-26.

Stephen L. Gans Distinguished Overseas Lecture. The neural crest in pediatric
surgery.

Tovar JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 28046
Madrid, Spain. jatovar.hulp@salud.madrid.org

AIM: This review highlights the relevance of the neural crest (NC) as a
developmental control mechanism involved in several pediatric surgical conditions
and the investigative interest of following some of its known signaling pathways.
METHODS: The participation of the NC in facial clefts, ear defects, branchial
fistulae and cysts, heart outflow tract and aortic arch anomalies, pigmentary
disorders, abnormal enteric innervation, neural tumors, hemangiomas, and vascular
anomalies is briefly reviewed. Then, the literature on clinical and experimental 
esophageal atresia-tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) and congenital
diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is reviewed for the presence of associated NC defects.
Finally, some of the molecular signaling pathways involved in both conditions
(sonic hedgehog, Hox genes, and retinoids) are summarized.
RESULTS: The association of facial, cardiovascular, thymic, parathyroid, and
C-cell defects together with anomalies of extrinsic and intrinsic esophageal
innervation in babies and/or animals with both EA-TEF and CDH strongly supports
the hypothesis that NC is involved in the pathogenesis of these malformative
clusters. On the other hand, both EA-TEF and CDH are observed in mice mutant for 
genes involved in the previously mentioned signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The investigation of NC-related molecular pathogenic pathways
involved in malformative associations like EA-TEF and CDH that are induced by
chromosomal anomalies, chemical teratogens, and engineered mutations is a
promising way of clarifying why and how some pediatric surgical conditions occur.
Pediatric surgeons should be actively involved in these investigations.

PMID: 17560195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Dent Res. 2007 Jun;86(6):544-9.

Genetic changes in sporadic keratocystic odontogenic tumors (odontogenic
keratocysts).

Heikinheimo K(1), Jee KJ, Morgan PR, Nagy B, Knuutila S, Leivo I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Dentistry,
University of Turku, Lemminkäisenkatu 2, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland.
heikinhe@netlife.fi

Little is known about the genetic background of keratocystic odontogenic tumors
(KCOT, odontogenic keratocysts). Our aim was to characterize genomic aberrations 
in sporadic KCOT using cDNA-expression arrays and array-comparative genomic
hybridization. For cDNA-expression arrays, 10 KCOT specimens and 20 fetal tooth
germs were studied. Quantitative real-time reverse-transcription/polymerase
chain-reaction and immunohistochemical studies were also undertaken. Several
genes were over-expressed in 12q13, including cytokeratin 6B (KRT6B) (
approximately 10-fold), epidermal growth factor receptor ERBB3 (approximately
4.7-fold), and glioma-associated oncogene homologue 1 (GLI1) (approximately 5- to
12-fold). One amplicon (approximately 0.7 Mega base pairs [Mbp]), covering
several genes involved in the regulation of cell growth, was found in 12q13.2.
Deletions were found in 3q13.1, 5p14.3, and 7q31.3, including the
cell-adhesion-related gene cadherin 18 (CDH18) and leukocyte cell adhesion
molecule (ALCAM, MEMD). Over-expressed and amplified genes in 12q13, also
reported in several other tumors and cell lines, may contribute to the persistent
growth characteristics of KCOT.

PMID: 17525355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Neuro Oncol. 2007 Jul;9(3):298-307. Epub 2007 May 23.

Expression of the neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NEUROG1 
identifies a subgroup of medulloblastomas not expressing ATOH1.

Salsano E(1), Croci L, Maderna E, Lupo L, Pollo B, Giordana MT, Consalez GG,
Finocchiaro G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Experimental Neuro-Oncology, Carlo Besta Neurological Institute
Foundation, via Celoria 11, 20133 Milan, Italy. ettore.salsano@istituto-besta.it

To gain insight into the lineage of origin of medulloblastomas, the mRNA
expression of NEUROG1, a gene encoding a proneural transcription factor
transiently detected during nervous system development, was investigated in 27
human medulloblastomas characterized for mRNA expression of ATOH1, a marker of
cerebellar granule precursors and corresponding medulloblastomas. Expression of
Ngn1, the mouse homolog of NEUROG1, was also analyzed in the mouse cerebellar
primordium. In addition, we studied mRNA expression of GLI1 as a marker of the
SHH pathway activation, and nuclear beta-catenin staining, beta-catenin
mutations, and mRNA expression of MYC as indicators of the WNT pathway status. In
15 cases, we also examined expression of OTX2, a transcription factor recently
indicated as a positive marker of medulloblastomas originating from cerebellar
granule precursors. The mRNA expression of NEUROG1 and Ngn1 was selectively found
in medulloblastomas not expressing ATOH1 and in progenitors of the cerebellar
ventricular zone, respectively. GLI1 transcript was expressed in medulloblastomas
with ATOH1 transcript, whereas high levels of MYC transcript were unrelated to
NEUROG1 or ATOH1 expression. No clear association between MYC overexpression and 
nuclear beta-catenin staining was found. Finally, OTX2 mRNA was expressed in all 
medulloblastomas with NEUROG1 transcript, but also in a subset of these
malignancies with ATOH1 transcript. These observations may help to define the
lineage of origin of medulloblastomas, and support a role for ATOH1 and NEUROG1
in the classification of these malignancies.

PMCID: PMC1907423
PMID: 17522332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Development. 2007 Jun;134(11):2159-69.

Conditional Kif3a ablation causes abnormal hedgehog signaling topography, growth 
plate dysfunction, and excessive bone and cartilage formation during mouse
skeletogenesis.

Koyama E(1), Young B, Nagayama M, Shibukawa Y, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Iwamoto M,
Maeda Y, Lanske B, Song B, Serra R, Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. eiki.koyama@jefferson.edu

The motor protein Kif3a and primary cilia regulate important developmental
processes, but their roles in skeletogenesis remain ill-defined. Here we created 
mice deficient in Kif3a in cartilage and focused on the cranial base and
synchondroses. Kif3a deficiency caused cranial base growth retardation and
dysmorphogenesis, which were evident in neonatal animals by anatomical and
micro-computed tomography (microCT) inspection. Kif3a deficiency also changed
synchondrosis growth plate organization and function, and the severity of these
changes increased over time. By postnatal day (P)7, mutant growth plates lacked
typical zones of chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy, and were instead
composed of chondrocytes with an unusual phenotype characterized by strong
collagen II (Col2a1) gene expression but barely detectable expression of Indian
hedgehog (Ihh), collagen X (Col10a1), Vegf (Vegfa), MMP-13 (Mmp13) and osterix
(Sp7). Concurrently, unexpected developmental events occurred in perichondrial
tissues, including excessive intramembranous ossification all along the
perichondrial border and the formation of ectopic cartilage masses. Looking for
possible culprits for these latter processes, we analyzed hedgehog signalling
topography and intensity by monitoring the expression of the hedgehog effectors
Patched 1 and Gli1, and of the hedgehog-binding cell-surface component syndecan
3. Compared with controls, hedgehog signaling was quite feeble within mutant
growth plates as early as P0, but was actually higher and was widespread all
along mutant perichondrial tissues. Lastly, we studied postnatal mice deficient
in Ihh in cartilage; their cranial base defects only minimally resembled those in
Kif3a-deficient mice. In summary, Kif3a and primary cilia make unique
contributions to cranial base development and synchondrosis growth plate
function. Their deficiency causes abnormal topography of hedgehog signaling,
growth plate dysfunction, and un-physiologic responses and processes in
perichondrial tissues, including ectopic cartilage formation and excessive
intramembranous ossification.

PMCID: PMC2776720
PMID: 17507416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 15;104(20):8455-60. Epub 2007 May 9.

Inhibition of GLI-mediated transcription and tumor cell growth by small-molecule 
antagonists.

Lauth M(1), Bergström A, Shimokawa T, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum Research
Park, Hälsovägen 7, SE-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden.

The developmentally important Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has recently been
implicated in several forms of solid cancer. Current drug development programs
focus on targeting the protooncogene Smoothened, a key transmembrane pathway
member. These drug candidates, albeit promising, do not address the scenario in
which pathway activation occurs downstream of Smoothened, as observed in cases of
medulloblastoma, glioma, pericytoma, breast cancer, and prostate cancer. A
cellular screen for small-molecule antagonists of GLI-mediated transcription,
which constitutes the final step in the Hh pathway, revealed two molecules that
are able to selectively inhibit GLI-mediated gene transactivation. We provide
genetic evidence of downstream pathway blockade by these compounds and
demonstrate the ineffectiveness of upstream antagonists such as cyclopamine in
such situations. Mechanistically, both inhibitors act in the nucleus to block GLI
function, and one of them interferes with GLI1 DNA binding in living cells.
Importantly, the discovered compounds efficiently inhibited in vitro tumor cell
proliferation in a GLI-dependent manner and successfully blocked cell growth in
an in vivo xenograft model using human prostate cancer cells harboring downstream
activation of the Hh pathway.

PMCID: PMC1866313
PMID: 17494766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Differentiation. 2007 Dec;75(10):968-77. Epub 2007 May 9.

Urothelial sonic hedgehog signaling plays an important role in bladder smooth
muscle formation.

Shiroyanagi Y(1), Liu B, Cao M, Agras K, Li J, Hsieh MH, Willingham EJ, Baskin
LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, UCSF Children's Hospital, University of California San 
Francisco, P. O. Box 0738, 400 Parnassus A640, San Francisco, CA 94143-0738, USA.

During bladder development, primitive mesenchyme differentiates into smooth
muscle (SM) under the influence of urothelium. The gene(s) responsible for this
process have not been elucidated. We propose that the Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling pathway is critical in bladder SM formation. Herein, we examine the
role of the Shh-signaling pathway during SM differentiation in the embryonic
mouse bladder. Genes in the Shh pathway and SM expression in mouse embryonic (E) 
bladders (E12.5, 13.5, and 14.5) were examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC), in 
situ hybridization, and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
To examine the effects of disrupting Shh signaling, bladder tissues were isolated
at E12.5 and E14.5, that is, before and after bladder SM induction. The embryonic
bladders were cultured on membranes floating on medium with and without 10 muM of
cyclopamine, an Shh inhibitor. After 3 days, SM expression was examined by
assessing the following: SM alpha-actin (SMAA), SM gamma-actin (SMGA), SM-myosin 
heavy chain (SM-MHC), Patched, GLI1, bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4), and
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) by IHC and RT-PCR. SM-related genes and
proteins were not expressed in E12.5 mouse embryonic bladder before SM
differentiation, but were expressed by E13.5 when SM differentiation was
initiated. Shh was expressed in the urothelium in E12.5 bladders. Shh-related
gene expression at E12.5 was significantly higher than at E14.5. In
cyclopamine-exposed cultures of E12.5 tissue, SMAA, SMGA, GLI1, and BMP4 gene
expression was significantly decreased compared with controls, but PCNA gene
expression did not change. In cyclopamine-exposed E14.5 cultures, SMGA and SM-MHC
gene expression did not change compared with controls. Using an in vitro
embryonic bladder culture model, we were able to define the kinetics of SM- and
Shh-related gene expression. Cyclopamine inhibited detrusor SM actin induction,
but did not inhibit SM-MHC induction. SMAA and SMGA genes appear to be induced by
Shh-signaling pathways, but the SM-MHC gene is not. Based on Shh expression by
urothelium and the effects of Shh inhibition on bladder SM induction, we
hypothesize that urothelial-derived Shh orchestrates induction of SM in the fetal
mouse bladder.

PMID: 17490411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Jun;19(6):875-83.

The Patched gene is epigenetically regulated in ovarian dermoids and fibromas,
but not in basocellular carcinomas.

Cretnik M(1), Musani V, Oreskovic S, Leovic D, Levanat S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, HR 10002 Zagreb,
Croatia.

The Hedgehog/Patched signaling pathway plays a prominent role during mammalian
development but it is also involved in oncogenic transformation. We investigated 
the methylation status of the Patched promotor in a set of basocellular
carcinomas of the skin and ovarian tumors as an alternative to mutational causes 
of the pathway deregulation. Our aim was to define a possible role of genetic
and/or epigenetic mechanisms of Hedgehog/Patched signal transduction in the
development of these tumors. Bisulfite-converted DNA from tumors and from matched
healthy tissue was amplified by a specific PCR and the CpG-rich regions of the
Patched promoter were sequenced. Two promoter regions showed statistically
significant hypermethylation compared to healthy controls in ovarian tumors; more
significantly in the region in the vicinity of Gli1-binding sites and less
significantly in the region containing the ATG codon. But, in basocellular
carcinomas of the skin we observed no difference in methylation, suggesting
different mechanisms of neoplasia in these tumors.

PMID: 17487419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 15;357(4):1084-9. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Hedgehog is involved in prostate basal cell hyperplasia formation and its
progressing towards tumorigenesis.

Chen BY(1), Liu JY, Chang HH, Chang CP, Lo WY, Kuo WH, Yang CR, Lin DP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung 402, Taiwan.

The role of Hedgehog signaling in human basal cell hyperplasia formation and its 
progressing towards tumorigenesis was investigated. Hedgehog signaling members
including PTCH1, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 were found co-localized with p63 expression
in most hyperplastic basal cells, but rarely in normal basal cells, suggesting
Hedgehog involvement in basal cell hyperplasia formation. Both CK-14 and CK-8
markers were found co-localized in the majority of hyperplastic basal cells, but 
relatively few in the normal basal cells, indicating a Hedgehog-promoted
transitory differentiation. Furthermore, CK-14 and PTCH1 were found co-localized 
with CD44 in the hyerplastic basal cells, in a way similar to the CD44
co-localization with PTCH1 and GLI1 in the cancer cells. Together, the present
study indicated Hedgehog involvement in forming basal cell hyperplasia and its
progressing towards cancer, presumably by transforming the normal basal stem
cells into the cancer stem cells where persistent Hedgehog activation might be
mandatory for tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17466949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Mar 21;13(11):1659-65.

Sonic hedgehog-Gli1 pathway in colorectal adenocarcinomas.

Bian YH(1), Huang SH, Yang L, Ma XL, Xie JW, Zhang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, College of Life Science, Shandong
University, Jinan 250010, Shandong Province, China.

AIM: To determine the role of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway in colorectal
adenocarcinomas through analysis of the expression of Shh pathway-related
molecules, Shh, Ptch1, hedgehog-interacting protein (Hip), Gli1, Gli3 and
PDGFRalpha.
METHODS: Expression of Shh in 25 colorectal adeno-carcinomas was detected by
RT-PCR, in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Expression of Ptch1 was
observed by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Expression of Hip,
Gli1, Gli3 and PDGFRalpha was analyzed by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Expression of cytokeratin AE1/AE3 was observed in the cytoplasm of
colorectal crypts. Members of the Hh signaling pathway were expressed in
colorectal epithelium. Shh was expressed in cytoplasm of dysplastic epithelial
cells, while expression of Ptch1, Hip and Gli1 were mainly detected in the
malignant crypts of adenocarcinomas. In contrast, PDGFRalpha was expressed highly
in aberrant crypts and moderately in the stroma. Expression of Gli3 could not be 
detected in colorectal adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that Shh-Ptch1-Gli1 signaling pathway may play a
role in the progression of colorectal tumor.

PMCID: PMC4146943
PMID: 17461467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Development. 2007 May;134(10):1977-89. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Genomic characterization of Gli-activator targets in sonic hedgehog-mediated
neural patterning.

Vokes SA(1), Ji H, McCuine S, Tenzen T, Giles S, Zhong S, Longabaugh WJ, Davidson
EH, Wong WH, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) acts as a morphogen to mediate the specification of distinct
cell identities in the ventral neural tube through a Gli-mediated (Gli1-3)
transcriptional network. Identifying Gli targets in a systematic fashion is
central to the understanding of the action of Shh. We examined this issue in
differentiating neural progenitors in mouse. An epitope-tagged Gli-activator
protein was used to directly isolate cis-regulatory sequences by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). ChIP products were then used to screen custom genomic
tiling arrays of putative Hedgehog (Hh) targets predicted from transcriptional
profiling studies, surveying 50-150 kb of non-transcribed sequence for each
candidate. In addition to identifying expected Gli-target sites, the data
predicted a number of unreported direct targets of Shh action. Transgenic
analysis of binding regions in Nkx2.2, Nkx2.1 (Titf1) and Rab34 established these
as direct Hh targets. These data also facilitated the generation of an algorithm 
that improved in silico predictions of Hh target genes. Together, these
approaches provide significant new insights into both tissue-specific and general
transcriptional targets in a crucial Shh-mediated patterning process.

PMID: 17442700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 15;67(8):3583-93.

Selective down-regulation of glioma-associated oncogene 2 inhibits the
proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Kim Y(1), Yoon JW, Xiao X, Dean NM, Monia BP, Marcusson EG.

Author information: 
(1)Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc., 1896 Rutherford Road, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA.
ykim@isisph.com

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway contributes to the initiation and progression of
tumors with various origins when aberrantly activated. In this study, we
investigated if the Shh pathway is important for the proliferation of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells and also began to identify which components 
of the pathway play a pivotal role in the biology of HCC. Expression levels of
components in the pathway were measured, and glioma-associated oncogene (Gli) 2
levels were found to be considerably higher in human HCC lines compared with
normal liver. Gli2 levels were also higher in tumor tissue from HCC patients
compared with normal liver. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) were used to
specifically down-regulate Gli2, and this led to decreased proliferation of
various HCC cell lines. However, inhibition of Gli1 and Gli3 with ASOs did not
decrease proliferation in most HCC cell lines and inhibitors targeting the
upstream components of the pathway, including smoothened (Smo), displayed
antiproliferative effects in only a subset of HCC cell lines. Moreover, in cancer
cells harboring Smo mutations or unresponsive to the Smo inhibitor
3-keto-N-aminoethylaminoethylcaproyldihydrocinnamoyl cyclopamine, the Gli2 ASO
was still able to inhibit proliferation. The importance of Gli2 in HCC
proliferation was further confirmed by the changes in expression levels of genes,
such as Bcl-2, c-Myc, and p27, following suppression of Gli2 expression. Taken
together, these results suggest that, among the Gli transcription factors, Gli2
plays a predominant role in the proliferation of HCC cells and the suppression of
Gli2 expression may provide a useful therapeutic option for the treatment of HCC.

PMID: 17440069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Dev Dyn. 2007 May;236(5):1363-73.

Gene expression analysis of the hedgehog signaling cascade in the chick midbrain 
and spinal cord.

Aglyamova GV(1), Agarwala S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurobiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712,
USA.

The signaling molecule Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) plays a critical role in patterning
the ventral midbrain of vertebrates. Our recent studies have established that the
requirement for Hedgehog (HH) signaling in the chick midbrain is modulated
spatially and temporally in a complex manner across the midbrain anlage.
Unfortunately, the patterns of expression of downstream regulators that might
modulate the HH signal in the midbrain are not currently known. To fill this gap,
we have examined across time, the expression pattern of 14 genes that function in
the HH signaling cascade in the midbrain and spinal cord. Our results suggest
that SHH expression in the axial mesendoderm begins before the expression of
known HH receptors/HH-binding proteins (e.g., PTC1, PTC2, HHIP, BOC, MEGALIN). In
the midbrain, PTC and GLI genes are expressed and then eliminated very early from
the ventral midline. However, they exhibit high and persistent expression in the 
midbrain region circumscribing the SHH source. Intriguingly, multiple HH-binding 
proteins (BOC, MEGALIN) and HH effectors (GLI1-3, SMO, SUFU, DZIP) are expressed 
in the dorsal midbrain and the midbrain-hindbrain boundary. Finally, we report
for the first time that IHH is expressed in intermediate regions of the spinal
cord, where its expression does not overlap with that of SHH.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17436280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biochem J. 2007 May 1;403(3):369-79.

Pathways of signal transduction employed by vertebrate Hedgehogs.

Riobo NA(1), Manning DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Signalling by Hh (Hedgehog) proteins is among the most actively studied
receptor-mediated phenomena relevant to development and post-embryonic
homoeostatic events. The impact of signalling by the Hh proteins is profound, and
work pertaining to the presentation of these proteins and the pathways engaged by
them continues to yield unique insights into basic aspects of morphogenic
signalling. We review here the mechanisms of signalling relevant to the actions
of Hh proteins in vertebrates. We emphasize findings within the past several
years on the recognition of, in particular, Sonic hedgehog by target cells,
pathways of transduction employed by the seven-pass transmembrane protein
Smoothened and end points of action, as manifest in the regulation of the Gli
transcription factors. Topics of extended interest are those regarding the
employment of heterotrimeric G-proteins and G-protein-coupled receptor kinases by
Smoothened. We also address the pathways, insofar as known, linking Smoothened to
the expression and stability of Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. The mechanisms by which Hh
proteins signal have few, if any, parallels. It is becoming clear in vertebrates,
however, that several facets of signalling are shared in common with other venues
of signalling. The challenge in understanding both the actions of Hh proteins and
the overlapping forms of regulation will be in understanding, in molecular terms,
both common and divergent signalling events.

PMID: 17419683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 15;67(8):3871-7. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Medulloblastomas derived from Cxcr6 mutant mice respond to treatment with a
smoothened inhibitor.

Sasai K(1), Romer JT, Kimura H, Eberhart DE, Rice DS, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is activated in approximately 30% of human
medulloblastoma resulting in increased expression of downstream target genes. In 
about half of these cases, this has been shown to be a consequence of mutations
in regulatory genes within the pathway, including Ptc1, Smo, and Sufu. However,
for some tumors, no mutations have been detected in known pathway genes. This
suggests that either mutations in other genes promote tumorigenesis or that
epigenetic alterations increase pathway activity in these tumors. Here, we report
that 3% to 4% of mice lacking either one or both functional copies of Cxcr6
develop medulloblastoma. Although CXCR6 is not known to be involved in Shh
signaling, tumors derived from Cxcr6 mutant mice expressed Shh pathway target
genes including Gli1, Gli2, Ptc2, and Sfrp1, indicating elevated pathway
activity. Interestingly, the level of Ptc1 expression was decreased in tumor
cells although two normal copies of Ptc1 were retained. This implies that reduced
CXCR6 function leads to suppression of Ptc1 thereby increasing Smoothened
function and promoting tumorigenesis. We used a direct transplant model to test
the sensitivity of medulloblastoma arising in Cxcr6 mutant mice to a
small-molecule inhibitor of Smoothened (HhAntag). We found that transplanted
tumors were dramatically inhibited in mice treated for only 4 days with HhAntag. 
These findings suggest that HhAntag may be effective against tumors lacking
mutations in known Shh pathway genes.

PMID: 17413002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 May 15;16(10):1143-56. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

SOX9cre1, a cis-acting regulatory element located 1.1 Mb upstream of SOX9,
mediates its enhancement through the SHH pathway.

Bien-Willner GA(1), Stankiewicz P, Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

SOX9 is a temporal and tissue-specific transcription factor involved in male
sexual development and bone formation. Haploinsufficiency of SOX9 is known to
cause campomelic dysplasia (CD). CD cases without SOX9 coding region mutations
have been described in association with translocations that have breakpoints
mapping as far as 932 kb upstream from the gene. These rearrangements suggest
that position effects acting from a great distance regulate SOX9 gene expression.
Studies of one such case (900 kb upstream to SOX9) have led to the delineation of
a potential 2.1 kb cis-acting regulatory element 1.1 Mb upstream of SOX9, termed 
SOX9cre1. We investigated the role of this putative regulator in SOX9 expression.
SOX9cre1 increases the activity of a minimal SOX9 promoter in reporter constructs
in a dose-dependent and tissue-specific manner, consistent with an enhancer role.
In silico studies identify a putative binding site within SOX9cre1 for GLI1, a
downstream mediator of sonic hedgehog (SHH). Furthermore, the stimulation of
primary human chondrocyte cells in culture with SHH increases endogenous SOX9
expression 3-fold. Electrophoresis mobility shift assay (EMSA) studies that
demonstrate physical interactions between the GLI1 transcription factor and a
putative binding site within SOX9cre1, as well as experiments in which reporter
constructs are co-transfected with GLI1, suggest a direct interaction between
GLI1 and SOX9cre1. GLI1-SOX9cre1 interactions are verified in chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments. These data support a direct molecular link
between the Hh signaling pathway and SOX9 regulation, wherein SHH stimulates SOX9
through its mediator GLI1, and are consistent with a mechanism of SOX9 regulation
through distal chromatin interactions.

PMID: 17409199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1745-54. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Protease nexin 1 and its receptor LRP modulate SHH signalling during cerebellar
development.

Vaillant C(1), Michos O, Orolicki S, Brellier F, Taieb S, Moreno E, Té H, Zeller 
R, Monard D.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66,
Basel, Switzerland.

Development of the postnatal cerebellum relies on the tight regulation of cell
number by morphogens that control the balance between cell proliferation,
survival and differentiation. Here, we analyze the role of the serine-protease
inhibitor protease nexin 1 (PN-1; SERPINE2) in the proliferation and
differentiation of cerebellar granular neuron precursors (CGNPs) via the
modulation of their main mitogenic factor, sonic hedgehog (SHH). Our studies show
that PN-1 interacts with low-density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins (LRPs)
to antagonize SHH-induced CGNP proliferation and that it inhibits the activity of
the SHH transcriptional target GLI1. The binding of PN-1 to LRPs interferes with 
SHH-induced cyclin D1 expression. CGNPs isolated from Pn-1-deficient mice exhibit
enhanced basal proliferation rates due to overactivation of the SHH pathway and
show higher sensitivity to exogenous SHH. In vivo, the Pn-1 deficiency alters the
expression of SHH target genes. In addition, the onset of CGNP differentiation is
delayed, which results in an enlarged outer external granular layer. Furthermore,
the Pn-1 deficiency leads to an overproduction of CGNPs and to enlargement of the
internal granular layer in a subset of cerebellar lobes during late development
and adulthood. We propose that PN-1 contributes to shaping the cerebellum by
promoting cell cycle exit.

PMID: 17409116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Biol Reprod. 2007 Aug;77(2):226-36. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

The hedgehog signaling pathway in the mouse ovary.

Russell MC(1), Cowan RG, Harman RM, Walker AL, Quirk SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway plays an essential role in the Drosophila
ovary, regulating cell proliferation and differentiation, but a role in the
mammalian ovary has not been defined. Expression of components of the HH pathway 
in the mouse ovary and effects of altering HH signaling in vitro were determined.
RT-PCR analyses show developmentally regulated expression of sonic (Shh), indian 
(Ihh) and desert (Dhh) HH in the ovary. Expression is detected in whole ovary,
granulosa cells, and corpora lutea. The mRNAs for the two receptors, patched
homolog 1 and 2 (Ptch1, Ptch2), and the signal transducer, smoothened (Smo), are 
also expressed. Immunohistochemistry using an antibody that detects all three HH 
ligands demonstrated HH protein primarily in granulosa cells of follicles from
primary to antral stages of development. Follicles also stained for PTCH1 and SMO
in both granulosa and theca cells. Treatment of cultured preantral follicles and 
granulosa cells with recombinant SHH increased growth and proliferation while
treatment with the HH pathway inhibitor, cyclopamine, had no effect. Therefore,
activation of HH signaling can increase cell proliferation and follicle growth
but is not essential for these processes in vitro. Treatment of granulosa cells
with SHH increased levels of mRNA for Gli1, a transcriptional target of HH
signaling, while cyclopamine decreased expression. SHH had no effect on
production of progesterone by cultured granulosa cells, while cyclopamine
increased progesterone production. The results demonstrate a functional HH
pathway in the follicle and identify granulosa cells as at least one of the
potential targets of HH signaling.

PMID: 17392501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 3;104(14):5895-900. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Melanomas require HEDGEHOG-GLI signaling regulated by interactions between GLI1
and the RAS-MEK/AKT pathways.

Stecca B(1), Mas C, Clement V, Zbinden M, Correa R, Piguet V, Beermann F, Ruiz I 
Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva School of
Medicine, 1 Rue Michel Servet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers, and its incidence is increasing. 
These tumors derive from the melanocyte lineage and remain incurable after
metastasis. Here we report that SONIC HEDGEHOG (SHH)-GLI signaling is active in
the matrix of human hair follicles, and that it is required for the normal
proliferation of human melanocytes in culture. SHH-GLI signaling also regulates
the proliferation and survival of human melanomas: the growth, recurrence, and
metastasis of melanoma xenografts in mice are prevented by local or systemic
interference of HH-GLI function. Moreover, we show that oncogenic RAS-induced
melanomas in transgenic mice express Gli1 and require Hh-Gli signaling in vitro
and in vivo. Finally, we provide evidence that endogenous RAS-MEK and AKT
signaling regulate the nuclear localization and transcriptional activity of GLI1 
in melanoma and other cancer cells. Our data uncover an unsuspected role of
HH-GLI signaling in melanocytes and melanomas, demonstrate a role for this
pathway in RAS-induced tumors, suggest a general integration of the RAS/AKT and
HH-GLI pathways, and open a therapeutic approach for human melanomas.

PMCID: PMC1838820
PMID: 17392427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Bone. 2007 Jun;40(6):1462-74. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

NDST-1 modulates BMPR and PTHrP signaling during endochondral bone formation in a
gene knockout model.

Hu Z(1), Yu M, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 (NDST-1), a member of the enzyme family
catalyzing the first modification step in the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate
(HS), was knocked out in mice to investigate its role in embryonic development.
NDST-1 null mice exhibited delayed endochondral bone formation including
shortened calcified zones in limbs, delayed chondrocyte and osteogenetic
differentiation, and increased chondrocyte proliferation. In situ HS binding
assay revealed that the binding ability of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) -2,
-4, and -6 to endogenous HS was decreased in mutant phalanges, while that of
fibroblast growth factor-1 (FGF-1) was not affected. Up-regulation of BMPR-IA,
Phospho-Smad1 (P-Smad1) and parathyroid-hormone related protein (PTHrP), but not 
the Indian hedgehog, Gli1, Gli3, Patched, and FGFR-3, was observed. Furthermore, 
block of BMPR signaling with noggin rescued the delayed chondrocyte hypertrophic 
differentiation in NDST-1 (-/-) mice and recovered the expression of both P-Smad1
and PTHrP proteins. These results suggested that NDST-1-dependent heparan sulfate
might negatively modulate BMP and its downstream PTHrP signaling, and thus affect
endochondral bone development.

PMID: 17376755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 23;26(39):5752-61. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Ligand-dependent activation of the hedgehog pathway in glioma progenitor cells.

Ehtesham M(1), Sarangi A, Valadez JG, Chanthaphaychith S, Becher MW, Abel TW,
Thompson RC, Cooper MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates progenitor cells during
embryogenesis and tumorigenesis in multiple organ systems. We have investigated
the activity of this pathway in adult gliomas, and demonstrate that the Hh
pathway is operational and activated within grade II and III gliomas, but not
grade IV de novo glioblastoma multiforme. Furthermore, our studies reveal that
pathway activity and responsiveness is confined to progenitor cells within these 
tumors. Additionally, we demonstrate that Hh signaling in glioma progenitor cells
is ligand-dependent and provide evidence documenting the in vivo source of Sonic 
hedgehog protein. These findings suggest a regulatory role for the Hh pathway in 
progenitor cells within grade II and III gliomas, and the potential clinical
utility of monitoring and targeting this pathway in these primary brain tumors.

PMID: 17353902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14048-55. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Oncogenic KRAS activates hedgehog signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer cells.

Ji Z(1), Mei FC, Xie J, Cheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Sealy Center for Cancer Cell
Biology, School of Medicine, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
TX 77555, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is deregulated in multiple human cancers including
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). Because KRAS mutation represents one of
the earliest genetic alterations and occurs almost universally in PDA, we
hypothesized that oncogenic KRAS promotes pancreatic tumorigenesis in part
through activation of the Hh pathway. Here, we report that oncogenic KRAS
activates hedgehog signaling in PDA cells, utilizing a downstream effector
pathway mediated by RAF/MEK/MAPK but not phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT. Oncogenic KRAS transformation of human pancreatic ductal epithelial
cells increases GLI transcriptional activity, an effect that is inhibited by the 
MEK-specific inhibitors U0126 and PD98059, but not by the PI3K-specific inhibitor
wortmannin. Inactivation of KRAS activity by a small interfering RNA specific for
oncogenic KRAS inhibits GLI activity and GLI1 expression in PDA cell lines with
activating KRAS mutation; the MEK inhibitors U0126 and PD98059 elicit a similar
response. In addition, expression of the constitutively active form of
BRAF(E600), but not myr-AKT, blocks the inhibitory effects of KRAS knockdown on
Hh signaling. Finally, suppressing GLI activity leads to a selective attenuation 
of the oncogenic transformation activity of mutant KRAS-expressing PDA cells.
These results demonstrate that oncogenic KRAS, through RAF/MEK/MAPK signaling, is
directly involved in the activation of the hedgehog pathway in PDA cells and that
collaboration between these two signaling pathways may play an important role in 
PDA progression.

PMID: 17353198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cancer. 2007 Mar 7;6:19.

Hedgehog pathway activity in the LADY prostate tumor model.

Gipp J(1), Gu G, Crylen C, Kasper S, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Surgery, Division of
Urology, Clinical Sciences Center, Madison, WI 53792, USA. gipp@surgery.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Robust Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated as a common
feature of human prostate cancer and an important stimulus of tumor growth. The
role of Hh signaling has been studied in several xenograft tumor models, however,
the role of Hh in tumor development in a transgenic prostate cancer model has
never been examined.
RESULTS: We analyzed expression of Hh pathway components and conserved Hh target 
genes along with progenitor cell markers and selected markers of epithelial
differentiation during tumor development in the LADY transgenic mouse model.
Tumor development was associated with a selective increase in Ihh expression. In 
contrast Shh expression was decreased. Expression of the Hh target Patched (Ptc) 
was significantly decreased while Gli1 expression was not significantly altered. 
A survey of other relevant genes revealed significant increases in expression of 
Notch-1 and Nestin together with decreased expression of HNF3a/FoxA1, NPDC-1 and 
probasin.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows no evidence for a generalized increase in Hh
signaling during tumor development in the LADY mouse. It does reveal a selective 
increase in Ihh expression that is associated with increased expression of
progenitor cell markers and decreased expression of terminal differentiation
markers. These data suggest that Ihh expression may be a feature of a progenitor 
cell population that is involved in tumor development.

PMCID: PMC1820793
PMID: 17343742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Prostate. 2007 May 1;67(6):674-84.

Sonic and desert hedgehog signaling in human fetal prostate development.

Zhu G(1), Zhau HE, He H, Zhang L, Shehata B, Wang X, Cerwinka WH, Elmore J, He D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog signaling is thought to play an important role in rodent
prostate organogenesis and morphogenesis. However, the role of this signaling
pathway in human fetal prostate development has not been investigated.
METHODS: Twenty-five human fetal prostates at various developmental stages (10-39
weeks) were included. Fifteen specimens were processed for H&E and
immunohistochemical staining of the Hedgehog signaling components: Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH), Desert Hedgehog (DHH), Patched-1(PTC1), Patched-2 (PTC2), Smoothened
(SMO), GLI1, and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). SHH, DHH, and GLI1
expression was also analyzed in ten snap-frozen specimens by Western blot.
RESULTS: SHH, DHH, SMO, PTC1, GLI1, and PCNA expression, assessed by a
semi-quantitative immunohistochemical method, was found mainly in the developing 
prostatic epithelial ducts, beginning at 10 weeks and peaking at 16 and 28 weeks 
with a dip occurring at 20 weeks, with the exception of PTC2.
CONCLUSION: Both SHH and DHH signaling components were detected during human
fetal prostate development. Despite the high expression of PTC2 in the epithelium
as well as the stroma in the early time of development, the expression of SHH,
DHH, SMO, PTC1, and a SHH/DHH target transcription factor, GLI-1, were all
largely restricted to epithelium in the developing prostate, suggesting that
SHH/DHH signaling is primarily through an autocrine mechanism in human fetal
prostate organogenesis.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17342747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Jun;79(6):465-82.

Altered localization of gene expression in both ectoderm and mesoderm is
associated with a murine strain difference in retinoic acid-induced forelimb
ectrodactyly.

Shimizu H(1), Lee GS, Beedanagari SR, Collins MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, UCLA School of Public Health, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

BACKGROUND: Defects in digit number or fusion as a teratogenic response are well 
documented in humans and intensively studied in various mouse models. Maternal
exposure to excess levels of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) at gestational day 9.5 
induces postaxial ectrodactyly (digit loss) in the murine C57BL/6N strain but not
in the SWV/Fnn strain.
METHODS: Whole-mount in situ hybridization was used to examine the differential
expression of limb patterning genes at the transcriptional level between the two 
mouse strains following the maternal exposure to a teratogenic level of RA. The
detection of a gene with altered expression was followed by either the evaluation
of other genes that were synexpressed or with an assessment of downstream genes.
RESULTS: In the C57BL/6N limb bud following maternal RA administration,
gene-specific perturbations were observed within hours of the RA injection in the
posterior pre-AER (apical ectodermal ridge) (Fgf8, Dlx3, Bmp4, Sp8, but not Dlx2 
or p63), whereas these genes were normally expressed in the SWV/Fnn limb bud.
Furthermore, although RA caused comparable reductions of Shh expression between
the strains in the 12 h after administration, some Shh downstream genes were
differentially expressed (e.g., Gli1, Ptc, and Hoxd13), whereas others were not
(e.g., Fgf4, Bmp4, and Gremlin).
CONCLUSIONS: It is proposed that altered gene expression in both pre-AER and
mesoderm is involved in the pathogenesis of postaxial digit loss, and that
because the alterations in the pre-AER occur relatively early in the temporal
sequence of events, those changes are candidates for an initiating factor in the 
malformation.

PMID: 17335046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 1;67(5):2187-96.

Blockade of hedgehog signaling inhibits pancreatic cancer invasion and
metastases: a new paradigm for combination therapy in solid cancers.

Feldmann G(1), Dhara S, Fendrich V, Bedja D, Beaty R, Mullendore M, Karikari C,
Alvarez H, Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Jimeno A, Gabrielson KL, Matsui W, Maitra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1550
Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. gfeldma4@jhmi.edu

In the context of pancreatic cancer, metastasis remains the most critical
determinant of resectability, and hence survival. The objective of this study was
to determine whether Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a role in pancreatic cancer
invasion and metastasis because this is likely to have profound clinical
implications. In pancreatic cancer cell lines, Hh inhibition with cyclopamine
resulted in down-regulation of snail and up-regulation of E-cadherin, consistent 
with inhibition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and was mirrored by a
striking reduction of in vitro invasive capacity (P < 0.0001). Conversely, Gli1
overexpression in immortalized human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells led to a 
markedly invasive phenotype (P < 0.0001) and near total down-regulation of
E-cadherin. In an orthotopic xenograft model, cyclopamine profoundly inhibited
metastatic spread; only one of seven cyclopamine-treated mice developed pulmonary
micrometastases versus seven of seven mice with multiple macrometastases in
control animals. Combination of gemcitabine and cyclopamine completely abrogated 
metastases while also significantly reducing the size of "primary" tumors. Gli1
levels were up-regulated in tissue samples of metastatic human pancreatic cancer 
samples compared with matched primary tumors. Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
overexpression is characteristic for both hematopoietic progenitors and leukemic 
stem cells; cyclopamine preferentially reduced "ALDH-high" cells by approximately
3-fold (P = 0.048). We confirm pharmacologic Hh pathway inhibition as a valid
therapeutic strategy for pancreatic cancer and show for the first time its
particular efficacy against metastatic spread. By targeting specific cellular
subpopulations likely involved in tumor initiation at metastatic sites, Hh
inhibitors may provide a new paradigm for therapy of disseminated malignancies,
particularly when used in combination with conventional antimetabolites that
reduce "bulk" tumor size.

PMCID: PMC3073370
PMID: 17332349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 1;13(5):1389-98.

Overexpression of hedgehog signaling molecules and its involvement in the
proliferation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Feng YZ(1), Shiozawa T, Miyamoto T, Kashima H, Kurai M, Suzuki A, Ying-Song J,
Konishi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Asahi, Matsumoto, Japan.

PURPOSE: Research has revealed abnormal activation of the hedgehog pathway in
human malignancies. The present study was undertaken to examine the expression
and functional involvement of the hedgehog pathway in endometrial tissues.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh), patched (Ptch),
Smoothened (Smo), and Gli1 was examined in various endometrial tissues and
endometrial carcinoma cell lines. The effect of hedgehog signaling on the
proliferation of endometrial carcinoma cell lines was also examined.
RESULTS: The expression of Shh, Ptch, Smo, and Gli1 was very weak in normal
endometrium, but was increased in endometrial hyperplasia and carcinoma
stepwisely with significant differences. There was no marked difference in the
expression of these molecules in carcinomas according to stages and histologic
grades. Treatment with cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of the hedgehog pathway,
for endometrial carcinoma Ishikawa and HHUA cells suppressed growth by 56% and
67%, respectively, compared with the control. The addition of recombinant Shh
peptide to HHUA cells enhanced their proliferation by 41%. The silencing of Gli1 
using small interfering RNA (siGli1) resulted in the growth suppression and
down-regulation of Ptch expression. In addition, the cyclopamine/siGli1-induced
growth suppression was associated with the down-regulation of cyclins D1 and A
and N-myc. No somatic mutations for ptch and smo genes were detected in the
endometrial carcinoma cases examined.
CONCLUSIONS: The abnormal activation of this pathway is involved in the
proliferation of endometrial carcinoma cells possibly in an auto-/paracrine
fashion, suggesting the possibility of the hedgehog pathway being a novel
candidate for molecular targeting.

PMID: 17332280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007 Mar;119(3):1146-7.

Gli-1 oncogene: the key to keloidogenesis?

Sananto D, Noer S, Alsagaff JH.

PMID: 17312558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cell Cycle. 2007 Feb 15;6(4):390-3. Epub 2007 Feb 3.

Multiple ubiquitin-dependent processing pathways regulate hedgehog/gli signaling:
implications for cell development and tumorigenesis.

Di Marcotullio L(1), Ferretti E, Greco A, De Smaele E, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, Cenci Bolognetti
Foundation, University La Sapienza, Roma, Italy.

Hedgehog pathway is crucial for the maintenance and self-renewal of neural stem
cells and for tumorigenesis. Hedgehog signaling is limited by multiple E3
ubiquitin ligases that process the downstream transcription factors Gli. Cullin
family-based ubiquitination results in either Cullin1-Slimb/betaTrCP- or
Cullin3-HIB/Roadkill/SPOP-dependent proteolytic processing or degradation of
Drosophila Cubitus interruptus or mammalian Gli proteins. We have recently
identified Itch as an additional HECT family E3 ligase, able to ubiquitinate and 
degrade Gli1. A functional link with the influence of Hedgehog signaling on cell 
development and tumorigenesis is suggested by the identification of Numb as a
promoter of such an Itch-dependent ubiquitination process that leads to Gli1
degradation, thus suppressing its transcriptional function. Numb is an
evolutionary conserved developmental protein that, during progenitor division,
asymmetrically segregates to daughter cells thereby determining distinct binary
cell fates. Numb is downregulated in cerebellar progenitors and their malignant
derivatives (i.e. medulloblastoma cells). Furthermore, Numb has
anti-proliferative and pro-differentiation effects on both cerebellar progenitors
and medulloblastoma cells, due to its suppression of functional Gli1. These
findings unveil a novel Numb/Itch-dependent regulatory loop that limits the
extent and duration of Hedgehog signaling during neural progenitor
differentiation. Its subversion emerges as a relevant event in brain
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17312394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 10;25(11):1341-9. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Differential gene expression patterns and interaction networks in
BCR-ABL-positive and -negative adult acute lymphoblastic leukemias.

Juric D(1), Lacayo NJ, Ramsey MC, Racevskis J, Wiernik PH, Rowe JM, Goldstone AH,
O'Dwyer PJ, Paietta E, Sikic BI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305-5151, USA.

PURPOSE: To identify gene expression patterns and interaction networks related to
BCR-ABL status and clinical outcome in adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DNA microarrays were used to profile a set of 54 adult ALL 
specimens from the Medical Research Council UKALL XII/Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group E2993 trial (21 p185BCR-ABL-positive, 16 p210BCR-ABL-positive and 
17 BCR-ABL-negative specimens).
RESULTS: Using supervised and unsupervised analysis tools, we detected
significant transcriptomic changes in BCR-ABL-positive versus -negative
specimens, and assessed their validity in an independent cohort of 128 adult ALL 
specimens. This set of 271 differentially expressed genes (including GAB1, CIITA,
XBP1, CD83, SERPINB9, PTP4A3, NOV, LOX, CTNND1, BAALC, and RAB21) is enriched for
genes involved in cell death, cellular growth and proliferation, and hematologic 
system development and function. Network analysis demonstrated complex
interaction patterns of these genes, and identified FYN and IL15 as the hubs of
the top-scoring network. Within the BCR-ABL-positive subgroups, we identified
genes overexpressed (PILRB, STS-1, SPRY1) or underexpressed (TSPAN16, ADAMTSL4)
in p185BCR-ABL-positive ALL relative to p210BCR-ABL-positive ALL. Finally, we
constructed a gene expression- and interaction-based outcome predictor consisting
of 27 genes (including GRB2, GAB1, GLI1, IRS1, RUNX2, and SPP1), which correlated
with overall survival in BCR-ABL-positive adult ALL (P = .0001), independent of
age (P = .25) and WBC count at presentation (P = .003).
CONCLUSION: We identified prominent molecular features of BCR-ABL-positive adult 
ALL, which may be useful for developing novel therapeutic targets and prognostic 
markers in this disease.

PMID: 17312329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 26;26(34):4889-96. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Distinct roles of first exon variants of the tumor-suppressor Patched1 in
Hedgehog signaling.

Shimokawa T(1), Svärd J, Heby-Henricson K, Teglund S, Toftgård R, Zaphiropoulos
PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge,
Sweden. Tash@biosci.ki.se

Patched1 (PTCH1) is one of the key molecules involved in the Hedgehog (HH)
signaling pathway and acts as the receptor of HH ligands. Additionally, PTCH1
inhibits the positive signal transductor Smoothened (SMO). Several PTCH1 splice
variants are known but the functional differences among them are not clear. Here,
we demonstrate the unique biological properties of the PTCH1 isoforms generated
by alternative first exon usage. All isoforms examined worked as functional
receptors of both Sonic HH and Desert HH. However, the signaling upregulated
isoforms PTCH1-1B and -1C inhibited SMO and the pathway transcription factors
glioma 1 (GLI1) and GLI2 to a higher extent than PTCH1-1 and -1Ckid. Moreover, in
situ hybridizations allowed the detection of the Ptch1 isoforms in specific
structures of the developing mouse embryo. Additionally, the differences in the
N-terminal tail had a dramatic influence on the steady states of the proteins,
with PTCH1-1B and -1C levels being significantly higher than PTCH1-1 and -1Ckid. 
This implies that the pronounced signaling inhibitory properties of PTCH1-1B and 
-1C may be mostly due to this high-protein expression rather than to intrinsic
functional differences. Thus, our study supports a role of splicing variation and
promoter choice for HH signaling regulation.

PMID: 17310997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Differentiation. 2007 Sep;75(7):638-51. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor signaling through MEK-ERK is required for
prostate bud induction.

Kuslak SL(1), Marker PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware St. SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The urogenital sinus (UGS) is specified as prostate in mice around embryonic day 
15.5 as indicated by expression of the transcription factor Nkx3.1. Shortly
thereafter, growth of epithelial buds into the UGS mesenchyme initiates prostatic
morphogenesis. A comparison of male and female UGSs in vivo demonstrated sexually
dimorphic expression of branching morphogenesis regulatory genes coincident with 
epithelial budding including Bmp7, Gli1, Gli2, Fgf10, Ptch1, and Shh. A
comparison of UGSs grown with or without testosterone in serum-free organ
cultures showed that some, but not all sexually dimorphic differences observed
during prostate bud induction, were effectively modeled in vitro. Organ cultures 
were then used to investigate the role of fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGFR) signaling during prostatic induction. Blocking FGFR activation with
PD173074 showed that activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2) in the UGS is dependent on FGFR signaling. Furthermore, inhibiting
either FGFR activation with PD173074 or ERK1/2 activation with UO126 blocked all 
morphogenesis, proliferation, and gene expression changes induced by androgens in
the UGS. These data reveal a previously unknown role for ERK1/2 during prostate
bud induction. They also show that signaling by FGFRs through ERK1/2 is required 
for androgen-induced budding morphogenesis, proliferation, and gene expression
during prostate bud induction.

PMID: 17309601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jun;292(6):G1559-69. Epub 2007 Feb 
15.

Chronically administered retinoic acid has trophic effects in the rat small
intestine and promotes adaptation in a resection model of short bowel syndrome.

Wang L(1), Tang Y, Rubin DC, Levin MS.

Author information: 
(1)Washington Univ. School of Medicine, Campus Box 8124, 660 South Euclid Ave.,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Aug;293(2):G517-8.

Following the loss of functional small bowel surface area, the intestine
undergoes a compensatory adaptive response. The observation that adaptation is
inhibited in vitamin A-deficient rats following submassive intestinal resection
suggested that vitamin A is required for this response and raised the possibility
that exogenous vitamin A could augment adaptation. Therefore, to directly assess 
whether chronically administered retinoic acid could stimulate gut adaptation in 
a model of short bowel syndrome and to address the mechanisms of any such
effects, Sprague-Dawley rats were implanted with controlled release retinoic acid
or control pellets and then subjected to mid-small bowel or sham resections. At 2
wk postoperation, changes in gut morphology, crypt cell proliferation and
apoptosis, enterocyte migration, the extracellular matrix, and gene expression
were assessed. Retinoic acid had significant trophic effects in resected and
sham-resected rats. Retinoic acid markedly inhibited apoptosis and stimulated
crypt cell proliferation and enterocyte migration postresection. Data presented
indicate that these proadaptive effects of retinoic acid may be mediated via
changes in the extracellular matrix (e.g., by increasing collagen IV synthesis,
decreasing E-cadherin expression, and reducing integrin beta(3) levels), via
affects on Hedgehog signaling (e.g., by reducing expression of the Hedgehog
receptors Ptch and Ptch2 and the Gli1 transcription factor), by increasing
expression of Reg1 and Pap1, and by modulation of retinoid and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor signaling pathways. These studies are the first
to demonstrate that retinoic acid can significantly enhance intestinal adaptation
and suggest it may be beneficial in patients with short bowel syndrome.

PMID: 17307727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 5;26(31):4489-98. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Gli1 acts through Snail and E-cadherin to promote nuclear signaling by
beta-catenin.

Li X(1), Deng W, Lobo-Ruppert SM, Ruppert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-3300, USA.

The Hedgehog pathway transcription factor Gli1 induces transformation of
epithelial cells via induction of Snail, a repressor of E-cadherin (E-cad). E-cad
is normally complexed with beta-catenin at the cell membrane. Loss of E-cad
during developmental epithelial-mesenchymal transitions can switch beta-catenin
from its role at adherens junctions to its role in nuclear transcription. During 
tumorigenesis it is unclear which pathways trigger this switch. In the current
study, gain- and loss-of-function approaches identified E-cad as a selective
inhibitor of transformation by Gli1, and Snail knockdown was rescued by
downregulation of E-cad. Gli1 induced relocalization of beta-catenin from the
cell membrane to the nucleus. The ability of wild-type or mutant alleles of E-cad
to modulate transformation by Gli1 correlated with their ability to regulate
localization of beta-catenin. Inhibition of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling by
dominant negative Tcf4 selectively blocked in vitro transformation by Gli1. In
Gli1-transgenic mice, infiltrating skin tumor cells expressed active,
unphosphorylated beta-catenin. Our studies identify E-cad as a selective
suppressor of transformation by Gli1 and point to the Sonic Hedgehog-Gli1 pathway
as a key regulator of the beta-catenin switch in epithelial cells and cancers.

PMCID: PMC2233601
PMID: 17297467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Urol. 2007 Mar;177(3):1179-85.

Lack of demonstrable autocrine hedgehog signaling in human prostate cancer cell
lines.

Zhang J(1), Lipinski R, Shaw A, Gipp J, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University
of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

PURPOSE: Several recent reports highlighted the role of hedgehog signaling in
prostate cancer. However, the relative contributions of autocrine and paracrine
hedgehog signaling to tumor growth and progression are unclear. Efforts to model 
autocrine signaling for drug development have been hampered by conflicting
reports of the presence or absence of autocrine signaling in established human
prostate cancer cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We comprehensively characterized the expression of
hedgehog pathway genes in the 3 prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP, PC3 and 22RV1
(American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, Virginia). We also examined their
response to Shh ligand and to the hedgehog pathway inhibitor cyclopamine (Toronto
Research Chemicals, Toronto, Ontario, Canada).
RESULTS: Expression of hedgehog ligand, patched and Gli1 in all 3 cell lines was 
lower than the expression level in normal human prostate tissue. All 3 cell lines
showed hedgehog target gene activation when transfected with an activated form of
Gli2 but none showed a detectable transcriptional response to hedgehog ligand or 
to transfection with an activated form of smoothened. Furthermore, treatment with
the hedgehog pathway inhibitor cyclopamine did not inhibit hedgehog target gene
expression in any of the 3 prostate cancer cell lines, although cyclopamine
inhibited proliferation in culture.
CONCLUSIONS: LNCaP, PC3 and 22RV1 show no evidence of autocrine signaling by
ligand dependent mechanisms and cyclopamine mediated inhibition of growth in
culture occurs without of any discernible effect on canonical hedgehog pathway
activity.

PMID: 17296441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Urol. 2007 Mar;177(3):832-8.

Hedgehog signaling in the prostate.

Shaw A(1), Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research and Department of Surgery, University
of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

PURPOSE: Recent discoveries highlight the importance of the hedgehog signaling
pathway in prostate growth regulation. We reviewed the role of hedgehog signaling
in prostate development, adult prostate homeostasis and prostate cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A comprehensive review of all relevant literature was
done.
RESULTS: Epithelial expression of hedgehog ligand during prostate development
exerts autocrine and paracrine signaling activities that regulate growth and
differentiation. Hedgehog signaling also occurs in the adult human prostate but
to our knowledge the influence on epithelial proliferation and/or differentiation
is unknown. Robust hedgehog signaling occurs frequently in prostate cancer, and
autocrine and paracrine signaling have been shown to accelerate the growth of
xenograft tumors. Autocrine signaling has been implicated in stimulating
stem/progenitor cells and increased hedgehog pathway activity may be a
characteristic of advanced, androgen independent cancer. The plant alkaloid
cyclopamine is a specific chemical inhibitor of hedgehog signaling that produced 
sustained regression of established xenograft tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Hedgehog signaling has an important role in prostate development and
it appears to be a characteristic feature of prostate cancer. It stimulates tumor
growth and may exert a specific role in the proliferation of tumor stem cells.
The development of hedgehog inhibitors based on the action of cyclopamine holds
promise for novel treatments to slow or arrest tumor growth.

PMID: 17296352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Stem Cells. 2007 May;25(5):1156-65. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Sonic hedgehog and other soluble factors from differentiating embryoid bodies
inhibit pancreas development.

Mfopou JK(1), De Groote V, Xu X, Heimberg H, Bouwens L.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Differentiation Unit, Diabetes Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.

Success of cell-replacement therapy for diabetes will largely depend on the
establishment of alternative sources of pancreatic islet grafts. Embryonic stem
(ES) cell differentiation toward pancreatic insulin-producing cells offers such
perspectives, but there are still many challenges to overcome. Our previous
studies suggested that the limited amount of insulin-positive cells derived from 
ES cells is related to the activation of pancreas inhibitory signals. To confirm 
this hypothesis, we report here that exposure of mouse embryonic pancreas
explants to soluble factors from embryoid bodies (EBs) inhibits growth,
morphogenesis, and endocrine and exocrine differentiation as evaluated by explant
size and mRNA and protein expression. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), an established
pancreas repressor both at early and late developmental stages, was produced and 
secreted by EBs, and participated in the inhibitory effect by inducing its target
Gli1 in the explants. Inhibition of Hedgehog pathway rescued the differentiation 
of Insulin-positive cells in the explants. In contrast to pancreatic cells,
hepatic progenitors exposed to EB-conditioned medium showed improved
differentiation of albumin-positive cells. In a model system of ES cell
differentiation in vitro, we found that definitive endoderm induction by serum
removal or activin A treatment further increased Hedgehog production and activity
in EBs. Concomitantly, downregulation of the pancreas marker Pdx1 was recorded in
activin-treated EBs, a phenomenon that was prevented by antagonizing Hedgehog
signaling with Hedgehog interacting protein. These data strongly suggest that
Hedgehog production in EBs limits pancreatic fate acquisition and forms a major
obstacle in the specification of pancreatic cells from ES-derived definitive
endoderm. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of
this article.

PMID: 17272496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Dev Dyn. 2007 Mar;236(3):769-76.

A hypermorphic mouse Gli3 allele results in a polydactylous limb phenotype.

Wang C(1), Pan Y, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, NY, USA.

Gli3 protein processing to generate the Gli3 repressor is mediated by proteasome 
and inhibited by Hedgehog signaling. The Gli3 repressor concentration is graded
along the anterior-posterior axis of the developing vertebrate limb due to
posteriorly restricted Sonic hedgehog expression. In this study, we created a
small deletion at the Gli3 locus (Gli3(Delta68)), which causes a half reduction
in the Gli3 repressor levels and a slightly increased activity of full-length
mutant protein in the limb. Mice homozygous for Gli3(Delta68) develop one to two 
extra partial digits in the anterior of the limb, while mice carrying one copy of
the Gli3(Delta68) allele die soon after birth and display seven digits. These
phenotypes are more severe than those found in mice lacking one wild-type Gli3
allele. The expression of dHand, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13 is anteriorly expanded in the
limb, even though no up-regulation of Gli1 and Ptc RNA expression is detected.
These findings suggest that a decrease in the Gli3 repressor level in combination
with an increase in Gli3 full-length activity results in more severe digit
patterning abnormalities than those caused by a loss of one wild-type Gli3
allele.

PMID: 17266131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 Dec;26(12):1728-31.

[Expression of Smo protein and the downstream transcription factor Gli1 protein
in Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway in gastric carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Rong ZX(1), Fang CH, Zhu DJ, Liu SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510282, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of Smo protein and the downstream
transcription factor Gli1 protein in Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway
in gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: A tissue microarray was constructed using 85 gastric carcinoma and 25
normal gastric mucosa specimens. The expression of Smo and Gli1 proteins were
detected immunohistochemically and the correlation between their expression in
gastric carcinoma was analyzed.
RESULTS: Only weak expression, if any, of Smo and Gli1 proteins was detected in
normal gastric mucosa, but in papillary adenocarcinoma, tubular adenocarcinoma
and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, their expressions were significant
increased as the differentiation degree was lowered. Smo protein expression in
gastric carcinoma was significantly correlated with that of Gli1 protein with
correlation coefficient of 0.989 (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: The abnormal activity of Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway
may play an important role in the occurrence of papillary adenocarcinoma, tubular
adenocarcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, and this abnormality is 
associated with Smo protein overexpression, which upregulates the expression of
the downstream transcription factor Gli1 protein.

PMID: 17259107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Development. 2007 Feb;134(3):557-65. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

The mouse seminal vesicle shape mutation is allelic with Fgfr2.

Kuslak SL(1), Thielen JL, Marker PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The mouse seminal vesicle shape (svs) mutation is a spontaneous recessive
mutation that causes branching morphogenesis defects in the prostate gland and
seminal vesicles. Unlike many other mutations that reduce prostatic and/or
seminal vesicle branching, the svs mutation dramatically reduces branching
without reducing organ growth. Using a positional cloning approach, we identified
the svs mutant lesion as a 491 bp insertion in the tenth intron of Fgfr2 that
results in changes in the pattern of Fgfr2 alternative splicing. An engineered
null allele of Fgfr2 failed to complement the svs mutation proving that a partial
loss of FGFR2(IIIb) isoforms causes svs phenotypes. Thus, the svs mutation
represents a new type of adult viable Fgfr2 allele that can be used to elucidate 
receptor function during normal development and in the adult. In the developing
seminal vesicles, sustained activation of ERK1/2 was associated with branching
morphogenesis and this was absent in svs mutant seminal vesicles. This defect
appears to be the immediate downstream effect of partial loss of FGFR2(IIIb)
because activation of FGFR2(IIIb) by FGF10 rapidly induced ERK1/2 activation, and
inhibition of ERK1/2 activation blocked seminal vesicle branching morphogenesis. 
Partial loss of FGFR2(IIIb) was also associated with down-regulation of several
branching morphogenesis regulators including Shh, Ptch1, Gli1, Gli2, Bmp4, and
Bmp7. Together with previous studies, these data suggest that peak levels of
FGFR2(IIIb) signaling are required to induce branching and sustain ERK1/2
activation, whereas reduced levels support ductal outgrowth in the prostate gland
and seminal vesicles.

PMID: 17202188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Am J Pathol. 2007 Jan;170(1):347-55.

Hedgehog signaling promotes medulloblastoma survival via Bc/II.

Bar EE(1), Chaudhry A, Farah MH, Eberhart CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave., Ross Building 558, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. ebar1@jhmi.edu

Activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been identified in several cancers,
including medulloblastoma, but the mechanisms by which this pathway affects tumor
survival and growth are incompletely understood. We investigated whether Hedgehog
might promote survival of medulloblastoma cells via up-regulation of BclII. We
found that mRNA levels of the Hedgehog pathway effector Gli1 were significantly
associated with BclII expression in medulloblastoma and that Gli1 and BclII are
both present in regions of decreased apoptosis in nodular medulloblastoma.
Transient overexpression of Gli1 and Gli2 in medulloblastoma cultures induced a
BclII transcriptional reporter and increased BclII protein levels, whereas stable
overexpression of Gli1 was associated with increased BclII mRNA. The Hedgehog
antagonist cyclopamine blocked expression of the Hh pathway targets PTCH1 and
Gli1, lowered BclII levels, and increased apoptosis in DAOY and UW228
medulloblastoma cells. Apoptotic induction caused by cyclopamine could be rescued
in part by enforced expression of Gli1 or BclII. Hh pathway blockade also
sensitized medulloblastoma to the effects of the proapoptotic agent lovastatin.
These data demonstrate that BclII is an important mediator of Hh activity in
medulloblastoma and suggest new strategies for combined chemotherapeutic
regimens.

PMCID: PMC1762704
PMID: 17200206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Curr Biol. 2007 Jan 23;17(2):165-72. Epub 2006 Dec 28.

HEDGEHOG-GLI1 signaling regulates human glioma growth, cancer stem cell
self-renewal, and tumorigenicity.

Clement V(1), Sanchez P, de Tribolet N, Radovanovic I, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, 8242 CMU, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2007 Jan 23;17(2):192.

Cancer stem cells are rare tumor cells characterized by their ability to
self-renew and to induce tumorigenesis. They are present in gliomas and may be
responsible for the lethality of these incurable brain tumors. In the most
aggressive and invasive type, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), an average of about 
one year spans the period between detection and death [1]. The resistence of
gliomas to current therapies may be related to the existence of cancer stem cells
[2-6]. We find that human gliomas display a stemness signature and demonstrate
that HEDGEHOG (HH)-GLI signaling regulates the expression of stemness genes in
and the self-renewal of CD133(+) glioma cancer stem cells. HH-GLI signaling is
also required for sustained glioma growth and survival. It displays additive and 
synergistic effects with temozolomide (TMZ), the current chemotherapeutic agent
of choice. TMZ, however, does not block glioma stem cell self-renewal. Finally,
interference of HH-GLI signaling with cyclopamine or through lentiviral-mediated 
silencing demonstrates that the tumorigenicity of human gliomas in mice requires 
an active pathway. Our results reveal the essential role of HH-GLI signaling in
controlling the behavior of human glioma cancer stem cells and offer new
therapeutic possibilities.

PMCID: PMC1855204
PMID: 17196391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Surg Oncol. 2007 Jan 1;95(1):55-62.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is a possible therapeutic target for gastric cancer.

Yanai K(1), Nagai S, Wada J, Yamanaka N, Nakamura M, Torata N, Noshiro H,
Tsuneyoshi M, Tanaka M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: It has been shown that the hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway is activated in gastric cancer. To investigate the viability of the Hh
pathway as a therapeutic target, we analyzed activation of the Hh pathway in
gastric cancer.
METHODS: Surgically resected gastric carcinoma specimens and lymph nodes were
analyzed immunohistochemically. We used the percentage of cancer cells with
nuclear translocation of Gli1 as a marker of Hh pathway activation.
RESULTS: Nuclear localization of Gli1 was higher in 28 undifferentiated-type
tumors than in 30 differentiated-type tumors. Eighteen of the fifty-eight cancer 
specimens consisted of a mixture of a histologically predominant part and a small
area with different histology. In these 18 tumors, the percentage of cells
showing nuclear staining of Gli1 was higher in the undifferentiated-type part
than in the differentiated-type part. Nuclear staining of Gli1 in primary tumors 
was positively correlated with lymph node metastasis. The Gli1 nuclear staining
percentage of metastatic lymph nodes correlated closely with that of each primary
carcinoma. Cyclopamine, a Hh pathway inhibitor, suppressed the growth of gastric 
cancer cells in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: The Hh pathway may be a useful therapeutic target for such as
undifferentiated-type gastric cancer with lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 17192867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Dyn. 2007 Feb;236(2):426-34.

Temporomandibular joint formation and condyle growth require Indian hedgehog
signaling.

Shibukawa Y(1), Young B, Wu C, Yamada S, Long F, Pacifici M, Koyama E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is essential for jaw function, but the
mechanisms regulating its development remain poorly understood. Because Indian
hedgehog (Ihh) regulates trunk and limb skeletogenesis, we studied its possible
roles in TMJ development. In wild-type mouse embryos, Ihh expression was already 
strong in condylar cartilage by embryonic day (E) 15.5, and expression of Ihh
receptors and effector genes (Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and PTHrP) indicated that Ihh
range of action normally reached apical condylar tissue layers, including
polymorphic chondroprogenitor layer and articular disc primordia. In Ihh(-/-)
embryos, TMJ development was severely compromised. Condylar cartilage growth,
polymorphic cell proliferation, and PTHrP expression were all inhibited, and
growth plate organization and chondrocyte gene expression patterns were abnormal.
These severe defects were partially corrected in double Ihh(-/-)/Gli3(-/-)
mutants, signifying that Ihh action is normally modulated and delimited by Gli3
and Gli3(R) in particular. Both single and double mutants, however, failed to
form an articular disc primordium, normally appreciable as an independent
condensation between condylar apex and neighboring developing temporal bone in
wild-type. This failure persisted at later stages, leading to complete absence of
a normal functional disc and lubricin-expressing joint cavities. In summary, Ihh 
is very important for TMJ development, where it appears to regulate growth and
elongation events, condylar cartilage phenotype, and chondroprogenitor cell
function. Absence of articular disc and joint cavities in single and double
mutants points to irreplaceable Ihh roles in formation of those critical TMJ
components.

PMID: 17191253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 9;353(2):405-11. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

Differentiation of an ameloblast-lineage cell line (ALC) is induced by Sonic
hedgehog signaling.

Takahashi S(1), Kawashima N, Sakamoto K, Nakata A, Kameda T, Sugiyama T, Katsube 
K, Suda H.

Author information: 
(1)Pulp Biology and Endodontics, Graduate School of Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.
s.takahashi.endo@tmd.ac.jp

Sonic hedgehog (Shh), one of the essential molecules for embryogenesis and
organogenesis, is strongly expressed in the enamel knot, which represents the
signaling center for odontogenesis due to the presence of essential secretory
molecules. Here, we investigated the effects of Shh on ameloblast differentiation
using a mouse ameloblast-lineage cell line (ALC). In the presence of Shh, the
expression of amelogenin and ameloblastin was up-regulated, and their promoter
activities were also elevated. Subcutaneous implantation of Shh-treated ALC into 
the dorsa of C57/Bl6J mouse caused increased expression of amelogenin and
ameloblastin. Forced expression of Gli1, a major transcription factor in Shh
signaling, up-regulated both amelogenin and ameloblastin, while Gli1-specific
RNAi blocked their expression. These results suggest that Shh directly promotes
ALC differentiation, and that Gli1 may be responsible for the signal mediation of
Shh.

PMID: 17188245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 9;353(2):501-8. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

GSK3beta positively regulates Hedgehog signaling through Sufu in mammalian cells.

Takenaka K(1), Kise Y, Miki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
takenaka@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Hedgehog signaling plays important roles in embryonic patterning of multicellular
organisms. This pathway is ultimately transmitted by the zinc-finger
transcriptional factor Gli, of which activity is suppressed by Sufu, a negative
regulator of this signaling. To clarify this regulation to more detail, we
screened for Sufu-binding proteins. We identified GSK3beta as a specific binding 
partner of Sufu by mass spectrometric analysis. GSK3beta bound to Sufu both in
vitro and in vivo. Down-regulation of GSK3beta expression by RNAi in
Hedgehog-responsive cells attenuated Hedgehog signaling, suggesting that GSK3beta
functions as a positive regulator of Hedgehog signaling. In addition, an in vitro
kinase assay showed that GSK3beta phosphorylates Sufu and
phosphorylation-mimicking mutant of Sufu showed significantly decreased ability
to bind Gli1 and could not suppress the Gli-mediated expression of a reporter
gene efficiently. These results strongly suggest that GSK3beta phosphorylates
Sufu to positively regulate Hedgehog signaling in mammalian cells.

PMID: 17182001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Oncology. 2006;70(5):378-89. Epub 2006 Dec 15.

Gli-1 expression is associated with lymph node metastasis and tumor progression
in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Mori Y(1), Okumura T, Tsunoda S, Sakai Y, Shimada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the expression and function of the hedgehog (Hh)
pathway in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
METHODS: The expression of Hh pathway molecules were detected in 34 human ESCC
cell lines by RT-PCR. Subsequently, we investigated the effects of cyclopamine, a
specific inhibitor of the Hh pathway, on cell proliferation, migration and
invasion. Next, the effects of siRNA targeting Gli-1 were examined.
Immunohistochemically, the expression of Gli-1 was studied in 104 ESCC specimens 
and compared with the clinicopathological characteristics of the patients.
RESULTS: Gli-1 were expressed in 31 of 34 cell lines (91%), while Sonic hedgehog 
(SHh), Patched (Ptch), and Smoothened (Smo) expression was noted in all 34 cell
lines. Cyclopamine significantly inhibited cell proliferation and migration in
ESCC cells that expressed Gli-1. siRNA targeting Gli-1 inhibited cell growth in
ESCC cells. Gli-1 was expressed in 52 of 104 cancer specimens (50%). Gli-1
expression was associated with tumor depth (p < 0.001), positive lymph node
metastasis (p = 0.004) and a poor prognosis (p = 0.0047).
CONCLUSION: Our results raise the possibility that the inhibition of the Hh
pathway could be a novel target for esophageal cancer therapy.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17179732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Exp Hematol. 2006 Dec;34(12):1643-50.

The SCL 3' enhancer responds to Hedgehog signaling during hemangioblast
specification.

Hochman E(1), Kinston S, Harmelin A, Göttgens B, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Section of Pediatric Malignancies, The Sheba Cancer Research
Center, Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine, 
Tel-Aviv University, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: The Hedgehog family of intercellular proteins has a crucial role in
embryonic development. Recent experimental data suggests that the Hedgehog
pathway may play a role in early hematopoiesis and angiogenesis. Stem cell
leukemia (SCL), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, is
essential for the specification and function of the hemangioblast. SCL expression
in early hematopoietic precursors and endothelium is directed by a 3' enhancer.
We hypothesized that the SCL 3' enhancer is regulated by Hedgehog signaling
during specification of mesoderm towards hemangioblastic fate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Whole embryos derived from transgenic mouse lines carrying
reporter genes under the regulation of SCL 3' enhancer were cultured in the
presence of active Hedgehog peptide. Hedgehog transcriptional regulation of SCL
3' enhancer was studied by in vitro and in vivo binding and reporter assays.
RESULTS: Hedgehog induced expansion of cells in which the SCL 3' enhancer was
transcriptionally activated. A Gli-binding site within the 3' enhancer of SCL was
identified and Gli1 was demonstrated to bind and transactivate this enhancer in a
sequence-dependent manner. We further demonstrated that the core region of the
SCL 3' enhancer is transcriptionally regulated by Hedgehog in-vivo and that the
Gli-binding site located in this enhancer is essential for Hedgehog
transcriptional regulation in vitro.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that SCL may be a direct target of Hedgehog
signaling during hemangioblast specification.

PMID: 17157160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 1;12(23):6960-6.

Dysregulated expression of stem cell factor Bmi1 in precancerous lesions of the
gastrointestinal tract.

Tateishi K(1), Ohta M, Kanai F, Guleng B, Tanaka Y, Asaoka Y, Tada M, Seto M,
Jazag A, Lianjie L, Okamoto M, Isayama H, Tada M, Yoshida H, Kawabe T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Tokyo, Japan.
ktate-tky@umin.ac.jp

PURPOSE: It is important to identify the definitive molecular switches involved
in the malignant transformation of premalignant tissues. Cellular senescence is a
specific characteristic of precancerous tissues, but not of cancers, which might 
reflect tumorigenesis-protecting mechanisms in premalignant lesions. Polycomb
protein Bmi1, which is a potent negative regulator of the p16INK4 gene,
suppresses senescence in primary cells and is overexpressed in various cancers.
We hypothesized that Bmi1 expression would also be dysregulated in precancerous
lesions in human digestive precancerous tissues.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Bmi1 expression was investigated in cancerous and
precancerous tissues of the digestive tract. The expression of p16, beta-catenin,
and Gli1 and the in vivo methylation status of the p16 gene were also analyzed in
serial sections of colonic precancerous lesions.
RESULTS: Bmi1 was clearly overexpressed across a broad spectrum of
gastrointestinal cancers, and the expression of Bmi1 increased in a manner that
reflected the pathologic malignant features of precancerous colonic tissues
(low-grade dysplasia, 12.9 +/- 2.0%; high-grade dysplasia, 82.9 +/- 1.6%; cancer,
87.5 +/- 2.4%). p16 was also strongly expressed in high-grade dysplasia, but not 
in cancers. p16 promoter methylation was detected only in some Bmi1-positive
neoplastic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Bmi1 overexpression was correlated with the malignant grades of
human digestive precancerous tissues, which suggests that advanced Bmi1
dysregulation might predict malignant progression. The abnormal Bmi1 expression
might link to malignant transformation via the disturbance of orderly histone
modification.

PMID: 17145814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2006 Oct;12(10):896-9.

[Expression patterns of sonic hedgehog signaling molecules in human fetal
prostate development].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu GD(1), He DL, He H, Zhang LL, Wang XY, Zhau EH, Chung LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University 
Medical School, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China. zhuguodong2004@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway is
involved in the development of human fetal prostate, and to evaluate the changing
staining patterns of its molecules, sonic hedgehog (SHH), patchedl (PTC1),
smoothened (SMO), and GLI1, in the human fetal prostate at various gestation
stages.
METHODS: Fifteen human fetal prostate specimens at various developmental stages
(10 - 39 weeks) were included in this study. SHH, PTC1, SMO and GLI1 were
detected in all the specimens by immunohistochemical technique. All the slides
were observed and assessed under the light microscope.
RESULTS: SHH, PTC1, SMO and GLI1 could be detected in human fetal prostate
tissues, and their expression formed two surges, the former at week 16, and the
latter at week 28. The staining of SHH and SMO was distributed only in the ductal
epithelium but not in the stroma. The expression of PTC1 and GLI1 could be found 
mainly in the epithelium, with minimal staining in the stroma.
CONCLUSION: The sonic hedgehog signaling pathway is involved in the development
of the human fetal prostate. The high expression of its molecules at early
gestation stages might be associated with the induction of prostatic buds, while 
their abundant expression at later gestation stages might be related to the
prostate ductal branching, growth, differentiation and morphogenesis.

PMID: 17121018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;8(12):1415-23. Epub 2006 Nov 19.

Numb is a suppressor of Hedgehog signalling and targets Gli1 for Itch-dependent
ubiquitination.

Di Marcotullio L(1), Ferretti E, Greco A, De Smaele E, Po A, Sico MA, Alimandi M,
Giannini G, Maroder M, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza,
Roma, 324 Viale Regina Elena, 00161 Roma, Italy.

The developmental protein Numb is a major determinant of binary cell fates. It is
also required for the differentiation of cerebellar granule cell progenitors
(GCPs) at a stage of development responsive to the morphogenic glycoprotein
Hedehog. Hedgehog signalling is crucial for the physiological maintenance and
self-renewal of neural stem cells and its deregulation is responsible for their
progression towards tumorigenesis. The mechanisms that inhibit this pathway
during the differentiation stage are poorly understood. Here, we identify Numb as
a Hedgehog-pathway inhibitor that is downregulated in early GCPs and GCP-derived 
cancer cells. We demonstrate that the Hedgehog transcription factor Gli1 is
targeted by Numb for Itch-dependent ubiquitination, which suppresses Hedgehog
signals, thus arresting growth and promoting cell differentiation. This novel
Numb-dependent regulatory loop may limit the extent and duration of Hedgehog
signalling during neural-progenitor differentiation, and its subversion may be a 
relevant event in brain tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17115028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006 Dec 15;217(3):375-83. Epub 2006 Oct 6.

The expression of Hedgehog genes (Ihh, Dhh) and Hedgehog target genes (Ptc1,
Gli1, Coup-TfII) is affected by estrogenic stimuli in the uterus of immature
female rats.

Katayama S(1), Ashizawa K, Gohma H, Fukuhara T, Narumi K, Tsuzuki Y, Tatemoto H, 
Nakada T, Nagai K.

Author information: 
(1)Kashima Laboratory, Mitsubishi Chemical Safety Institute Ltd., 14 Sunayama,
Kamisu, Ibaraki 314-0255, Japan. katayama@ankaken.co.jp

The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of estrogen receptor
(ER) agonists and an ER antagonist on the expression of Hedgehog genes (Indian
hedgehog: Ihh; Desert hedgehog: Dhh) and Hedgehog target genes (Patched 1: Ptc1; 
glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1: Gli1; chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factor II: Coup-TfII) in the rat uterus. Immature female rats were 
administered once with 17alpha-ethynyl estradiol (EE, an ER agonist), propyl
pyrazole triole (PPT, an ERalpha-selective agonist), diarylpropionitrile (DPN, an
ERbeta-selective agonist), or ICI 182,780 (an ER antagonist). Expression of mRNA 
for Ihh, Dhh, and Ptc1 was dose-dependently downregulated by EE in the uterus of 
immature rats, mediated by ER as confirmed by coadministration of ICI 182,780.
The mRNA expression levels of Ptc1, Gli1, and Coup-TfII were simultaneously
downregulated during the period in which the mRNA expression levels of Ihh and
Dhh were downregulated in the uterus after administration of EE. PPT
downregulated the transcription of Ihh, Dhh, Ptc1, Gli1, and Coup-TfII,
indicating that expression of these genes was regulated by the ERalpha-dependent 
pathway. DPN also downregulated the transcription of Ihh and Dhh, although the
effect was weaker than that of PPT, indicating that the regulation of uterine Ihh
and Dhh transcription was also affected by the ERbeta-dependent pathway. These
results suggest that the expression of Hedgehog genes (Ihh, Dhh) and Hedgehog
target genes (Ptc1, Gli1, Coup-TfII) is affected by estrogenic stimuli in the
uterus of immature female rats.

PMID: 17109907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cell Cycle. 2006 Nov 1;5(21):2457-63. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Regulation of Hh/Gli signaling by dual ubiquitin pathways.

Jiang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology and Department of Pharmacology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 75390, USA.
jin.jiang@utsouthwestern.edu

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway governs cell growth and patterning in animal 
development. Malfunction of several pathway components, including the key
transcriptional effector Ci/Gli proteins, leads to a variety of human disorders
including several malignancies. Ci/Gli activity is controlled by multi-layered
regulatory mechanisms, the most prominent of which is the ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis. In the absence of Hh, Ci/Gli is proteolytically processed into a
truncated form that functions as a transcriptional repressor of the Hh pathway.
Ci processing is mediated by an SCF (Skip1/Cul1/F-box protein) ubiquitin ligase
in which the F-box protein Slimb/beta-TRCP bridges Ci to the ubiquitin ligase.
Recent studies in Drosophila and mammalian cultured cells have demonstrated that 
sequential phosphorylation of Ci/Gli by PKA, GSK3, and CKI creates multiple
docking sites that can recruit SCF(Slimb/beta-TRCP), which then promotes Ci/Gli
ubiquitination followed by proteasome-mediated processing. Recently, an E3
ubiquitin ligase consisting of the BTB (Broad Complex, Tramtrack, and Bric a
Brac) protein HIB (Hh induced MATH and BTB protein) and Cullin 3 (Cul3) has been 
identified that acts in a negative feedback loop to fine-tune Hh signaling
responses by degrading full length Ci. In eye imaginal discs where Hh signals
coordinate cell proliferation and differentiation, HIB is highly expressed in the
differentiating cells to prevent aberrant Hh signaling activity and ensure normal
eye development. Tissue- and developmental stage-specific expression of HIB and
its homologs in vertebrates may provide a conserved mechanism for ensuring
precision in spatial and temporal control of Hh signaling.

PMID: 17102630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Nov;5(11):1530-8. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Sonic Hedgehog-Gli1 signaling pathway might become an effective therapeutic
target in gastrointestinal neuroendocrine carcinomas.

Shida T(1), Furuya M, Nikaido T, Hasegawa M, Koda K, Oda K, Miyazaki M, Kishimoto
T, Nakatani Y, Ishikura H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Pathology, General Surgery, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) are extremely aggressive and
poorly prognostic. We showed previously that human achaete-scute homologue gene 1
(hASH1), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor regulated by Notch, was
aberrantly expressed in NECs. To date, no effective therapeutic strategies for
NECs have been investigated. Notch, Wnt and Hedgehog (Hh) signalings are
important for stem cell self-renewal and carcinogenesis in the gastrointestinal
epithelium. In this study, we showed that Hh signaling was clearly upregulated in
NECs in Gli1-dependent manner. Specific therapeutic effects of cyclopamine on
NECs were also demonstrated. RT-PCR showed that among eight frozen samples (three
NECs, one carcinoid tumor, three adenocarcinomas and one normal mucosa), the band
intensities of Gli1 were the strongest in NECs, moderately strong in a carcinoid 
tumor, very weak in adenocarcinomas and undetectable in a normal mucosa. In
real-time RT-PCR, the expression levels of Gli1 in NECs were 108.4, 28.6 and 16.3
times higher than that in an adenocarcinoma. In immunohistochemistry using 25
paraffin-embedded tissues, all twelve NECs and three of six carcinoid tumors
showed positive stainings for Gli1, whereas six of seven adenocarcinomas were
negative. In vitro, RT-PCR showed that NEC cell lines expressed Gli1 mRNA
significantly. Administration of cyclopamine suppressed cell proliferation and
invasion, and induced apoptosis in NECs. In cyclopamine-treated NECs,
downregulation of Gli1, Ptch1, Snail and hASH1, and upregulation of E-cadherin
were demonstrated at mRNA levels. Such effects were not observed in a
Gli1-negative colonic adenocarcinoma cell line or in control alkaloid-treated
NECs. Hh signaling may play a crucial role in the pathophysiology of NECs.
Blockade of Hh pathway using cyclopamine or its synthetic derivatives might open 
an effective therapeutic strategy to NECs, not only by suppressing tumor
viability but also by altering tumor cell nature.

PMID: 17102592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Dec;18(6):1019-23.

Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastrointestinal stem cell signaling network
(review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Hedgehog, BMP/TGFbeta, FGF, WNT and Notch signaling pathways constitute the stem 
cell signaling network, which plays a key role in a variety of processes, such as
embryogenesis, maintenance of adult tissue homeostasis, tissue repair during
chronic persistent inflammation, and carcinogenesis. Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Indian
hedgehog (IHH) and Desert hedgehog (DHH) bind to PTCH1/PTCH or PTCH2 receptor to 
release Smoothened (SMO) signal transducer from Patched-dependent suppression.
SMO then activates STK36 serine/threonine kinase to stabilize GLI family members 
and to phosphorylate SUFU for nuclear accumulation of GLI. Hedgehog signaling
activation leads to GLI-dependent transcriptional activation of target genes,
such as GLI1, PTCH1, CCND2, FOXL1, JAG2 and SFRP1. GLI1-dependent positive
feedback loop combined with PTCH1-dependent negative feedback loop gives rise to 
transient proliferation of Hedgehog target cells. Iguana homologs (DZIP1 and
DZIP1L) and Costal-2 homologs (KIF7 and KIF27) are identified by comparative
integromics. SHH-dependent parietal cell proliferation is implicated in gastric
mucosal repair during chronic Helicobacter pylori infection. BMP-RUNX3 signaling 
induces IHH expression in surface differentiated epithelial cells of stomach and 
intestine. Hedgehog signals from epithelial cells then induces FOXL1-mediated
BMP4 upregulation in mesenchymal cells. Hedgehog signaling is frequently
activated in esophageal cancer, gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer due to
transcriptional upregulation of Hedgehog ligands and epigenetic silencing of
HHIP1/HHIP gene, encoding the Hedgehog inhibitor. However, Hedgehog signaling is 
rarely activated in colorectal cancer due to negative regulation by the canonical
WNT signaling pathway. Hedgehog signaling molecules or targets, such as SHH, IHH,
HHIP1, PTCH1 and GLI1, are applied as biomarkers for cancer diagnostics,
prognostics and therapeutics. Small-molecule inhibitors for SMO or STK36 are
suitable to be used for treatment of Hedgehog-dependent cancer.

PMID: 17089004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;12(21):6557-64.

Synthetic microRNA designed to target glioma-associated antigen 1 transcription
factor inhibits division and induces late apoptosis in pancreatic tumor cells.

Tsuda N(1), Ishiyama S, Li Y, Ioannides CG, Abbruzzese JL, Chang DZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4095, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine whether the synthetic microRNAs (miRNA) could effectively
target tumor cells we designed several miRNA complementary to glioma-associated
antigen-1 (Gli-1) mRNA and investigated their ability to inhibit tumor cell
proliferation. The sonic hedgehog pathway is an early and late mediator of
tumorigenesis in epithelial cancers. Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling seems
to precede transformation of tissue stem cells to cancerous stem cells, with the 
Gli-1 transcription factor functioning as a mediator of environmental signals.
Inhibiting cancer cell proliferation by targeting the Gli-1 effector pathway is
difficult to achieve by chemotherapeutic agents or short interfering RNA.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We hypothesized that targeting the 3'-untranslated region of
Gli-1 mRNA would effectively inhibit tumor cell proliferation. To test this
hypothesis, we used synthetic miRNAs of our own design and corresponding
duplex/small temporal RNAs by introducing three-nucleotide loops in the
3'-untranslated region Gli-1 sequence of high GU content.
RESULTS: We found that miRNA (Gli-1-miRNA-3548) and its corresponding duplex
(Duplex-3548) significantly inhibited proliferation of Gli-1+ ovarian (SK-OV-3)
and pancreatic (MiaPaCa-2) tumor cells. The miRNAs mediated delayed cell division
and activation of late apoptosis in MiaPaCa-2 cells. This is the first
demonstration of inhibition of pancreatic tumor cell division by designed miRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Gli-1 miRNAs should significantly add to the general understanding
of the mechanisms of metastasis and contribute toward the design of better
treatments for epithelial cancers.

PMID: 17085671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cancer Sci. 2007 Jan;98(1):68-76.

Hedgehog signal pathway is activated in ovarian carcinomas, correlating with cell
proliferation: it's inhibition leads to growth suppression and apoptosis.

Chen X(1), Horiuchi A, Kikuchi N, Osada R, Yoshida J, Shiozawa T, Konishi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.

The hedgehog (Hh) signal pathway has recently been shown to be activated in human
malignancies. However, little is known about its role in the development or
patient prognosis of epithelial ovarian carcinoma. In the present study, we
examined in vivo and in vitro the expression and functional role of Hh signal
molecules in epithelial ovarian tumors and normal ovarian surface epithelial
(OSE) cells. The expression of Shh, Dhh, Ptch, Smo and Gli1 proteins was not
observed in normal OSE, but was increased stepwise in benign, borderline and
malignant neoplasms. In addition, immunoreactivity for Shh, Dhh, Ptch, Smo and
Gli1 was highly correlated with cell proliferation assessed by Ki-67. Blocking
the Hh signal using either the Hh pathway inhibitor cyclopamine or Gli1 siRNA led
to remarkably decreased cell proliferation in ovarian carcinoma cells. Treatment 
with cyclopamine induced not only G, arrest but also apoptosis along with the
downregulation of cyclin A and cyclin D1, and the upregulation of p21 and p27.
Among the Hh signal molecules, Dhh expression was correlated with poor prognosis 
of ovarian carcinoma patients. These findings suggest that the Hh signal pathway 
plays an important role in ovarian tumorigenesis as well as in the activation of 
cell proliferation in ovarian carcinomas. Thus, the Hh signal pathway is a
possible molecular target of new treatment strategies for ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 17083567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 8;351(1):78-84. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Fused kinase is stabilized by Cdc37/Hsp90 and enhances Gli protein levels.

Kise Y(1), Takenaka K, Tezuka T, Yamamoto T, Miki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Serine/threonine kinase Fused (Fu) is an essential component of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling in Drosophila, but the biochemical functions of Fu remain unclear.
Here, we have investigated proteins co-precipitated with mammalian Fu and
identified a kinase-specific chaperone complex, Cdc37/Hsp90, as a novel-binding
partner of Fu. Inhibition of Hsp90 function by geldanamycin (GA) induces rapid
degradation of Fu through a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. We next show that
co-expression of Fu with transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 significantly
increases their protein levels and luciferase reporter activities, which are
blocked by GA. These increases can be ascribed to Fu-mediated stabilization of
Gli because co-expression of Fu prolongs half-life of Gli1 and reduces
polyubiquitination of Gli1. Finally, we show that GA inhibits proliferation of
PC3, a Hh signaling-activated prostate cancer cell line. This growth inhibition
is partially rescued by expression of ectopic Gli1, suggesting that Fu may
contribute to enhance Hh signaling activity in cancer cells.

PMID: 17054904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 24;281(47):35598-602. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Suppressing Wnt signaling by the hedgehog pathway through sFRP-1.

He J(1), Sheng T, Stelter AA, Li C, Zhang X, Sinha M, Luxon BA, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology, Department of Pharmacology and
Biochemistry, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-1048,
USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is essential for embryonic development and
carcinogenesis. Activation of Hh signaling has been identified in several types
of gastrointestinal cancers, including esophageal, gastric, pancreatic, and liver
cancers. Several recent studies suggest that Hh signaling activation can inhibit 
Wnt signaling. However, the molecular basis underlying this inhibition remains
unclear. As transcription factors in the Hh signaling pathway, Gli molecules
transform cells in culture, and their expression are associated with cancer
development. Here we report that expression of a secreted frizzled-related
protein-sFRP-1 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts is dependent on Gli1 and Gli2. In
human gastric cancer cells, inhibition of Hh signaling reduces the level of
sFRP-1 transcript, whereas ectopic expression of Gli1 increases the level of
sFRP-1 transcript. Results from chromatin immunoprecipitation indicate that Gli1 
is involved in transcriptional regulation of sFRP-1. In 293 cells with Gli1
expression, Wnt-1-mediated beta-catenin accumulation in the cytosol and DKK1
expression are all abrogated, which can be reversed by inhibiting sFRP-1
expression. Furthermore, while SIIA cells do not respond to Wnt-1-conditioned
medium, inhibition of Hh signaling by smoothened (SMO) antagonist
KAAD-cyclopamine (keto-N-aminoethylaminocaproyldihydrocinnamoylcyclopamine) leads
to Wnt1-mediated beta-catenin accumulation in the cytosol. These data indicate
that sFRP-1, a target gene of the hedgehog pathway, is involved in cross-talk
between the hedgehog pathway and the Wnt pathway.

PMID: 17035233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9437-44.

Squamous cell carcinoma related oncogene/DCUN1D1 is highly conserved and
activated by amplification in squamous cell carcinomas.

Sarkaria I(1), O-charoenrat P, Talbot SG, Reddy PG, Ngai I, Maghami E, Patel KN, 
Lee B, Yonekawa Y, Dudas M, Kaufman A, Ryan R, Ghossein R, Rao PH, Stoffel A,
Ramanathan Y, Singh B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epithelial Cancer Biology, Thoracic Surgery Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Chromosomal amplification at 3q is common to multiple human cancers, but has a
specific predilection for squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of mucosal origin. We
identified and characterized a novel oncogene, SCC-related oncogene (SCCRO),
which is amplified along the 3q26.3 region in human SCC. Amplification and
overexpression of SCCRO in these tumors correlate with poor clinical outcome. The
importance of SCCRO amplification in malignant transformation is established by
the apoptotic response to short hairpin RNA against SCCRO, exclusively in cancer 
cell lines carrying SCCRO amplification. The oncogenic potential of SCCRO is
underscored by its ability to transform fibroblasts (NIH-3T3 cells) in vitro and 
in vivo. We show that SCCRO regulates Gli1--a key regulator of the hedgehog (HH) 
pathway. Collectively, these data suggest that SCCRO is a novel component of the 
HH signaling pathway involved in the malignant transformation of squamous cell
lineage.

PMID: 17018598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Sep 21;12(35):5687-91.

Expressions of sonic hedgehog, patched, smoothened and Gli-1 in human intestinal 
stromal tumors and their correlation with prognosis.

Yoshizaki A(1), Nakayama T, Naito S, Wen CY, Sekine I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

AIM: To investigate the role that the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, which
includes sonic hedgehog (Shh), Patched (Ptc), Smoothened (Smo) and Gli-1, plays
in human gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs).
METHODS: Surgically resected specimens from patients with GISTs, leiomyomas and
schwannomas were examined by immunohistochemical staining for aberrant expression
of hedgehog signaling components, Shh, Ptc, Smo and Gli-1, respectively.
RESULTS: In GISTs, 58.1% (18 of 31), 77.4% (24 of 31), 80.6% (25 of 31) and 58.1%
(18 of 31) of the specimens stained positive for Shh, Ptc, Smo and Gli-1,
respectively. In leiomyomas, 92.3% (12 of 13), 92.3% (12 of 13), 69.2% (9 of 13) 
and 92.3% (12 of 13) stained positive for Shh, Ptc, Smo and Gli-1, respectively. 
In schwannomas, 83.3% (5 of 6), 83.3% (5 of 6), 83.3% (5 of 6) and 100% (6 of 6) 
stained positive for Shh, Ptc, Smo and Gli-1, respectively. Immunohistochemistry 
revealed that the expressions of Shh and Gli-1 were significantly higher in
leiomyomas than in GISTs (P < 0.05, respectively). Shh expression strongly
correlated with the grade of tumor risk category and with tumor size (P < 0.05,
respectively). However, the expressions of Ptc and Smo did not correlate with
histopathological differentiation.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the Hh signaling pathway may play an
important role in myogenic differentiation and the malignant potential of human
intestinal stromal tumors.

PMCID: PMC4088171
PMID: 17007023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Regul Pept. 2006 Nov 15;137(1-2):58-66. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

Growth factor-dependent actions of PACAP on oligodendrocyte progenitor
proliferation.

Lelievre V(1), Ghiani CA, Seksenyan A, Gressens P, de Vellis J, Waschek JA.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Mental Retardation Research Center, University of California,
Los Angeles 90095, USA.

We previously reported that rat oligodendrocyte progenitors (OLP) express
receptors for the pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP) in vivo
and in vitro. Addition of PACAP to cultured OLP triggered a potent elevation in
intracellular cAMP contents, a dose-dependent stimulation of proliferation, and a
delay in myelinogenesis (Lee M, Lelievre V, Zhao P, Torres M, Rodriguez W, Byun
JY, Doshi S, Ioffe Y, Gupta G, de los Monteros AE, de Vellis J, Waschek J.
Pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating polypeptide stimulates DNA synthesis but
delays maturation of oligodendrocyte progenitors. J Neurosci. 2001 21:3849-59.). 
In an attempt to understand how PACAP might interact with growth factors known to
stimulate OLP proliferation, we investigated PACAP actions on OLP proliferation
in the presence of Fibroblast Growth Factor-2 (FGF-2) and PDGF. Multiple PACAP
receptor subtype mRNAs and splice variants were detected in these cultures. PACAP
by itself potently stimulated OLP proliferation and enhanced the ability of FGF-2
to stimulate DNA synthesis. In contrast, this peptide strongly antagonized the
mitogenic effects of PDGF in association with a reduction of PDGFalpha receptor
gene expression. Additionally, we investigated the interaction of PACAP with the 
morphogenetic factor sonic hedgehog (Shh), which recently was shown to be crucial
for oligodendrocyte generation. OLP cultures were found to express mRNAs for both
ptc1 (Shh receptor) and gli1 (Shh target gene) and responded to Shh treatment
with an increase in proliferation. PACAP antagonized the ability of Shh to
stimulate OLP proliferation. Moreover, transcriptional targets of Shh signaling
were also reduced by this treatment, suggesting that PACAP directly antagonized
Shh signaling. These studies reveal complex in vitro interactions of PACAP with
other factors involved in OLP development.

PMID: 16989910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 22;26(8):1122-36. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

The hedgehog regulated oncogenes Gli1 and Gli2 block myoblast differentiation by 
inhibiting MyoD-mediated transcriptional activation.

Gerber AN(1), Wilson CW, Li YJ, Chuang PT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94158, USA.

The mechanism by which activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway modulates
differentiation and promotes oncogenesis in specific tissues is poorly
understood. We therefore, analysed rhabdomyosarcomas from mice that were
haploinsufficient for the Hh-binding protein, Hip1, or for the Hh receptor,
Patched 1 (Ptch1). Transfection of the Hh-regulated transcription factor Gli1,
which is expressed in a subset of mouse and human rhabdomyosarcomas, suppressed
differentiation of myogenic rhabdomyosarcoma lines generated from Hip1+/- and
Ptch1+/- mice. The closely related factor, Gli2, had similar effects. Gli1 and
Gli2 inhibited myogenesis by repressing the capacity of MyoD to activate
transcription. Deletion analysis of Gli1 indicated that multiple domains of Gli1 
are required for efficient inhibition of MyoD. Gli1 reduced the ability of MyoD
to heterodimerize with E12 and bind DNA, providing one mechanism whereby the Gli 
proteins modulate the activity of MyoD. This novel activity of Gli proteins
provides new insights into how Hh signaling modulates terminal differentiation
through inhibition of tissue-specific factors such as MyoD. This mechanism may
contribute to the broad role of Hh signaling and the Gli proteins in
differentiation decisions and cancer formation.

PMCID: PMC3325095
PMID: 16964293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Development. 2006 Sep;133(18):3661-70. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

Gli3-mediated repression of Hedgehog targets is required for normal mammary
development.

Hatsell SJ(1), Cowin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

The Hedgehog pathway is vital for the development of many epidermal appendages,
but its role in mammary development has been unclear. Here, we show that although
Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed during embryonic mammary development, transcriptional
reporters of positive Hedgehog signaling are absent. Nevertheless, Gli3(xt/xt)
embryos show aberrant early mammary marker expression and lack two pairs of
mammary buds, demonstrating that Gli3 is essential for mammary bud formation and 
preceding patterning events. Misactivation of the Hedgehog pathway by targeted
expression of the constitutive activator Gli1, from the Gli2 promoter in
Gli3(xt/+) mice, also induces mammary bud loss. Moreover, loss of Gli3 expression
induces Gli1 misexpression in mammary mesenchyme. These results establish that
the essential function of Gli3 during embryonic mammary development is to repress
Hedgehog/Gli1-inducible targets. During postnatal mammary development, Gli2 and
Gli3 are expressed in stromal and myoepithelial cells, and Gli3 is also found
within the lumenal epithelium. Again, transcriptional reporters of positive
Hedgehog signaling are absent from these cell types, yet are expressed robustly
within mammary lymphatics. Thus, positive Hedgehog signaling is absent throughout
mammary development, distinguishing the mammary gland from other epidermal
appendages, such as hair follicles, which require Hedgehog pathway activity.

PMID: 16914490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 15;26(7):1046-55. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Frequent requirement of hedgehog signaling in non-small cell lung carcinoma.

Yuan Z(1), Goetz JA, Singh S, Ogden SK, Petty WJ, Black CC, Memoli VA, Dmitrovsky
E, Robbins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, 
NH 03755, USA.

Although it had previously been suggested that the hedgehog (HH) pathway might be
activated in some lung tumors, the dependence of non-small cell lung carcinomas
(NSCLC) for HH activity had not been comprehensively studied. During a screen of 
a panel of 60 human tumor cell lines with an HH antagonist, we observed that the 
proliferation of a subset of NSCLC cell lines was inhibited. These NSCLC cell
lines express HH, as well as key HH target genes, consistent with them being
activated through an autocrine mechanism. Interestingly, we also identified a
number of NSCLC cell lines that express high levels of the downstream
transcription factor GLI1 and harbor enhanced levels of HH activity, but appear
insensitive to known HH antagonists. We hypothesized that the high levels of GLI1
in these cells would function downstream of the HH antagonist target, allowing
them to bypass the antagonist-mediated block in proliferation. Consistent with
this hypothesis, when the levels of GLI1 are knocked down in such cells, they
become sensitive to these inhibitors. We go on to show that a large percentage of
primary NSCLC samples express GLI1, consistent with constitutive activation of
the HH pathway in these samples. Taken together, these results establish the
involvement of the HH signaling pathway in a subset of NSCLCs.

PMID: 16909105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Genetics. 2006 Oct;174(2):735-52. Epub 2006 Aug 3.

Genomewide expression profiling in the zebrafish embryo identifies target genes
regulated by Hedgehog signaling during vertebrate development.

Xu J(1), Srinivas BP, Tay SY, Mak A, Yu X, Lee SG, Yang H, Govindarajan KR, Leong
B, Bourque G, Mathavan S, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore.

Hedgehog proteins play critical roles in organizing the embryonic development of 
animals, largely through modulation of target gene expression. Little is
currently known, however, about the kinds and numbers of genes whose expression
is controlled, directly or indirectly, by Hedgehog activity. Using techniques to 
globally repress or activate Hedgehog signaling in zebrafish embryos followed by 
microarray-based expression profiling, we have discovered a cohort of genes whose
expression responds significantly to loss or gain of Hedgehog function. We have
confirmed the Hedgehog responsiveness of a representative set of these genes with
whole-mount in situ hybridization as well as real time PCR. In addition, we show 
that the consensus Gli-binding motif is enriched within the putative regulatory
elements of a sizeable proportion of genes that showed positive regulation in our
assay, indicating that their expression is directly induced by Hedgehog. Finally,
we provide evidence that the Hedgehog-dependent spatially restricted
transcription of one such gene, nkx2.9, is indeed mediated by Gli1 through a
single Gli recognition site located within an evolutionarily conserved enhancer
fragment. Taken together, this study represents the first comprehensive survey of
target genes regulated by the Hedgehog pathway during vertebrate development. Our
data also demonstrate for the first time the functionality of the Gli-binding
motif in the control of Hedgehog signaling-induced gene expression in the
zebrafish embryo.

PMCID: PMC1602081
PMID: 16888327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Dermatol Sci. 2006 Oct;44(1):11-20. Epub 2006 Aug 2.

HAN11 binds mDia1 and controls GLI1 transcriptional activity.

Morita K(1), Lo Celso C, Spencer-Dene B, Zouboulis CC, Watt FM.

Author information: 
(1)Keratinocyte Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, London 
WC2A 3PX, England, UK.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog pathway is important in normal and diseased skin. One of
the key transcription factors in the pathway is GLI1. GLI1-dependent
transcription is positively regulated by DYRK1A, which is reported to bind HAN11.
HAN11 is the human homologue of AN11, which controls flavonoid synthesis in
plants.
OBJECTIVE: We wanted to identify other binding partners of HAN11 and investigate 
whether HAN11 regulates GLI1-dependent transcription.
METHODS: We used TAP-tag purification and GST pull down to identify
protein-protein interactions and performed luciferase assays of transcriptional
activity. We used immunofluorescence microscopy to examine the subcellular
distribution of HAN11, mDia1 and GLI1. We performed in situ hybridisation to
compare expression of HAN11 with GLI1 and patched in mouse embryos.
RESULTS: We identified the cytoskeletal regulator mDia1 as a binding partner of
HAN11. We showed that HAN11 binds the FH2 actin binding domain of mDia1 and
confirmed that HAN11 also interacts with DYRK1A. Overexpression of mDia1 or
active RhoA caused translocation of HAN11 from nucleus to cytoplasm. HAN11 and
mDia1 repressed DYRK1A-dependent GLI1 transcriptional activity. HAN11
overexpression decreased SZ95 sebocyte proliferation and increased cytoplasmic
GLI1. AN11 was highly expressed in E10.5 mouse embryo limb buds, in an
overlapping pattern with Ptc and GLI1.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that AN11 may be a physiological regulator of
GLI1 transcriptional activity.

PMID: 16887337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2006 Aug;88(8):1826-34.

Anterior cruciate ligament deficiency alters the in vivo motion of the
tibiofemoral cartilage contact points in both the anteroposterior and
mediolateral directions.

Li G(1), Moses JM, Papannagari R, Pathare NP, DeFrate LE, Gill TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Quantifying the effects of anterior cruciate ligament deficiency on
joint biomechanics is critical in order to better understand the mechanisms of
joint degeneration in anterior cruciate ligament-deficient knees and to improve
the surgical treatment of anterior cruciate ligament injuries. We investigated
the changes in position of the in vivo tibiofemoral articular cartilage contact
points in anterior cruciate ligament-deficient and intact contralateral knees
with use of a newly developed dual orthogonal fluoroscopic and magnetic resonance
imaging technique.
METHODS: Nine patients with an anterior cruciate ligament rupture in one knee and
a normal contralateral knee were recruited. Magnetic resonance images were
acquired for both the intact and anterior cruciate ligament-deficient knees to
construct computer knee models of the surfaces of the bone and cartilage. Each
patient performed a single-leg weight-bearing lunge as images were recorded with 
use of a dual fluoroscopic system at full extension and at 15 degrees , 30
degrees , 60 degrees , and 90 degrees of flexion. The in vivo knee position at
each flexion angle was then reproduced with use of the knee models and
fluoroscopic images. The contact points were defined as the centroids of the
areas of intersection of the tibial and femoral articular cartilage surfaces.
RESULTS: The contact points moved not only in the anteroposterior direction but
also in the mediolateral direction in both the anterior cruciate
ligament-deficient and intact knees. In the anteroposterior direction, the
contact points in the medial compartment of the tibia were more posterior in the 
anterior cruciate ligament-deficient knees than in the intact knees at full
extension and 15 degrees of flexion (p < 0.05). No significant differences were
observed with regard to the anteroposterior motion of the contact points in the
lateral compartment of the tibia. In the mediolateral direction, there was a
significant lateral shift of the contact points in the medial compartment of the 
tibia toward the medial tibial spine between full extension and 60 degrees of
flexion (p < 0.05). The contact points in the lateral compartment of the tibia
shifted laterally, away from the lateral tibial spine, at 15 degrees and 30
degrees of flexion (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In the presence of anterior cruciate ligament injury, the contact
points shift both posteriorly and laterally on the surface of the tibial plateau.
In the medial compartment, the contact points shift toward the medial tibial
spine, a region where degeneration is observed in patients with chronic anterior 
cruciate ligament injuries.

PMID: 16882908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(16):6283-98.

Selective modulation of Hedgehog/GLI target gene expression by epidermal growth
factor signaling in human keratinocytes.

Kasper M(1), Schnidar H, Neill GW, Hanneder M, Klingler S, Blaas L, Schmid C,
Hauser-Kronberger C, Regl G, Philpott MP, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signaling plays a critical role in epidermal development and
basal cell carcinoma. Here, we provide evidence that epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) signaling modulates the target gene expression profile of GLI
transcription factors in epidermal cells. Using expression profiling and
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR, we identified a set of 19 genes whose
transcription is synergistically induced by GLI1 and parallel EGF treatment.
Promoter studies of a subset of GLI/EGF-regulated genes, including the genes
encoding interleukin-1 antagonist IL1R2, Jagged 2, cyclin D1, S100A7, and S100A9,
suggest convergence of EGFR and HH/GLI signaling at the level of promoters of
selected direct GLI target genes. Inhibition of EGFR and MEK/ERK but not of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT abrogated synergistic activation of GLI/EGF
target genes, showing that EGFR can signal via RAF/MEK/ERK to cooperate with GLI 
proteins in selective target gene regulation. Coexpression of the GLI/EGF target 
IL1R2, EGFR, and activated ERK1/2 in human anagen hair follicles argues for a
cooperative role of EGFR and HH/GLI signaling in specifying the fate of outer
root sheath (ORS) cells. We also show that EGF treatment neutralizes GLI-mediated
induction of epidermal stem cell marker expression and provide evidence that EGFR
signaling is essential for GLI-induced cell cycle progression in epidermal cells.
The results suggest that EGFR signaling modulates GLI target gene profiles which 
may play an important regulatory role in ORS specification, hair growth, and
possibly cancer.

PMCID: PMC1592816
PMID: 16880536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Oncogene. 2006 Nov 23;25(55):7267-73. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Alternative splicing of the ErbB-4 cytoplasmic domain and its regulation by
hedgehog signaling identify distinct medulloblastoma subsets.

Ferretti E(1), Di Marcotullio L, Gessi M, Mattei T, Greco A, Po A, De Smaele E,
Giangaspero F, Riccardi R, Di Rocco C, Pazzaglia S, Maroder M, Alimandi M,
Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza,
Roma, Italy.

Medulloblastoma (MB) results from aberrant development of cerebellar neurons in
which altered hedgehog (Hh) signalling plays a major role. We investigated the
possible influence of Hh signalling on ErbB-receptor expression in MB, in
particular that of the ErbB-4 CYT-1 and CYT-2 isoforms generated by alternative
splicing of the cytoplasmic domain. ErbB-4 expression was downregulated in
Hh-induced MBs from Patched-1(+/-) mice. Hh signalling (reflected by enhanced
expression of the Gli1 transcription factor) inhibited ErbB-4 expression in mouse
cerebellar granule progenitors and human MB cells. Analysis of 26 human primary
MBs revealed a subset of 11 tumors characterized by low Gli1 levels, upregulated 
ErbB-4 expression and increased CYT-1:CYT-2 ratios. Interestingly, CYT-1 and Gli1
levels were inversely correlated. ErbB-4 CYT-1 and CYT-2 had different phenotypic
effects in cultured MB cells: in response to neuregulin treatment, CYT-2
overexpression inhibited proliferation whereas CYT-1, which includes a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-binding site that is missing in CYT-2,
enhanced resistance to starvation- and etoposide-induced apoptosis by activating 
PI3K/Akt signalling. CYT-1:CYT-2 ratios displayed correlation with tumor
histotype and ErbB-2 levels, which are established prognostic indices for MB.
These findings demonstrate that low-level Hh signalling in human MB is associated
with the selective maintenance of high ErbB-4 CYT-1 expression, an alteration
that exerts tumor-promoting effects.

PMID: 16878160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jun;5(6):674-83. Epub 2006 Jun 18.

Hedgehog signaling and response to cyclopamine differ in epithelial and stromal
cells in benign breast and breast cancer.

Mukherjee S(1), Frolova N, Sadlonova A, Novak Z, Steg A, Page GP, Welch DR,
Lobo-Ruppert SM, Ruppert JM, Johnson MR, Frost AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.

The hedgehog pathway regulates epithelial-mesenchymal interactions,
differentiation, proliferation and survival during development. Stimulation of
hedgehog signaling induces carcinogenesis or promotes cell survival in cancers of
multiple organs. Using real-time, quantitative PCR, laser capture
microdissection, and immunohistochemistry, distinctive patterns of expression of 
the hedgehog pathway members patched 1 (PTCH1), smoothened, GLI1, GLI2 and the 3 
hedgehog ligands were identified for epithelial cells and stromal fibroblasts in 
benign breast and breast cancer. Hedgehog ligands were expressed at higher levels
in some cancer epithelial cell lines compared to noncancerous epithelial cells.
Correspondingly, expression of GLI1, a transcription factor and transcriptional
product of hedgehog signaling, was increased 8-fold in cancer epithelial cell
lines; however, PTCH1, also a transcriptional target of hedgehog signaling in
many cell types, was not increased. GLI1 protein and mRNA, and PTCH1 and sonic
hedgehog (SHH) proteins were elevated in 3 of 10 breast cancers; however, PTCH1
transcripts were not consistently increased. Hedgehog-mediated transcription, as 
indicated by a reporter of GLI-dependent promoter activity and by expression of
GLI1 transcripts, was reduced by the hedgehog pathway inhibitor cyclopamine in
both MDA-MB-435 cancer epithelial cells and MCF10AT epithelial cells, a cell line
derived from benign breast. However, cyclopamine reduced viability of cancer
epithelial cell lines, including MDA-MB-435, but did not specifically affect
fibroblasts or epithelial cells from benign breast, including MCF10AT. Treatment 
with sonic hedgehog ligand diminished the cyclopamine-induced reduction in
GLI-dependent promoter activity in MCF10AT and MDA-MB-435 and viability of
MDA-MB-435. These results demonstrate modulation of GLI-mediated transcription in
both cancer and benign-derived epithelial cells by cyclopamine and sonic
hedgehog, and further suggest that hedgehog signaling contributes to the survival
of only the cancer epithelial cells. Determination as to whether the increase in 
GLI1 and SHH expression in breast cancer indicates a significant increase in
hedgehog signaling will require further evaluation.

PMCID: PMC1557635
PMID: 16855373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Gene Ther. 2006 Nov;13(22):1587-94. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Antisense Smo under the control of the PTCH1 promoter delivered by an adenoviral 
vector inhibits the growth of human pancreatic cancer.

Gao J(1), Li Z, Chen Z, Shao J, Zhang L, Xu G, Tu Z, Gong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is crucial in growth and patterning during
embryonic development. Recent data have shown an association of its activation
with cancer formation and maintenance. A ligand-dependent activation, where Hh
components (SHH, PTCH1, Smo and GLi1) are aberrantly expressed with PTCH1 being a
negative feedback regulator, is a newly identified mechanism for pancreatic
carcinogenesis. In this study, we developed a cell-specific cytotoxic model for
the treatment of human pancreatic cancer (HPC) in which expression of antisense
Smo (SAS) was under the control of the PTCH1 promoter (ptch/p) delivered by an
adenoviral vector (Ad-ptch/p-SAS). We observed that the cell-specific
cytotoxicity in HPC cells depended on the expressions of inherent PTCH1, Smo and 
GLi1 in the target cells in which the Hh pathway was presumed to be activated.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis indicated that the cell death was
apoptosis. Western blot showed that Smo protein in the infected cells
significantly decreased. Furthermore, an in vivo experiment demonstrated that
such Hh activity-cell-specific cytotoxicity was achieved by daily intratumoral
injection of Ad-ptch/p-SAS (10(9) plaque-forming unit) for 5 days. Our study
suggests that targeting at the Hh signaling pathway may be an effective novel
gene therapeutic strategy alone or in combination with other agents for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 16826192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jul 12;128(27):8939-46.

Control of transcription factor activity and osteoblast differentiation in
mammalian cells using an evolved small-molecule-dependent intein.

Yuen CM(1), Rodda SJ, Vokes SA, McMahon AP, Liu DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Inteins are naturally occurring protein elements that catalyze their own excision
from within a larger protein together with the ligation of the flanking "extein" 
sequences. Previously we reported the directed evolution of an intein-based
molecular switch in which intein splicing in yeast cells was made dependent on
the cell-permeable small molecule 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT). Here we show that
these evolved inteins are effective means of rendering protein function and
biological signaling pathway activation dependent on 4-HT in mammalian cells. We 
have characterized the generality, speed, and dose dependence of ligand-induced
protein splicing in murine NIH3T3 cells and in human HEK293 cells. Evolved
inteins were used to control in mammalian cells the function of Gli1 and a
truncated form of Gli3, two transcriptional mediators of the Hedgehog signaling
pathway. Finally, we show that a complex biological process such as osteoblast
differentiation can be made dependent on 4-HT using the evolved intein system.
Our findings suggest that evolved small-molecule-dependent inteins may serve as a
general means of achieving gene-specific, dose-dependent, post-translational, and
small-molecule-induced control over protein activity in mammalian systems.

PMCID: PMC2519127
PMID: 16819890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):2937-46. Epub 2006 Jul 3.

FGF signalling generates ventral telencephalic cells independently of SHH.

Gutin G(1), Fernandes M, Palazzolo L, Paek H, Yu K, Ornitz DM, McConnell SK,
Hébert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience and Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1410 Pelham Parkway South, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is required to generate ventral cell types throughout the
central nervous system. Its role in directly specifying ventral cells, however,
has recently been questioned because loss of the Shh gene has little effect on
ventral development if the Gli3 gene is also mutant. Consequently, another
ventral determinant must exist. Here, genetic evidence establishes that FGFs are 
required for ventral telencephalon development. First, simultaneous deletion of
Fgfr1 and Fgfr3 specifically in the telencephalon results in the loss of
differentiated ventromedial cells; and second, in the Fgfr1;Fgfr2 double mutant, 
ventral precursor cells are lost, mimicking the phenotype obtained previously
with a loss of SHH signalling. Yet, in the Fgfr1;Fgfr2 mutant, Shh remains
expressed, as does Gli1, the transcription of which depends on SHH activity,
suggesting that FGF signalling acts independently of SHH to generate ventral
precursors. Moreover, the Fgfr1;Fgfr2 phenotype, unlike the Shh phenotype, is not
rescued by loss of Gli3, further indicating that FGFs act downstream of Shh and
Gli3 to generate ventral telencephalic cell types.

PMID: 16818446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 Jul;21(7):1034-44.

Different roles of Runx2 during early neural crest-derived bone and tooth
development.

James MJ(1), Järvinen E, Wang XP, Thesleff I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, University of Helsinki, Finland.
martyn.james@helsinki.fi

We compared gene expression profiles between Runx2 null mutant mice and their
wildtype littermates. Most Runx2-dependent genes in bones were different from
those in teeth, implying that the target genes of Runx2 are tissue-dependent. In 
vitro experiments determined that Runx2 is a part of the FGF and BMP signaling
pathways in tooth and bone development, respectively.INTRODUCTION: Runx2 (Cbfa1) 
is expressed in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme of developing bone and tooth.
Runx2 homozygous null mice lack bone through a failure in osteoblast
differentiation and have arrested tooth development at the late bud stage. The
aim of this study was to discover and compare the identities and the roles of
Runx2 target genes in bone and tooth development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Wildtype and Runx2-/- tissue was collected from mouse
embryos, and gene expression was compared by Affymetrix microarray analysis and
radioactive in situ hybridization of embryonic tissue sections (E12-E14).
Induction of target genes by growth factors in bone and tooth tissue was studied 
using in vitro experiments, including a novel method involving hanging-drop
cultures and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Thirteen bone and four tooth genes were identified that are
Runx2-dependent. The identities of these genes do not significantly overlap
between bone and tooth, indicating tissue specificity of several genes regulated 
by Runx2. Genes downregulated in bone development in Runx2 null mutants were
Bambi, Bmp4, Bono1, Dkk1, Fgf receptor1, Gli1, Lef1, Patched, Prostaglandin F
receptor1, Tcf1, Tgfbeta1, Wnt10a, and Wnt10b. Several of these genes were
induced by BMPs in bone tissue in a Runx2-independent manner. Genes downregulated
in tooth development were Dkk1, Dusp6, Enpp1, and Igfbp3. These genes were all
induced by fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) in dental tissue. FGF-induction of
Dkk1 was completely dependent on Runx2 function.
CONCLUSIONS: The contrasting identities and distinctive mechanisms that stimulate
the expression of Runx2-dependent genes in bone and tooth development imply that 
the developmental roles of Runx2 in these separate tissues are different. In
tooth development, Dkk1 may be a direct transcriptional target of Runx2. Bone
genes were stimulated by BMP4 before the formation of the ossification center,
suggesting that BMPs may mediate the early epithelial-mesenchymal interactions
involved in bone formation.

PMID: 16813524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Jul 7;12(25):3965-9.

Study of Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway related molecules in gastric carcinoma.

Ma XL(1), Sun HJ, Wang YS, Huang SH, Xie JW, Zhang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Jinan Central Hospital, 105# Jinan Jiefang Road, Jinan
250013, Shandong Province, China. mxl7125@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: To study the expression of Sonic hedgehog pathway-related molecules, Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) and Gli1 in gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: Expression of Shh in 56 gastric specimens including non-cancerous
gastric tissues, gastric adenocarcinoma, gastric squamous cell carcinoma was
detected by RT-PCR, in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Expression of
Gli1 was observed by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: The positive rate of Shh and Gli1 expression was 0.0%, 0.0% in
non-cancerous gastric tissues while it was 66.7%, 57.8% respectively in gastric
adenocarcinoma, and 100%, 100% respectively in gastric squamous cell carcinoma.
There was a significant difference between the non-cancerous gastric tissues and 
gastric carcinoma (P<0.05). Elevated expression of Shh and Gli1 in gastric
tubular adenocarcinoma was associated with poorly differentiated tumors while the
expression was absent in gastric mucinous adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSION: The elevated expression of Shh and Gli1 in gastric adenocarcinoma and
gastric squamous cell carcinoma shows the involvement of activated Shh signaling 
in the cellular proliferation of gastric carcinogenesis. It suggests Shh
signaling gene may be a new and good target gene for gastric tumor diagnosis and 
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4087703
PMID: 16810741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Orthop Res. 2006 Aug;24(8):1773-81.

Age-related expression of molecular regulators of hypertrophy and maturation in
articular cartilage.

Semevolos SA(1), Nixon AJ, Fortier LA, Strassheim ML, Haupt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. stacy.semevolos@oregonstate.edu

The purpose of this study was to determine changes in the expression of
regulatory molecules in normal equine articular cartilage throughout development 
up to 18 months of age. The hypothesis was that expression of these regulatory
molecules would decrease from birth to postpubescence. Cartilage was harvested
from normal femoropatellar or scapulohumeral joints from 34 fresh horse cadavers.
Horses were placed in four age groups [prenatal (n = 5); prepubertal, 0-6 months 
(n = 11); pubertal, 7-14 months (n = 13); and postpubertal, 15-18 months (n =
5)]. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), Gli1, Gli3, Patched1 (Ptc1), Smoothened (Smo),
Noggin, bone morphogenetic protein-6 (BMP-6), BMP-2, parathyroid hormone-related 
peptide (PTHrP), and PTH/PTHrP receptor mRNA expression levels were evaluated by 
real-time quantitative PCR. Spatial tissue mRNA and protein expression was
determined by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. The expression of
PTHrP decreased (p = 0.002) in the pubertal group, while PTH/PTHrP receptor
expression significantly increased (p = 0.001). No significant difference was
found between groups for Ihh (p = 0.6) or Smo (p = 0.3) expression. In contrast, 
there was significantly increased expression of Ptc1 (p = 0.006), Gli1 (p =
0.04), and Gli3 (p = 0.007) in the pubertal group, and Gli3 (p = 0.007) remained 
elevated in the postpubertal group. The expression of BMP-6 significantly
increased from prenatal to postnatal groups (p = 0.03) while BMP-2 expression
increased during puberty and postpuberty (p = 0.03). The changes in expression of
hedgehog and BMP signaling molecules in articular cartilage during postnatal
development have not been shown previously. The increased expression of hedgehog 
receptor and transcription factors during puberty may indicate maturation of the 
deep articular layer during this time period.

PMID: 16788989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Oncol Rep. 2006 Jul;16(1):91-6.

Enhancement of GLI1-transcriptional activity by beta-catenin in human cancer
cells.

Maeda O(1), Kondo M, Fujita T, Usami N, Fukui T, Shimokata K, Ando T, Goto H,
Sekido Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway and the Wnt signaling pathway are known to
play important roles in carcinogenesis and the progression of various human
malignant tumors. Although a relationship between these two pathways has recently
been reported, the mechanism by which beta-catenin, one of the key molecules of
the Wnt signaling pathway, influences the Hh pathway has not yet been revealed in
detail. To clarify the role of beta-catenin in relation to the Hh signaling
pathway, we transfected GLI1 and beta-catenin expression constructs into human
malignant cells, including stomach, colon, and lung cancers, and evaluated the
luciferase activity of GLI-responsive reporter constructs. While exogenous GLI1
increased the luciferase activity, exogenous beta-catenin also enhanced the
activity under overexpression of GLI1. However, co-transfection with T-cell
factor (TCF)-4 or lymphocyte enhancer factor (LEF)-1 did not influence the
activity, indicating that the enhancement of beta-catenin in relation to the Hh
signaling pathway is not TCF/LEF-dependent. Our results suggest that beta-catenin
might be involved in the Hh signaling pathway via enhancement of the
transcriptional activity of GLI.

PMID: 16786128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6063-71.

Hedgehog signaling and Bmi-1 regulate self-renewal of normal and malignant human 
mammary stem cells.

Liu S(1), Dontu G, Mantle ID, Patel S, Ahn NS, Jackson KW, Suri P, Wicha MS.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0946, USA.

The epithelial components of the mammary gland are thought to arise from stem
cells with a capacity for self-renewal and multilineage differentiation.
Furthermore, these cells and/or their immediate progeny may be targets for
transformation. We have used both in vitro cultivation and a xenograft mouse
model to examine the role of hedgehog signaling and Bmi-1 in regulating
self-renewal of normal and malignant human mammary stem cells. We show that
hedgehog signaling components PTCH1, Gli1, and Gli2 are highly expressed in
normal human mammary stem/progenitor cells cultured as mammospheres and that
these genes are down-regulated when cells are induced to differentiate.
Activation of hedgehog signaling increases mammosphere-initiating cell number and
mammosphere size, whereas inhibition of the pathway results in a reduction of
these effects. These effects are mediated by the polycomb gene Bmi-1.
Overexpression of Gli2 in mammosphere-initiating cells results in the production 
of ductal hyperplasia, and modulation of Bmi-1 expression in
mammosphere-initiating cells alters mammary development in a humanized nonobese
diabetic-severe combined immunodeficient mouse model. Furthermore, we show that
the hedgehog signaling pathway is activated in human breast "cancer stem cells"
characterized as CD44+CD24-/lowLin-. These studies support a cancer stem cell
model in which the hedgehog pathway and Bmi-1 play important roles in regulating 
self-renewal of normal and tumorigenic human mammary stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4386278
PMID: 16778178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Pathol. 2006 Aug;209(4):501-11.

Peripheral chondrosarcoma progression is accompanied by decreased Indian Hedgehog
signalling.

Hameetman L(1), Rozeman LB, Lombaerts M, Oosting J, Taminiau AH, Cleton-Jansen
AM, Bovée JV, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Centre, The Netherlands.

Hedgehog (HH) signalling is important for specific developmental processes, and
aberrant, increased activity has been described in various tumours. Disturbed HH 
signalling has also been implicated in the hereditary syndrome, Multiple
Osteochondromas. Indian Hedgehog (IHH), together with parathyroid hormone-like
hormone (PTHLH), participates in the organization of growth plates in long bones.
PTHLH signalling is absent in osteochondromas, benign tumours arising adjacent to
the growth plate, but is reactivated when these tumours undergo malignant
transformation towards secondary peripheral chondrosarcoma. We describe a gradual
decrease in the expression of Patched (PTCH) and glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 1 (GLI1) (both transcribed upon IHH activity), and GLI2 with increasing
malignancy, suggesting that IHH signalling is inactive and PTHLH signalling is
IHH independent in secondary peripheral chondrosarcomas. cDNA expression
profiling and immunohistochemical studies suggest that transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta)-mediated proliferative signalling is active in high-grade 
chondrosarcomas since TGF-beta downstream targets were upregulated in these
tumours. This is accompanied by downregulation of energy metabolism-related genes
and upregulation of the proto-oncogene jun B. Thus, the tight regulation of
growth plate organization by IHH signalling is still seen in osteochondroma, but 
gradually lost during malignant transformation to secondary peripheral
chondrosarcoma and subsequent progression. TGF-beta signalling is stimulated
during secondary peripheral chondrosarcoma progression and could potentially
regulate the retained activity of PTHLH.

Copyright 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 16755518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Acta Orthop. 2006 Apr;77(2):267-74.

Comparison of the ACL and ACL graft forces before and after ACL reconstruction:
an in-vitro robotic investigation.

Li G(1), Papannagari R, DeFrate LE, Yoo JD, Park SE, Gill TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Long-term follow-up studies have indicated that there is an increased
incidence of arthrosis following anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction,
suggesting that the reconstruction may not reproduce intact ACL biomechanics. We 
studied not only the magnitude but also the orientation of the ACL and ACL graft 
forces.
METHODS: 10 knee specimens were tested on a robotic testing system with the ACL
intact, deficient, and reconstructed (using a bone-patella tendon-bone graft).
The magnitude and orientation of the ACL and ACL graft forces were determined
under an anterior tibial load of 130 N at full extension, and 15, 30, 60, and 90 
degrees of flexion. Orientation was described using elevation angle (the angle
formed with the tibial plateau in the sagittal plane) and deviation angle (the
angle formed with respect to the anteroposterior direction in the transverse
plane).
RESULTS: ACL reconstruction restored anterior tibial translation to within 2.6 mm
of that of the intact knee under the 130-N anterior load. Average internal tibial
rotation was reduced after ACL reconstruction at all flexion angles. The force
vector of the ACL graft was significantly different from the ACL force vector.
The average values of the elevation and deviation angles of the ACL graft forces 
were higher than that of the intact ACL at all flexion angles.
INTERPRETATION: Contemporary single bundle ACL reconstruction restores anterior
tibial translation under anterior tibial load with different forces (both
magnitude and orientation) in the graft compared to the intact ACL. Such graft
function might alter knee kinematics in other degrees of freedom and could overly
constrain the tibial rotation. An anatomic ACL reconstruction should reproduce
the magnitude and orientation of the intact ACL force vector, so that the
6-degrees-of-freedom knee kinematics and joint reaction forces can be restored.

PMID: 16752289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):13-25. Epub 2006 May 16.

Functional compensation in Hedgehog signaling during mouse prostate development.

Doles J(1), Cook C, Shi X, Valosky J, Lipinski R, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Box 3236 Clinical
Science Center-G5, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Studies of hedgehog signaling in prostate development using anti-Shh antibodies, 
chemical inhibitors of hedgehog signaling and Shh(-/-) mutant mice have yielded
conflicting data regarding the requirements of hedgehog signaling for normal
ductal budding and glandular morphogenesis. We used transgenic mouse models in
combination with chemical inhibitors and renal grafting to clarify the role of Hh
signaling in prostate development. These studies showed that genetic loss of Shh 
is accompanied by an up-regulation of Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) and maintenance of Hh
pathway activity. We found that while neither Gli1 nor Gli3 are required for
normal prostate ductal budding, the urogenital sinus (UGS) of the Gli2(-/-)
mutant mouse displays aberrant ductal budding in utero. When grown as a
subcapsular graft, the Gli2(-/-) UGS exhibited prostatic differentiation but also
displayed areas of focal epithelial hyperplasia. Functional redundancy between
the three Gli transcription factors appears to mitigate the effect of Gli2 LOF as
evidenced by residual Hh pathway activity in the E14 Gli2(-/-) UGS that could be 
inhibited by cyclopamine treatment. Together, these studies reveal a surprising
degree of functional redundancy operating both at the level of the ligand and at 
the level of transcriptional regulation that effectively mitigates phenotypes
associated with Hh-signaling perturbations.

PMID: 16707121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Surgery. 2006 May;139(5):665-70.

Sonic Hedgehog-dependent proliferation in a series of patients with colorectal
cancer.

Douard R(1), Moutereau S, Pernet P, Chimingqi M, Allory Y, Manivet P, Conti M,
Vaubourdolle M, Cugnenc PH, Loric S.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Department, APHP Georges Pompidou University Hospital, Paris. 
richard.douard@hop.egp.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) gene family is known to regulate development of
stem cells. In addition, activation is responsible for the induction of GLI1
proto-oncogene and subsequent cellular proliferation. Sonic Hedgehog (SHh), one
of the Hh family members promotes carcinogenesis in airway and pancreatic
epithelia, is expressed in colonic stem cells. As differentiated colonic cells
arise from constant renewal of Hedgehog-expressing colonic stem cells, SHh could 
be involved in human colonic carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Tissue samples of colorectal adenocarcinoma (T) and adjacent normal
colon tissue (NT) were sampled from each of 44 consecutive patients with
colorectal cancer. Specific transcription of SHh, GLI1, and the GLI1 downstream
target FOXM1 were evaluated using semiquantitative reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction. Similar in vitro measurements of mRNA of GLI1 and
FOXM1 transcription levels after specific induction by SHh-Np were performed in
the HT-29 colorectal tumor cell line to confirm the in vivo results.
RESULTS: SHh mRNA was overexpressed in colorectal adenocarcinomas in 38 of 44
(86%) patients. Expression of transcription levels of GLI1 and FOXM1 correlated
with SHh expression (SHh vs GLI1, r = 0.77, P < .0001; GLI1 vs FOXM1, r = 0.68, P
< .0001; SHh vs FOXM1, r = 0.79, P < .0001). SHh overexpression did not appear to
correlate with the patient characteristics evaluated. Similarly, when studied in 
the HT-29 colorectal cell line, exogenous SHh promoted cell proliferation, while 
inhibition of SHh expression decreased proliferation. Expression of GLI1 and
FOXM1 mRNA increased with exogenous exposure to SHh.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated increased expression of SHh mRNA in human colonic
adenocarcinomas and in a colorectal cell line with downstream increased
expression of GLI1 and FOXM1 mRNA known to promote cell proliferation. This
upregulation within human colorectal adenocarcinoma tissue confirms the potential
role of the Hh pathway in colorectal carcinogenesis and suggests a potential
therapeutic target of Hh blockade in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 16701100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Dent Res. 2006 May;85(5):427-31.

Sonic hedgehog signaling is important in tooth root development.

Nakatomi M(1), Morita I, Eto K, Ota MS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Japan.

Hertwig's epithelial root sheath (HERS) is important for tooth root formation,
but the molecular basis for the signaling of root development remains uncertain. 
We hypothesized that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is involved in the HERS
function, because it mediates epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during
embryonic odontogenesis. We examined the gene expression patterns of Shh
signaling in murine developing molar roots. Shh and Patched2 transcripts were
identified in the HERS, whereas Patched1, Smoothened, and Gli1 were expressed in 
the proliferative dental mesenchyme in addition to the HERS. To confirm whether
Shh signaling physiologically functions in vivo, we analyzed mesenchymal
dysplasia (mes) mice carrying an abnormal C-terminus of the PATCHED1 protein. In 
the mutant, cell proliferation was repressed around the HERS at 1 wk. Moreover,
the molar eruption was disturbed, and all roots were shorter than those in
control littermates at 4 wks. These results indicate that Shh signaling is
important in tooth root development. Abbreviations used: BrdU,
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine; HERS, Hertwig's epithelial root sheath; NFI-C/CTF,
nuclear factor Ic/CAAT box transcription factor; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear
antigen; Ptc, patched; Shh, sonic hedgehog; Smo, smoothened.

PMID: 16632755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Lung Cancer. 2006 Jun;52(3):281-90. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Hedgehog signaling in small-cell lung cancer: frequent in vivo but a rare event
in vitro.

Vestergaard J(1), Pedersen MW, Pedersen N, Ensinger C, Tümer Z, Tommerup N,
Poulsen HS, Larsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copenhagen, and Department of Radiation 
Biology, The Finsencenter, Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark.

The hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway plays multiple roles during embryonic
development and increasing evidence suggests that this embryonic pathway is
involved in development and progression of several human cancers including those 
of the brain, skin, lung and gastrointestinal tract. To investigate HH signaling 
activity in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), we have performed gene expression
analysis on members of the HH pathway on a panel of 20 SCLC cell lines. Sonic
hedgehog (SHH) expression was detected in only DMS79 and GLC16 and only DMS114
expressed detectable protein levels of GLI1, one of the key transcription factors
of the pathway. Involvement of HH signaling in SCLC proliferation was
investigated in a subset of cell lines using the HH signaling inhibitor
cyclopamine or small interfering RNA (siRNA) against GLI1. Cells expressing GLI1 
responded only weakly to both cyclopamine and RNA interference, suggesting that
HH signaling plays only a minor role in the growth of SCLC cell lines. To
investigate HH pathway activity in vivo, GLI1 immunohistochemistry was performed 
on SCLC tumors. Interestingly, GLI1 was expressed in most SCLC tumors studied,
indicating that HH signaling is important for in vivo growth of SCLC but
establishment of cell lines from SCLC tumors may lead to loss of expression of
key HH pathway members. Thus, the data support the idea that the HH pathway may
be a therapeutic target in SCLC. However, the data also suggest that the SCLC
cells can circumvent the apparent in vivo requirement of HH signaling.

PMID: 16616798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Aquat Toxicol. 2006 Jun 15;78(2):103-13. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Impairment of lower jaw growth in developing zebrafish exposed to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and reduced hedgehog expression.

Teraoka H(1), Dong W, Okuhara Y, Iwasa H, Shindo A, Hill AJ, Kawakami A, Hiraga
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen
University, Ebetsu 069-8501, Japan. hteraoka@rakuno.ac.jp

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has been shown to cause a multitude of
detrimental effects to developing zebrafish (Danio rerio). Previously, we
demonstrated that jaw growth was impaired by TCDD exposure, but the exact
mechanism underlying these malformations remained unknown. In the present study, 
we investigated the involvement of hedgehog genes and their downstream signaling 
in TCDD-mediated jaw malformation. We demonstrate that the developing lower jaw
expresses sonic hedgehog a (shha), sonic hedgehog b (shhb) and their receptors,
patched1 (ptc1) and patched2 (ptc2), as well as the downstream transcription
factors, gli1 and gli2a. Loss of Hh signaling in mutants (sonic you) and larvae
treated with a Hh inhibitor (cyclopamine), resulted in similar effects as those
caused by TCDD. Moreover, TCDD exposure caused downregulation of shha and shhb in
a manner dependent on aryl hydrocarbon receptor 2 (ahr2). Although this suggested
an involvement of Hh signaling in TCDD-mediated impairment of jaw growth, we did 
not observe downregulation of ptc1 and ptc2, receptors dependent on Hh signaling.
Furthermore, while the overall occurrence of apoptosis in the developing jaw was 
minimal, it was significantly increased in larvae treated with cyclopamine. In
contrast, both TCDD and cyclopamine markedly reduced immunoreactivity against
phosphorylated histone 3, a cell proliferation marker in the developing jaw.
Taken together, our data suggest that Ahr2-mediated downregulation of Hh
signaling, leading to a failure of cell proliferation, contributes to TCDD
induced inhibition of lower jaw growth. TCDD may impair jaw growth through other 
pathway(s) in addition to Hh signaling.

PMID: 16580747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Hum Reprod. 2006 Jul;21(7):1698-704. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Role of sonic hedgehog in maintaining a pool of proliferating stem cells in the
human fetal epidermis.

Zhou JX(1), Jia LW, Liu WM, Miao CL, Liu S, Cao YJ, Duan EK.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian epidermis is maintained by the ongoing proliferation of
a subpopulation of keratinocytes known as epidermal stem cells. Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) can regulate morphogenesis of hair follicles and several types of skin
cancer, but the effect of Shh on proliferation of human putative epidermal stem
cells (HPESCs) is poorly understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We first found that Shh, its receptors Patched1 (Ptc1) as
well as Smoothened (Smo) and its downstream transcription factor Gli-1 were
expressed in the basal layer of human fetal epidermis and freshly sorted HPESCs. 
Next, treatment of HPESCs with media conditioned by Shh-N-expressing cells
promoted cell proliferation, whereas inhibition of Shh by cyclopamine, a specific
inhibitor of Shh signalling, had an opposite effect. Interestingly, the mitogenic
effect of epidermal growth factor (EGF) on HPESCs was efficiently abolished by
cyclopamine. Finally, bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4), a potential
downstream effector of Shh signalling, increased HPESC proliferation in a
concentration-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Shh is an important regulator of HPESC proliferation in the basal
layer of human fetal epidermis and modulates the cell responsiveness to EGF,
which will assist to unravel the mechanisms that regulate stem cell proliferation
and neoplasia in the human epidermis.

PMID: 16571640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 2006 May;133(9):1811-21. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

The level of sonic hedgehog signaling regulates the complexity of cerebellar
foliation.

Corrales JD(1), Blaess S, Mahoney EM, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, 540 First Avenue New York, NY 10016, USA.

Foliation of the mouse cerebellum occurs primarily during the first 2 weeks after
birth and is accompanied by tremendous proliferation of granule cell precursors
(GCPs). We have previously shown that sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling correlates
spatially and temporally with fissure formation, and that Gli2 is the main
activator driving Shh induced proliferation of embryonic GCPs. Here, we have
tested whether the level of Shh signaling regulates the extent of cerebellar
foliation. By progressively lowering signaling by removing Gli1 and Gli2 or the
Shh receptor smoothened, we found the extent of foliation is gradually reduced,
and that this correlates with a decrease in the duration of GCP proliferation.
Importantly, the pattern of the remaining fissures in the mutants corresponds to 
the first fissures that form during normal development. In a complementary
manner, an increase in the level and length of Shh signaling results in formation
of an extra fissure in a position conserved in rat. The complexity of cerebellar 
foliation varies greatly between vertebrate species. Our studies have uncovered a
mechanism by which the level and length of Shh signaling could be integral to
determining the distinct number of fissures in each species.

PMID: 16571625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jul 1;312(11):1925-38. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Unique and complimentary activities of the Gli transcription factors in Hedgehog 
signaling.

Lipinski RJ(1), Gipp JJ, Zhang J, Doles JD, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, Madison, WI 53705-222, USA.

The Gli family of transcription factors (Gli1, 2 and 3) mediate the Hedgehog
morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of downstream target genes.
Aberrations in Hedgehog signaling seriously affect vertebrate development.
Postnatally, Hedgehog signaling has been postulated to play a pivotal role in
healing and repair processes and inappropriate pathway activation has been
implicated in several types of cancers. To better understand both the upstream
regulation of the Gli transcription factors, as well as their unique and
combinatorial roles in regulating the expression of Hedgehog target genes, we
have characterized embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Gli mutant mice. Stimulation
of wild-type MEFs by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) peptide elicited unique profiles of
induction of Hedgehog target genes Gli1, Ptc1, and Hip1. Gli2 loss-of-function
was associated with diminished Shh-induced target gene expression, while Gli3
loss-of-function was associated with increased basal and Shh-induced target gene 
expression. The loss of Gli1 alone had no effect on target gene induction but did
diminish Shh-induced target gene expression when combined with the loss of Gli2
or Gli3. Additionally, overexpression of Gli1 induced target gene expression in
Gli2(-/-)3(-/-) MEFs, while Shh stimulation did not. Using MEFs expressing only
Gli2 or Gli3, we found that both cyclopamine and the PKA activator forskolin
inhibited target gene induction mediated by Gli2 and Gli3. These results
demonstrate that Gli2 and Gli3 share common regulatory mechanisms and modulate
Hedgehog target gene expression directly and independently while also regulating 
Gli1 expression, which in specific contexts, coordinately contributes to target
gene activation.

PMID: 16571352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Feb 20;119(4):267-74.

Association of the GLI gene with ventricular septal defect after the
susceptibility gene being narrowed to 3.56 cM in 12q13.

Qiu GR(1), Gong LG, He G, Xu XY, Xin N, Sun GF, Yuan YH, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001,
China. qgr1973@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Our previous research has suggested that genes around D12S1056 in
12q13 may confer susceptibility to ventricular septal defect (VSD) in humans. The
present study was to define the chromosome region assignment by transmission
disequilibrium test (TDT), and to identify the important candidate gene by
family-based association study and haplotype analysis.
METHODS: Surrounding D12S1056, ten microsatellite markers including D12S329,
D12S305, D12S1662, D12S1056, D12S1293, D12S334, D12S102, D12S83, D12S1655 and
D12S1691 were chosen, and TDT was performed in 62 nuclear family trios each
consisting of an affected child and two healty parents. Subsequently, the GLI
gene, a positional candidate gene that maps to the target region, was selected
for further analysis. Three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), G11888C,
G11388A, and G11625T, were selected for family-based association study and
haplotype analysis.
RESULTS: VSD was significantly associated with all selected markers except
D12S1691 [72.2 centi morgen (cM)] and D12S1700 (75.76 cM). VSD was also
significantly associated with G11888C (chi(2) = 5.918, P = 0.015), G11388A
(chi(2) = 8.067, P = 0.005), and G11625T (chi(2) = 11.842, P = 0.001). Haplotype 
analysis showed a strong linkage disequilibrium between G11888C and G11388A (D' =
0.999), but in significant (chi(2) = 1.035, df = 2, P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The susceptibility gene of VSD was mapped to 3.56 cM in 12q13 by
TDT, and the GLI gene, an important candidate in the target region, was
associated with VSD.

PMID: 16537020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Br J Dermatol. 2006 Apr;154(4):619-23.

Psoriatic skin expresses the transcription factor Gli1: possible contribution of 
decreased neurofibromin expression.

Endo H(1), Momota Y, Oikawa A, Shinkai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Chiba Aoba Municipal Hospital, 1273-2 Aoba-cho,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-0852, Japan. chw92121@syd.odn.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disorder of skin characterized by
hyperproliferation of keratinocytes. Intracellular signalling pathways inducing
the hyperproliferation of keratinocytes remain to be elucidated. An inhibitor of 
Hedgehog (Hh) signalling, cyclopamine, was recently reported to clear psoriatic
skin lesions, suggesting involvement of the Hh signalling pathway in the
hyperproliferation of lesional keratinocytes. We have previously observed
activation of the Hh signalling pathway in Schwann cells of plexiform
neurofibroma in neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), which results from functional
loss of the NF1 encoding protein, neurofibromin. In psoriasis, deficiency of
neurofibromin expression has been observed in lesional keratinocytes.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether the Hh signalling pathway would be activated
in psoriasis and whether inhibition of neurofibromin expression would enhance the
activation of the Hh signalling pathway.
METHODS: Activation of the Hh signalling pathway was examined by protein
expression of one of the target genes, GLI1, coding for the transcription factor 
Gli1. Immunohistochemical studies were performed on seven psoriatic skin samples 
and seven control normal skin samples with a standard immunoperoxidase technique.
mRNA expression of GLI1 was analysed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction in HaCaT cells transfected with double-strand small interfering RNA for 
NF1.
RESULTS: Our results showed Gli1 expression in psoriatic skin but not in control 
normal skin. Inhibition of neurofibromin expression in HaCaT cells upregulated
mRNA expression of GLI1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the Hh signalling pathway is activated in
psoriasis and that neurofibromin deficiency may upregulate the pathway.

PMID: 16536802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Nat Immunol. 2006 Apr;7(4):418-26. Epub 2006 Mar 5.

Hedgehog signaling controls thymocyte progenitor homeostasis and differentiation 
in the thymus.

El Andaloussi A(1), Graves S, Meng F, Mandal M, Mashayekhi M, Aifantis I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Rheumatology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Commitment of hematopoietic progenitors to the T cell lineage requires the
integration of multiple signaling pathways. Evidence has suggested involvement of
hedgehog (Hh) signaling in T cell differentiation through its signal transducer
smoothened (Smo). However, the precise function of the Hh pathway remains
controversial, mainly because T cell-specific in vivo genetic models have not
been used. Using pre-T cell-specific, mature T cell-specific and
poly(I).poly(C)-inducible deletions of Smo and antagonists of Smo signaling, we
report here that Hh is an essential positive regulator of T cell progenitor
differentiation. Furthermore, we localize Hh function to a stage preceding pre-T 
cell receptor signaling, connect Smo signaling to the activity of the Gli1 and
Gli2 transcription factors and demonstrate that Hh affects regulators of
thymocyte survival and proliferation.

PMID: 16518394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Trends Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;16(4):176-80. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Hedgehog signalling: how to get from Smo to Ci and Gli.

Østerlund T(1), Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia. toosathome@yahoo.se

The secreted morphogens of the Hedgehog family have important roles in normal
development as well as in associated pathologies, including cancer. The Hedgehog 
signalling pathway has been studied in Drosophila and is thought to be conserved 
in vertebrates. Hedgehog elicits a signalling response that activates Smoothened 
(Smo). There is evidence of differences between Drosophila and vertebrates
concerning signalling downstream of Smo, as well as in Smo itself. Here, we
discuss this evidence and its importance for investigations of the pathway and
related biology, as well as for the development of drugs targeting components of 
the pathway for treatment of associated pathologies.

PMID: 16516476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 1;66(5):2666-72.

N-myc can substitute for insulin-like growth factor signaling in a mouse model of
sonic hedgehog-induced medulloblastoma.

Browd SR(1), Kenney AM, Gottfried ON, Yoon JW, Walterhouse D, Pedone CA, Fults
DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84132-2303, USA.

Medulloblastoma is a malignant brain tumor that arises in the cerebellum in
children, presumably from granule neuron precursors (GNP). Advances in patient
treatment have been hindered by a paucity of animal models that accurately
reflect the molecular pathogenesis of human tumors. Aberrant activation of the
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) pathways is associated 
with human medulloblastomas. Both pathways are essential regulators of GNP
proliferation during cerebellar development. In cultured GNPs, IGF signaling
stabilizes the oncogenic transcription factor N-myc by inhibiting glycogen
synthase kinase 3beta-dependent phosphorylation and consequent degradation of
N-myc. However, determinants of Shh and IGF tumorigenicity in vivo remain
unknown. Here we report a high frequency of medulloblastoma formation in mice
following postnatal overexpression of Shh in cooperation with N-myc.
Overexpression of N-myc, alone or in combination with IGF signaling mediators or 
with the Shh target Gli1, did not cause tumors. Thus, Shh has transforming
functions in addition to induction of N-myc and Gli1. This tumor model will be
useful for testing novel medulloblastoma therapies and providing insight into
mechanisms of hedgehog-mediated transformation.

PMID: 16510586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Cancer. 2006 Mar 1;5:9.

Perlecan, a candidate gene for the CAPB locus, regulates prostate cancer cell
growth via the Sonic Hedgehog pathway.

Datta MW(1), Hernandez AM, Schlicht MJ, Kahler AJ, DeGueme AM, Dhir R, Shah RB,
Farach-Carson C, Barrett A, Datta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
mdatta@emory.edu

BACKGROUND: Genetic studies associated the CAPB locus with familial risk of brain
and prostate cancers. We have identified HSPG2 (Perlecan) as a candidate gene for
CAPB. Previously we have linked Perlecan to Hedgehog signaling in Drosophila.
More recently, we have demonstrated the importance of Hedgehog signaling in
humans for advanced prostate cancer.
RESULTS: Here we demonstrate Perlecan expression in prostate cancer, and its
function in prostate cancer cell growth through interaction and modulation of
Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling. Perlecan expression in prostate cancer tissues
correlates with a high Gleason score and rapid cell proliferation. Perlecan is
highly expressed in prostate cancer cell lines, including androgen insensitive
cell lines and cell lines selected for metastatic properties. Inhibition of
Perlecan expression in these cell lines decreases cell growth. Simultaneous
blockade of Perlecan expression and androgen signaling in the androgen-sensitive 
cell line LNCaP was additive, indicating the independence of these two pathways. 
Perlecan expression correlates with SHH in tumor tissue microarrays and increased
tumor cell proliferation based on Ki-67 immunohistochemistry. Inhibition of
Perlecan expression by siRNA in prostate cancer cell lines decreases SHH
signaling while expression of the downstream SHH effector GLI1 rescues the
proliferation defect. Perlecan forms complexes with increasing amounts of SHH
that correlate with increasing metastatic potential of the prostate cancer cell
line. SHH signaling also increases in the more metastatic cell lines. Metastatic 
prostate cancer cell lines grown under serum-starved conditions (low androgen and
growth factors) resulted in maintenance of Perlecan expression. Under low
androgen, low growth factor conditions, Perlecan expression level correlates with
the ability of the cells to maintain SHH signaling.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated that Perlecan, a candidate gene for the CAPB
locus, is a new component of the SHH pathway in prostate tumors and works
independently of androgen signaling. In metastatic tumor cells increased SHH
signaling correlates with the maintenance of Perlecan expression and more
Perlecan-SHH complexes. Perlecan is a proteoglycan that regulates extracellular
and stromal accessibility to growth factors such as SHH, thus allowing for the
maintenance of SHH signaling under growth factor limiting conditions. This
proteoglycan represents an important central regulator of SHH activity and
presents an ideal drug target for blocking SHH effects.

PMCID: PMC1421430
PMID: 16507112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Jul;27(7):1334-40. Epub 2006 Feb 25.

Activation of the hedgehog pathway in human hepatocellular carcinomas.

Huang S(1), He J, Zhang X, Bian Y, Yang L, Xie G, Zhang K, Tang W, Stelter AA,
Wang Q, Zhang H, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Sealy Center for Cancer Cell
Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston,
TX 77555-1048, USA.

Liver cancers, the majority of which are hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs), rank
as the fourth in cancer mortality worldwide and are the most rapidly increasing
type of cancer in the United States. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
HCC development are not well understood. Activation of the hedgehog pathway is
shown to be involved in several types of gastrointestinal cancers. Here, we
provide evidence to indicate that hedgehog signaling activation occurs frequently
in HCC. We detect expression of Shh, PTCH1 and Gli1 in 115 cases of HCC and in 44
liver tissues adjacent to the tumor. Expression of Shh is detectable in about 60%
of HCCs examined. Consistent with this, hedgehog target genes PTCH1 and Gli1 are 
expressed in over 50% of the tumors, suggesting that the hedgehog pathway is
frequently activated in HCCs. Of five cell lines screened, we found Hep3B, Huh7
and PLC/PRF/5 cells with detectable hedgehog target genes. Specific inhibition of
hedgehog signaling in these three cell lines by smoothened (SMO) antagonist,
KAAD-cyclopamine, or with Shh neutralizing antibodies decreases expression of
hedgehog target genes, inhibits cell growth and results in apoptosis. In
contrast, no effects are observed after these treatments in HCC36 and HepG2
cells, which do not have detectable hedgehog signaling. Thus, our data indicate
that hedgehog signaling activation is an important event for development of human
HCCs.

PMID: 16501253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Mol Biol. 2006 Apr 7;357(4):1167-83. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Solution structure of a Zap1 zinc-responsive domain provides insights into
metalloregulatory transcriptional repression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Wang Z(1), Feng LS, Matskevich V, Venkataraman K, Parasuram P, Laity JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology and Biophysics, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64110-2499, USA.

The Zap1 transcription factor controls expression of genes that regulate zinc
homeostasis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The solution structure of two zinc
fingers (zf1-2(CA3)) derived from a zinc-responsive domain of Zap1 (zf1-2) has
been determined. Under zinc-limiting conditions, zinc finger 2 (zf2) from this
domain has been shown to be a constitutive transcriptional activator. Moreover,
repression of zf2 function in zinc-replete cells required zinc coordination to
both canonical finger 1 (zf1) and zf2 metal sites, suggesting zf1-zf2
cooperativity underlies Zap1 metalloregulation. A structural basis for this
cooperativity is identified here. Favorable inter-helical contacts in zf1-2(CA3) 
extend the individual finger hydrophobic cores through the zf1-zf2 interface.
Tryptophan residues at position 5 in each finger provide numerous non-helical
inter-finger contacts reminiscent of those observed in GLI1 zinc fingers 1 and 2.
The molecular mechanism for zf1-dependent repression of zf2 transcriptional
activation is explored further using NMR and CD titration studies. While zf1
independently forms a betabetaalpha solution structure, the majority of zf2
ensemble solution states do not adopt the canonical betabetaalpha zinc finger
fold without zf1-zf2 interactions. Cooperative effects on Zn(II) affinities
stemming from these finger-finger interactions are observed also in calorimetric 
studies, in which the 160(+/-20)nM (zf1) and 250(+/-40)nM (zf2) K(d) values for
each individual finger increased substantially in the context of the zf1-2
protein (apparent K(dzf1-2WT)=4.6(+/-1.2)nM). On the basis of the above
observations, we propose a mechanism for Zap1 transcriptional regulation in which
zf1-zf2 interactions stabilize the betabetaalpha folded "repressed state" of the 
zf2 activation domain in the presence of cellular Zn(II) excess. Moreover, in
contrast to earlier reports of <<1 labile zinc ion/Escherichia coli cell, the
zf1-zf2 zinc affinities determined calorimetrically are consistent with Zn(II)
levels >>1 labile zinc ion/eukaryotic cell.

PMID: 16483601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Cell. 2006 Feb;10(2):187-97.

Genetic elimination of Suppressor of fused reveals an essential repressor
function in the mammalian Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Svärd J(1), Heby-Henricson K, Persson-Lek M, Rozell B, Lauth M, Bergström A,
Ericson J, Toftgård R, Teglund S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences at Novum, Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 57 Huddinge,
Sweden.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2006 Mar;10(3):409. Henricson, Karin Heby [corrected to Heby-Henricson,
Karin].

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway plays important roles during embryogenesis and
carcinogenesis. Here, we show that ablation of the mouse Suppressor of fused
(Sufu), an intracellular pathway component, leads to embryonic lethality at
approximately E9.5 with cephalic and neural tube defects. Fibroblasts derived
from Sufu(-/-) embryos showed high Gli-mediated Hh pathway activity that could
not be modulated at the level of Smoothened and could only partially be blocked
by PKA activation. Despite the robust constitutive pathway activation in the
Sufu(-/-) fibroblasts, the GLI1 steady-state localization remained largely
cytoplasmic, implying the presence of an effective nuclear export mechanism.
Sufu(+/-) mice develop a skin phenotype with basaloid changes and jaw
keratocysts, characteristic features of Gorlin syndrome, a human genetic disease 
linked to enhanced Hh signaling. Our data demonstrate that, in striking contrast 
to Drosophila, in mammals, Sufu has a central role, and its loss of function
leads to potent ligand-independent activation of the Hh pathway.

PMID: 16459298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2006 Feb;88(2):395-402.

Three-dimensional tibiofemoral articular contact kinematics of a
cruciate-retaining total knee arthroplasty.

Li G(1), Suggs J, Hanson G, Durbhakula S, Johnson T, Freiberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA 02114,
USA. gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Accurate knowledge of the location of tibiofemoral articular contact 
following total knee arthroplasty is important in order to understand
polyethylene wear and the mechanisms of component failure. The present study was 
performed to determine the three-dimensional tibiofemoral articular contact
patterns of a posterior cruciate ligament-retaining total knee replacement during
in vivo weight-bearing flexion.
METHODS: Nine osteoarthritic patients who were managed with a single design of a 
posterior cruciate ligament-retaining total knee implant were investigated with
the use of an innovative dual orthogonal fluoroscopic imaging system. The
position of the components during in vivo weight-bearing flexion was measured
from full extension to maximum flexion in 15 degrees intervals. Tibiofemoral
articular contact was determined by the overlap of the tibiofemoral articular
surfaces. The centroid of the surface intersection was used to report the point
of contact location. The average tibiofemoral contact points on both the medial
and lateral tibial component surfaces were reported as a function of flexion.
RESULTS: The average maximum weight-bearing flexion angle was 113.3 degrees +/-
13.1 degrees (range, 96 degrees to 138 degrees ). In the anteroposterior
direction, the contact location was relatively constant in the medial compartment
and moved posteriorly by 5.6 mm in the lateral compartment as the knee flexed
from full extension to 90 degrees of flexion. The range of the contact location
in the mediolateral direction was 3.7 mm in the medial compartment and 4.8 mm in 
the lateral compartment. For both compartments, posterior translation of the
contact point was significant from 90 degrees to maximum flexion, but the contact
point at maximum flexion was not observed to reach the posterior edge of the
polyethylene tibial insert articular surface.
CONCLUSIONS: While the minimum anteroposterior translation of the contact point
on the medial side might be interpreted as a medial pivot rotation during knee
flexion, the contact point did move in the mediolateral direction with flexion.
Beyond 90 degrees , both medial and lateral contact points were shown to move
posteriorly but stopped before reaching the posterior edge of the polyethylene
tibial insert articular surface. It seemed that the current component design did 
not allow the femoral condyle to roll off the polyethylene edge at high degrees
of flexion because of the geometry at the posterior lip.

PMID: 16452753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Jun;290(6):G1280-8. Epub 2006 Jan
26.

Increased apoptosis and accelerated epithelial migration following inhibition of 
hedgehog signaling in adaptive small bowel postresection.

Tang Y(1), Swietlicki EA, Jiang S, Buhman KK, Davidson NO, Burkly LC, Levin MS,
Rubin DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, MO 63110, USA.

The intestinal epithelium undergoes a marked adaptive response following loss of 
functional small bowel surface area characterized by increased crypt cell
proliferation and increased enterocyte migration from crypt to villus tip,
resulting in villus hyperplasia and enhanced nutrient absorption. Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling plays a critical role in regulating epithelial-mesenchymal interactions
during morphogenesis of the embryonic intestine. Our previous studies showed that
blocking Hh signaling in neonatal mice results in increased small intestinal
epithelial crypt cell proliferation and altered enterocyte fat absorption and
morphology. Hh family members are also expressed in the adult intestine, but
their role in the mature small bowel is unclear. With the use of a model of
intestinal adaptation following partial small bowel resection, the role of Hh
signaling in the adult gut was examined by determining the effects of blocking Hh
signaling on the regenerative response following loss of functional surface area.
Hh-inactivating monoclonal antibodies or control antibodies were administered to 
mice that sustained a 50% intestinal resection. mRNA analyses of the preoperative
ileum by quantitative real-time PCR revealed that Indian hedgehog was the most
abundant Hh family member. The Hh receptor Patched was more abundant than Patched
2. Analyses of downstream targets of Hh signaling demonstrated that Gli3 was
twofold more abundant than Gli1 and Gli2 and that bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)2 was most highly expressed compared with BMP1, -4, and -7. Following
intestinal resection, the expression of Hh, Patched, Gli, and most BMP genes was 
markedly downregulated in the remnant ileum, and, in anti-Hh antibody-treated
mice, expression of Patched 2 and Gli 1 was further suppressed. In Hh
antibody-treated mice following resection, the enterocyte migration rate from
crypt to villus tip was increased, and by 2 wk postoperation, apoptosis was
increased in the adaptive gut. However, crypt cell proliferation, villus height, 
and crypt depth were not augmented. These data indicate that Hh signaling plays a
role in adult gut epithelial homeostasis by regulating epithelial cell migration 
from crypt to villus tip and by enhancing apoptosis.

PMID: 16439469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Genomics. 2006 May;87(5):616-32. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Overlapping and distinct transcriptional regulator properties of the GLI1 and
GLI2 oncogenes.

Eichberger T(1), Sander V, Schnidar H, Regl G, Kasper M, Schmid C, Plamberger S, 
Kaser A, Aberger F, Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The GLI transcription factors mediate the hedgehog signal in development and
carcinogenesis. Basal cell carcinoma can be caused by overexpression of either
GLI1 or GLI2. Though GLI1 and GLI2 have identical or very similar DNA binding
specificities, some of their activities are overlapping, some are clearly
distinct. We analyzed target gene specificities of GLI1 and constitutively active
GLI2 (GLI2DeltaN) by global expression profiling in an inducible,
well-characterized HaCaT keratinocyte expression system. Four hundred fifty-six
genes up- or downregulated at least twofold were identified. GLI target gene
profiles correlated well with the biological activities of these transcription
factors in hair follicles and basal cell carcinoma. Upregulation of largely
overlapping sets of target genes was effected by both factors, repression
occurred predominantly in response to GLI2. Also, significant quantitative
differences in response to GLI1 and GLI2DeltaN were found for a small number of
activated genes. Since we have not detected a putative processed GLI2 repressor, 
these results point to specific but indirect target gene repression by GLI2DeltaN
via preferential activation of one or more negative regulators.

PMID: 16434164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;66(2):839-45.

Protein kinase C-delta and mitogen-activated protein/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase-1 control GLI activation in hedgehog signaling.

Riobo NA(1), Haines GM, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

One third of all lethal cancers are associated with excessive activation of the
Hedgehog (HH) pathway by mutations of its signaling components or by increased
responsiveness of cells to the HH ligand. HH signaling through the GLI
transcription factors leads to increased cell proliferation by up-regulation of
the extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) pathway and by expression of S phase
cyclins. In this study, we have tested the hypothesis that the HH pathway can
integrate ERK signaling to modulate the activity of GLI. Using NIH 3T3 cells, we 
show that phorbol esters, acting through protein kinase C-delta (PKCdelta) and
mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 (MEK-1), fully 
stimulate the transcriptional activity of endogenous and overexpressed GLI
proteins, as assessed by GLI-luciferase reporter assays, and induce the
expression of endogenous GLI1 and PTCH-1 target genes, as assessed by reverse
transcription-PCR. Moreover, activation of GLI elicited by Sonic Hedgehog also
requires PKCdelta and MEK-1 function. Remarkably, coexpression of activated MEK-1
and GLI1 or GLI2 induced a 10-fold synergistic increase in GLI-luciferase
activity that was totally blocked by PD98059. The NH(2)-terminal region of GLI1
(amino acids 1-130) is required for sensing the ERK pathway, as deletion of this 
domain produces active GLI1 protein with greatly reduced response to activation
by MEK-1. Basic fibroblast growth factor activation of the ERK pathway also
stimulated GLI1 activity through its NH(2)-terminal domain. Our results identify 
PKCdelta and MEK-1 as essential, positive regulators of GLI-mediated HH
signaling. Furthermore, our findings suggest that tumors with deregulated HH and 
ERK synergize to stimulate cell proliferation pathways.

PMID: 16424016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Genes Dev. 2006 Feb 1;20(3):276-81. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Dual degradation signals control Gli protein stability and tumor formation.

Huntzicker EG(1), Estay IS, Zhen H, Lokteva LA, Jackson PK, Oro AE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA.

Regulated protein destruction controls many key cellular processes with aberrant 
regulation increasingly found during carcinogenesis. Gli proteins mediate the
transcriptional effects of the Sonic hedgehog pathway, which is implicated in up 
to 25% of human tumors. Here we show that Gli is rapidly destroyed by the
proteasome and that mouse basal cell carcinoma induction correlates with Gli
protein accumulation. We identify two independent destruction signals in Gli1,
D(N) and D(C), and show that removal of these signals stabilizes Gli1 protein and
rapidly accelerates tumor formation in transgenic animals. These data argue that 
control of Gli protein accumulation underlies tumorigenesis and suggest a new
avenue for antitumor therapy.

PMCID: PMC1361699
PMID: 16421275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Dev Biol. 2006 Mar 15;291(2):368-81. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Regulation of the Drosophila transcription factor, Cubitus interruptus, by two
conserved domains.

Croker JA(1), Ziegenhorn SL, Holmgren RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Robert H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208,
USA.

Hedgehog signaling is required for the development of many organisms, including
Drosophila. In flies, Hh patterns the embryonic epidermis and larval imaginal
discs by regulating the transcription factor, Cubitus interruptus (Ci). To date, 
three levels of regulation have been identified: proteolytic processing into a
repressor, nuclear import, and activation. In this report, we characterize the
function of two Ci domains that are conserved in the vertebrate homologues, GLI1,
GLI2, and GLI3. One domain includes the first two of five C(2)-H(2) zinc-fingers.
While conserved in all members of the GLI/Ci family, the first two fingers do not
appear to make significant contacts with the DNA target sequence. Ci protein
lacking this region is still able to interact with the cytoplasmic complex and
activate transcription in embryos and wing imaginal discs, but it is no longer
processed into the repressor form. The second domain, termed NR for "N-terminal
Regulatory", binds Suppressor of Fused. Deletion of this region has little effect
on embryonic patterning, but compromises cytoplasmic retention of Ci. Analysis of
the amino acid sequence of this domain identifies 11 perfectly conserved serines 
and one tyrosine. We propose that this region may be modified, possibly by
phosphorylation, to regulate Ci nuclear import.

PMID: 16413529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Eur J Cancer. 2006 Mar;42(4):437-45. Epub 2006 Jan 10.

GLI transcription factors: mediators of oncogenic Hedgehog signalling.

Kasper M(1), Regl G, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The current concept of tumourigenesis holds that cancer results from the
progressive acquisition of mutations that endow affected cells with selective
growth advantages by activating multiple processes including intrinsic mitogenic 
and pro-survival pathways. Constitutive activation of the Hedgehog (HH)/GLI
signalling cascade has recently been implicated in the growth of a number of
human malignancies ranging from semi-malignant tumours of the skin to highly
aggressive cancers of the brain, lung, pancreas and prostate. This review focuses
on the role of the GLI zinc finger transcription factors, which mediate Hedgehog 
signalling at the distal end of the pathway. We summarise recent data on the
mechanisms by which latent GLI proteins are activated in response to stimulation 
of Hedgehog signalling. Based on the identification of a growing number of direct
GLI target genes, we propose that HH-driven tumourigenesis relies on multiple
cellular processes such as promotion of G1/S phase progression, enhancement of
cell survival by providing anti-apoptotic cues, increase in metastatic potential 
of Hedgehog responsive cells, and activation of potential tumour stem cells. In
view of the critical role of GLI genes in Hedgehog-associated cancers, strategies
that aim at interfering with GLI function are likely to represent efficient
approaches in future targeted cancer therapy.

PMID: 16406505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Am J Pathol. 2006 Jan;168(1):321-30.

Constitutive hedgehog signaling in chondrosarcoma up-regulates tumor cell
proliferation.

Tiet TD(1), Hopyan S, Nadesan P, Gokgoz N, Poon R, Lin AC, Yan T, Andrulis IL,
Alman BA, Wunder JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave., Suite S107, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada, M5G 1X8.

Chondrosarcoma is a malignant cartilage tumor that may arise from benign
precursor lesions, such as enchondromas. Some cases of multiple enchondromas are 
caused by a mutation that results in constitutive activation of Hedgehog-mediated
signaling. We found that chondrosarcomas expressed high levels of the Hedgehog
target genes PTCH1 and GLI1. Treatment with parathyroid hormone-related protein
down-regulated Indian Hedgehog (IHH) expression in normal growth plates but not
in chondrosarcoma or enchondroma organ cultures. Treatment of the chondrosarcoma 
organ cultures with Hedgehog protein increased cell proliferation rate, whereas
addition of chemical inhibitors of Hedgehog signaling decreased the proliferation
rate. Chondrosarcoma xenografts from 12 different human tumors were established
in NOD-SCID mice. Treatment with triparanol, an inhibitor of Hedgehog signaling, 
resulted in a 60% decrease in tumor volume, a 30% decrease in cellularity, and a 
20% reduction in proliferation rate. These results show that Hedgehog signaling
is active in chondrosarcoma and benign cartilage tumors and regulates tumor cell 
proliferation. Our data raise the intriguing possibility that Hedgehog blockade
could serve as an effective treatment for chondrosarcoma, a tumor for which there
are currently no universally effective nonsurgical management options.

PMCID: PMC1592680
PMID: 16400033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jan;5(1):111-7. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

Hedgehog signaling in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Patil MA(1), Zhang J, Ho C, Cheung ST, Fan ST, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences and Liver Center, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143-0446, USA.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fourth most common malignancy and one of
the leading causes of death world wide. Signaling pathways important for tumor
initiation and progression in HCC are poorly understood. Hedgehog signaling (Hh) 
has been implicated in multiple events during development and has also been
proposed to play important roles in several tumor types. However, it remains
unclear whether this pathway is activated in HCC. Here, we report the detection
of transcripts for hedgehog pathway signaling molecules in both HCC cell lines
and tumor samples. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR also revealed the decreased
expression of Hip1 and increased expression of Gli1 and smo in HCC samples
compared with nontumor liver tissues. Blocking the hedgehog pathway with
cyclopamine inhibited proliferation, induced apoptosis and repressed c-Myc and
cyclin D expression in a subset of HCC cell lines. The study therefore, for the
first time, provides evidence that hedgehog signaling may be activated in some
HCC tumors. The results also indicate that the hedgehog pathway may be a new
candidate for therapeutic targeting in HCC.

PMID: 16397407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):569-78. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

GLI3-dependent transcriptional repression of Gli1, Gli2 and kidney patterning
genes disrupts renal morphogenesis.

Hu MC(1), Mo R, Bhella S, Wilson CW, Chuang PT, Hui CC, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Canada.

Truncating mutations in Gli3, an intracellular effector in the SHH-SMO-GLI
signaling pathway, cause renal aplasia/dysplasia in humans and mice. Yet, the
pathogenic mechanisms are undefined. Here, we report the effect of decreased
SHH-SMO signaling on renal morphogenesis, the expression of SHH target genes and 
GLI binding to Shh target genes. Shh deficiency or cyclopamine-mediated SMO
inhibition disrupted renal organogenesis, decreased expression of GLI1 and GLI2
proteins, but increased expression of GLI3 repressor relative to GLI3 activator. 
Shh deficiency decreased expression of kidney patterning genes (Pax2 and Sall1)
and cell cycle regulators (cyclin D1 and MYCN). Elimination of Gli3 in Shh(-/-)
mice rescued kidney malformation and restored expression of Pax2, Sall1, cyclin
D1, MYCN, Gli1 and Gli2. To define mechanisms by which SHH-SMO signaling controls
gene expression, we determined the binding of GLI proteins to 5' flanking regions
containing GLI consensus binding sequences in Shh target genes using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. In normal embryonic kidney tissue, GLI1 and/or GLI2 were
bound to each target gene. By contrast, treatment of embryonic kidney explants
with cyclopamine decreased GLI1 and/or GLI2 binding, and induced binding of GLI3.
However, cyclopamine failed to decrease Gli1 and Gli2 expression and branching
morphogenesis in Gli3-deficient embryonic kidney tissue. Together, these results 
demonstrate that SHH-SMO signaling controls renal morphogenesis via
transcriptional control of Gli, renal patterning and cell cycle regulator genes
in a manner that is opposed by GLI3.

PMID: 16396903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biomech. 2006;39(3):522-9.

A global optimization method for prediction of muscle forces of human
musculoskeletal system.

Li G(1), Pierce JE, Herndon JH.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ 1215, Boston, MA
2114, USA. gli1@partners.org

Inverse dynamic optimization is a popular method for predicting muscle and joint 
reaction forces within human musculoskeletal joints. However, the traditional
formulation of the optimization method does not include the joint reaction moment
in the moment equilibrium equation, potentially violating the equilibrium
conditions of the joint. Consequently, the predicted muscle and joint reaction
forces are coordinate system-dependent. This paper presents an improved
optimization method for the prediction of muscle forces and joint reaction
forces. In this method, the location of the rotation center of the joint is used 
as an optimization variable, and the moment equilibrium equation is formulated
with respect to the joint rotation center to represent an accurate moment
constraint condition. The predicted muscle and joint reaction forces are
independent of the joint coordinate system. The new optimization method was used 
to predict muscle forces of an elbow joint. The results demonstrated that the
joint rotation center location varied with applied loading conditions. The
predicted muscle and joint reaction forces were different from those predicted by
using the traditional optimization method. The results further demonstrated that 
the improved optimization method converged to a minimum for the objective
function that is smaller than that reached by using the traditional optimization 
method. Therefore, the joint rotation center location should be involved as a
variable in an inverse dynamic optimization method for predicting muscle and
joint reaction forces within human musculoskeletal joints.

PMID: 16389092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Oral Oncol. 2006 Apr;42(4):398-408. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Epithelial expression of SHH signaling pathway in odontogenic tumors.

Zhang L(1), Chen XM, Sun ZJ, Bian Z, Fan MW, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Oral Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education,
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, 237# Luo Yu Road, Wuhan,
Hubei 430079, PR China.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway plays a critical role in tooth
development. Recent studies indicate that SHH signaling pathway activation occurs
both in the odontogenic cyst and ameloblastoma. However, the association of SHH
pathway with other subtypes of odontogenic tumor is not well documented. The
objective of this paper is to investigate the protein distribution of SHH and its
receptor PTC, SMO and transcription factor GLI1 in various odontogenic tumors.
Odontogenic tumor tissues including 34 epithelial derived, 24
epithelial-mesenchymal derived, and 26 mesenchymal derived were examined by
immunohistochemistry for SHH, PTC, SMO and GLI1. Immunoreactivity for SHH, PTC,
SMO and GLI1 was detected in both epithelial derived odontogenic tumors and
epithelial-mesenchymal derived odontogenic tumors with or without dental hard
tissue formation. Mesenchymal derived odontogenic tumors showed no positive
staining except for the focal epithelial cells in island or cord forms within the
central portion of the tumor. The protein expression of SHH signaling pathway in 
malignant odontogenic tumors was no stronger than that in benign tumors. Each of 
the genes in the pathway was expressed in similar patterns in the same tumor
subtype. SHH, PTC, SMO and GLI1 were detected more in the cytoplasm of the
epithelial cells than in stromal cells. Immunoreactivity for GLI1 was also
detected in the base membrane of the tumor cells. The findings suggest SHH, PTC, 
SMO and GLI1 protein are predominantly located in epithelial components in
various odontogenic tumors and might participate in the proliferation of
epithelial components of odontogenic tumors.

PMID: 16376138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Dec;4(12):1401-8. Epub 2005 Dec 23.

KLF4 and PCNA identify stages of tumor initiation in a conditional model of
cutaneous squamous epithelial neoplasia.

Huang CC(1), Liu Z, Li X, Bailey SK, Nail CD, Foster KW, Frost AR, Ruppert JM,
Lobo-Ruppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294-3300, USA.

KLF4 is induced upon growth-arrest in vitro and during epithelial maturation in
vivo, and is essential for proper cell fate specification of post-mitotic cells. 
In spite of a normal role in post-mitotic cells, expression is upregulated and
constitutive in certain tumor types. KLF4 functions as an oncogene in vitro, and 
enforced expression in basal cells of mouse skin rapidly induces lesions similar 
to hyperplasia, dysplasia and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Here we used
conditional expression to characterize early steps in KLF4-mediated tumor
initiation. In contrast to SCC-like lesions that result when using a conditional,
keratin 14 promoter-dependent strategy, lower conditional expression achieved
using a MMTV promoter induced only epidermal cycling within morphologically
normal skin, a process we termed occult cell turnover. Surprisingly, KLF4-induced
hyperplastic lesions showed increased transgene-derived mRNA and protein in
maturing, PCNA-negative cells, a property of endogenous KLF4. In contrast,
hyperplastic lesions induced by GLI1, a control, showed uniform transgene
expression. In KLF4-induced dysplasia and SCC the complementarity of KLF4 and
PCNA was replaced by concordance of the two proteins. These studies show that
KLF4 transcripts are normally suppressed in cycling cells in a
promoter-independent fashion, consistent with a post-transcriptional control, and
reveal loss of this control in the transition from hyperplasia to dysplasia. Like
the mouse tumors, human cutaneous SCCs and adjacent dysplasias frequently showed 
maturation-independence of KLF4, with co-expression of KLF4 and PCNA. A smaller
subset of human SCCs showed complementarity of KLF4 and PCNA, similar to
hyperplastic mouse skin. The results identify parallels between a mouse model and
human primary tumors, and show that successive increases of KLF4 in the nuclei of
basal keratinocytes leads to occult cell turnover followed by hyperplasia,
dysplasia, and invasive SCC.

PMCID: PMC1361751
PMID: 16357510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Dev Dyn. 2006 Mar;235(3):594-605.

Complementary Gli activity mediates early patterning of the mouse visual system.

Furimsky M(1), Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, Ottawa Health Research Institute and University of
Ottawa Eye Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. mfurimsky@ohri.ca

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway plays a key role in the development of
the vertebrate central nervous system, including the eye. This pathway is
mediated by the Gli transcription factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) that
differentially activate and repress the expression of specific downstream target 
genes. In this study, we investigated the roles of the three vertebrate Glis in
mediating midline Shh signaling in early ocular development. We examined the
ocular phenotypes of Shh and Gli combination mutant mouse embryos and monitored
proximodistal and dorsoventral patterning by the expression of specific eye
development regulatory genes using in situ hybridization. We show that midline
Shh signaling relieves the repressor activity of Gli3 adjacent to the midline and
then promotes eye pattern formation through the nonredundant activities of all
three Gli proteins. Gli3, in particular, is required to specify the dorsal optic 
stalk and to define the boundary between the optic stalk and the optic cup.

PMID: 16342201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Gene. 2006 Feb 15;367:56-65. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Transcriptional control of Shh/Ptc1 signaling in embryonic development.

Lin SL(1), Chang SJ, Ying SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Neurobiology, BMT-403, 1333 San Pablo Street, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA. lins@usc.edu

In vivo profiling of signal-directed gene expression patterns is a major
bottleneck in studying developmental biology. A signal molecule initiates its
specific gene expression pattern through the activation of certain transcription 
factor (TF); however, tissue heterogeneity often masks this pattern due to
intercellular complexity of other signal transduction pathways. To decipher the
synergistic regulation of signal-directed gene expression in the tissue level, we
report here a unique transcriptional responsive element (TRE) existing in the
5'-upstream promoter regions (5'-UPR) of the genes responding to the Shh/Ptc1
signal transduction pathway during feather placode development in chicken
embryos. By locating the TRE homologue and its interactive TF, we were able to
reveal the gene expression pattern of the Shh/Ptc1 signaling. We firstly
demonstrated that homology profiling of the 5'-UPR of the genes, Gli1, TGF-beta2 
and Msx2, responding to the Shh/Ptc1 signaling showed a more than 70% conserved
region. Computer alignment of the consensus sequences in the conserved region
revealed a 37-nucleotide TRE sequence, containing two regulatory elements
homologous to human and mouse Gli-binding sites. Activation of this newly
identified Shh/Ptc1-responsive TRE by active Smo signaling in chicken
hepatoepithelial carcinoma cells elicited a strong synergistic expression of the 
Shh/Ptc1-downstream genes. Based on previous bioinformatics and the present
experimental findings, we successfully established an in vivo signaling model for
the Shh/Ptc1-directed embryonic feather morphogenesis.

PMID: 16330160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Dev Cell. 2005 Dec;9(6):819-30.

Phosphorylation by double-time/CKIepsilon and CKIalpha targets cubitus
interruptus for Slimb/beta-TRCP-mediated proteolytic processing.

Jia J(1), Zhang L, Zhang Q, Tong C, Wang B, Hou F, Amanai K, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. jin.jiang@utsouthwestern.edu

Hedgehog (Hh) proteins govern animal development by regulating the Gli/Ci family 
of transcription factors. In Drosophila, Hh signaling blocks proteolytic
processing of full-length Ci to generate a truncated repressor form. Ci
processing requires sequential phosphorylation by PKA, GSK3, and a casein kinase 
I (CKI) family member(s). Here we show that Double-time (DBT)/CKIepsilon and
CKIalpha act in conjunction to promote Ci processing. CKI phosphorylates Ci at
three clusters of serine residues primed by PKA and GSK3 phosphorylation. CKI
phosphorylation of Ci confers binding to the F-box protein Slimb/beta-TRCP, the
substrate recognition component of the SCF(Slimb/beta-TRCP) ubiquitin ligase
required for Ci processing. CKI phosphorylation sites act cooperatively to
promote Ci processing in vivo. Substitution of Ci phosphorylation clusters with a
canonical Slimb/beta-TRCP recognition motif in beta-catenin renders
Slimb/beta-TRCP binding and Ci processing independent of CKI. We propose that
phosphorylation of Ci by CKI creates multiple Slimb/beta-TRCP binding sites that 
act cooperatively to recruit SCF(Slimb/beta-TRCP).

PMID: 16326393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):10822-9.

p53-Independent negative regulation of p21/cyclin-dependent kinase-interacting
protein 1 by the sonic hedgehog-glioma-associated oncogene 1 pathway in gastric
carcinoma cells.

Ohta M(1), Tateishi K, Kanai F, Watabe H, Kondo S, Guleng B, Tanaka Y, Asaoka Y, 
Jazag A, Imamura J, Ijichi H, Ikenoue T, Sata M, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Tada M,
Kawabe T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Hongo, Japan.

The activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated in the growth of
various tumor types, including gastric carcinoma. However, the precise mechanisms
of Hh activation and suppression of tumor growth by the blockade of Hh signaling 
in gastric carcinoma cells remain unknown. The aim of this study was to elucidate
the mechanism of abnormal Hh signaling and the key molecules contributing to
dysregulated growth of gastric carcinoma. The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) ligand and its
receptor Patched were expressed in all five gastric carcinoma cell lines examined
(MKN1, MKN7, MKN45, MKN74, and AGS cells). The blockade of Hh signaling with
anti-Shh antibody inhibited the growth of all five gastric carcinoma cell lines. 
Shh was overexpressed (mean, 12.8-fold) in 8 of 14 (57.0%) cancerous tissue
samples from patients with gastric carcinoma as compared with expression in the
surrounding noncancerous tissues. The disruption of glioma-associated oncogene 1 
(Gli1) by small interfering RNA induced an increase in p21/cyclin-dependent
kinase-interacting protein 1 (CIP1), interfered with the G1-S transition, and
suppressed cell proliferation. The stimulation or inhibition of Hh signaling did 
not affect p53 activity and the induction of p21/CIP1 expression and the G1
arrest by inhibition of Hh signaling were not affected by the p53 status. These
findings suggest that the overexpression of Shh contributes to constitutive Hh
activation and that this signaling pathway negatively regulates p21/CIP1 through 
a Gli1-dependent and p53-independent mechanism in gastric carcinoma cells.

PMID: 16322228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Differentiation. 2005 Oct;73(8):397-405.

Negative regulation of Gli1 and Gli2 activator function by Suppressor of fused
through multiple mechanisms.

Barnfield PC(1), Zhang X, Thanabalasingham V, Yoshida M, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Sick Children, Program in Developmental Biology, 101 College
Street, TMDT, Rm. 13-314, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1L7.

During animal development, the Hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction pathway plays
critical roles in cell fate determination and tissue patterning. In humans,
aberrant Hh signaling has been linked to several genetic disorders and cancers.
Binding of Hh to its receptor initiates a signaling cascade, which ultimately
results in the activation of the Gli/Ci transcription factors. Suppressor of
fused (Su(fu)) is a Gli/Ci-interacting protein, which acts as a negative
regulator of Hh signaling in Drosophila and vertebrates. Su(fu) is also
implicated as a tumor suppressor as its mutations have been found in
medulloblastoma and prostate cancer. Su(fu) is thought to act by preventing the
nuclear accumulation of Gli/Ci, however, mechanistic insight into its mode of
action has remained elusive. We demonstrate here that Su(fu) prevents the nuclear
accumulation of Gli1 and Gli2 through multiple mechanisms. While Su(fu) itself is
not subject to CRM1-dependent regulation, Su(fu) sequesters Gli1 in the cytoplasm
mostly through a mechanism that depends on the activity of the nuclear export
protein CRM1. In contrast, CRM1-mediated export is not required for Su(fu) to
sequester Gli2. Furthermore, we show that the N-terminus of Su(fu) is sufficient 
for Gli inactivation in the absence of cytoplasmic sequestration. Together, these
observations reveal that Su(fu) regulates the activity of Gli1 and Gli2 through
distinct cytoplasmic and nuclear mechanisms.

PMID: 16316410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Anticancer Res. 2005 Nov-Dec;25(6A):3697-701.

Immunohistochemical staining of hedgehog pathway-related proteins in human
thymomas.

Tasaki A(1), Akiyoshi T, Koga K, Nakashima H, Yamanaka N, Kubo M, Matsumoto K,
Kojima M, Tanaka M, Nakamura M, Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The thymus plays an essential role in the maturing of progenitor cells to
functional T cells. Recent studies suggest that the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling
pathway contributes to this differentiation process. However, there is limited
information concerning the expression of Hh pathway-related proteins (Hh
proteins) in the human thymus. The staining of Hh proteins in the thymic
epithelium of 26 surgically resected thymoma tissues was examined by
immunohistochemistry. The staining of sonic Hh (Shh) correlated relatively well
with the World Health Organization histological classification of thymoma. The
higher the grade, the fainter the staining. However, no significant difference in
Shh staining was found between normal and neoplastic epithelia. Interestingly,
Gli1 staining in thymomas was significantly greater than that in normal thymus (p
< 0.0001). Thus, some members of the Hh signaling pathway may contribute to the
development of thymoma.

PMID: 16302728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Gut. 2006 Jul;55(7):991-9. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Gli1, downregulated in colorectal cancers, inhibits proliferation of colon cancer
cells involving Wnt signalling activation.

Akiyoshi T(1), Nakamura M, Koga K, Nakashima H, Yao T, Tsuneyoshi M, Tanaka M,
Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Early events in the progression of 90% of sporadic colorectal cancers
depend on constitutive activation of Wnt signalling. Recent data also indicate a 
close association between the Hedgehog (Hh) and Wnt pathways in colonic
epithelial cell differentiation.
AIMS: To investigate whether expression of Gli1, a transactivator of Hh
signalling, can suppress Wnt signalling and inhibit proliferation of human
colorectal cancer cells.
METHODS: Gli1 and nuclear beta-catenin expression were examined in a series of 40
human colorectal cancers by immunohistochemistry. We quantified Gli1 and nuclear 
beta-catenin staining as markers of Hh and Wnt pathway activation, respectively. 
Two human colon cancer cell lines, SW480 and HCT116, with mutations in APC and
beta-catenin, respectively, were used. The effects of Gli1 overexpression on Wnt 
transcriptional activity, beta-catenin subcellular distribution, and
proliferation in these cells were analysed.
RESULTS: Nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and the Gli1 staining level were
inversely associated in the 40 human colorectal cancers. Wnt transcriptional
activity was reduced in Gli1 transfected cells. These effects were observed even 
in Gli1 transfected cells cotransfected with mutated beta-catenin. Furthermore,
nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin was diminished compared with that in empty
vector transfected cells, and downregulated transcription of c-Myc was observed
in Gli1 transfected cells. Proliferation of Gli1 transfected cells was also
significantly suppressed compared with that in empty vector transfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that Gli1 plays an inhibitory role in the
development of colorectal cancer involving Wnt signalling, even in cases with the
stabilising mutation of beta-catenin.

PMCID: PMC1856354
PMID: 16299030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Pathol. 2006 Jan;208(1):17-25.

Deregulation of the hedgehog signalling pathway: a possible role for the PTCH and
SUFU genes in human rhabdomyoma and rhabdomyosarcoma development.

Tostar U(1), Malm CJ, Meis-Kindblom JM, Kindblom LG, Toftgård R, Undén AB.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institute, Department of Bioscience at Novum, SE-14157 Huddinge,
Sweden.

The naevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is caused by mutations in the
hedgehog receptor PTCH gene. It is characterized by developmental defects and a
predisposition to the development of certain tumours, such as basal cell
carcinoma, medulloblastoma and meningioma, and potentially fetal rhabdomyomas and
embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas. This study aimed to analyse PTCH status in an NBCCS 
patient with fetal rhabdomyoma and to investigate whether deregulation of
hedgehog signalling, as shown by altered expression of hedgehog pathway
components and/or genetic imbalances, is a general finding in sporadic
rhabdomyomas and rhabdomyosarcomas. The NBCCS patient had a novel PTCH germ-line 
mutation, 1370insT, and developed a fetal rhabdomyoma that harboured a 30 bp
in-frame deletion in the second allele resulting in homozygous inactivation of
PTCH. Sporadic rhabdomyomas and rhabdomyosarcomas showed overexpression of PTCH
(43/43) and GLI1 (41/43) mRNA, as determined by in situ hybridization, indicating
ongoing active hedgehog signalling. Immunohistochemical staining revealed a
subgroup of fetal rhabdomyomas and embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas (12/34) lacking
PTCH immunoreactivity. Four of nine informative fetal rhabdomyomas and embryonal 
rhabdomyosarcomas showed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the PTCH region with two
of these (one fetal rhabdomyoma and one embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma) also showing 
LOH in the SUFU region. These findings suggest that haploinsufficiency for the
two tumour suppressor genes PTCH and SUFU, which are both active in the same
signalling pathway, may be important for tumour development. Based on our results
we propose that the pathogenesis of rhabdomyoblastic tumours, particularly fetal 
rhabdomyomas and embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas, involves deregulation of the
hedgehog signalling pathway.

Copyright 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 16294371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 6;281(1):9-12. Epub 2005 Nov 17.

Regulation of Gli1 localization by the cAMP/protein kinase A signaling axis
through a site near the nuclear localization signal.

Sheng T(1), Chi S, Zhang X, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology and Department of Pharmacology,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 7555-1048, USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) pathway plays a critical role during development of embryos and
cancer. Although the molecular basis by which protein kinase A (PKA) regulates
the stability of hedgehog downstream transcription factor cubitus interruptus,
the Drosophila homologue of vertebrate Gli molecules, is well documented, the
mechanism by which PKA inhibits the functions of Gli molecules in vertebrates
remains elusive. Here, we report that activation of PKA retains Gli1 in the
cytoplasm. Conversely, inhibition of PKA activity promotes nuclear accumulation
of Gli1. Mutation analysis identifies Thr374 as a major PKA site determining Gli1
protein localization. In the three-dimensional structure, Thr374 resides adjacent
to the basic residue cluster of the nuclear localization signal (NLS).
Phosphorylation of this Thr residue is predicted to alter the local charge and
consequently the NLS function. Indeed, mutation of this residue to Asp
(Gli1/T374D) results in more cytoplasmic Gli1 whereas a mutation to Lys
(Gli1/T374K) leads to more nuclear Gli1. Disruption of the NLS causes Gli1/T374K 
to be more cytoplasmic. We find that the change of Gli1 localization is
correlated with the change of its transcriptional activity. These data provide
evidence to support a model that PKA regulates Gli1 localization and its
transcriptional activity, in part, through modulating the NLS function.

PMID: 16293631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Androl. 2006 Mar-Apr;27(2):225-32. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

Sonic hedgehog pathway inhibition alters epididymal function as assessed by the
development of sperm motility.

Turner TT(1), Bang HJ, Attipoe SA, Johnston DS, Tomsig JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, PO Box
800422, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. ttt@virginia.edu

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway plays a role in pattern orientation in
the developing embryo and has been shown to be required for development of the
prostate and external genitalia. Recent evidence has shown that important
elements of the Shh pathway are also expressed in the adult mouse epididymis at
both the gene and protein levels. The objective of the present investigation was 
to refine the expression pattern of Shh in the mouse epididymis and to determine 
if the Shh pathway is important for epididymal function vis-à-vis sperm
maturation. The former was achieved by microarray analysis of Shh expression in
all segments of the mouse epididymis, and the latter was determined by 14-day
administration of cyclopamine, a Shh pathway inhibitor, followed by a microassay 
for the activation and duration of cauda epididymal sperm motility. Shh pathway
inhibition was monitored by semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction for expression of epididymal Gli1 and Gli3. The Gli family of
transcription factors is commonly activated and regulated by Shh pathway
activation. Cyclopamine treatment reduced Gli1 expression by 61% and initiation
of cauda sperm motility by 50%. Gli3 expression was reduced by approximately 50%.
Subsequent cluster analysis using the microarray data on epididymal gene
expression highlighted several potential target genes for the Shh pathway, the
most prominent of which is prostaglandin D2 synthase. These results indicate that
an operating Shh pathway is important in the murine epididymis for the
development of sperm motility and implies a role for Shh signaling in adult
epididymal function.

PMID: 16278368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Oct;4(10):1050-4. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastric cancer.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

Hedgehog, WNT, FGF and BMP signaling pathways network together during
embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Aberrant activation of
Hedgehog signaling pathway leads to pathological consequences in a variety of
human tumors, such as gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer. Endoscopic mucosal
resection (EMR), endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD), surgical gastrectomy and
chemotherapy are therapeutic options for gastric cancer; however, prognosis of
advanced gastric cancer patient is still poor. Here, Hedgehog signaling pathway
in human gastric cancer and its clinical applications will be reviewed. Human
SHH, IHH, DHH (Hedgehog homologs), HHAT (Hedgehog acyltransferase), HHIP
(Hedgehog-interacting protein), DISP1, DISP2, DISP3 (Dispatched homologs), PTCH1,
PTCH2 (Patched homologs), SMO (Smoothened homolog), KIF27, KIF7 (Costal-2
homologs), STK36 (Fused homolog), SUFU (SuFu homolog), DZIP1 (Iguana homolog),
GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (Cubitus interruptus homologs) are implicated in the Hedgehog
signaling. PTCH1, FOXM1 and CCND2 are direct transcriptional targets of Hedgehog 
signaling. Hedgehog signaling activation leads to cell proliferation through cell
cycle regulation. SHH regulates growth and differentiation within gastric mucosa 
through autocrine loop and FOXL1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. SHH
is implicated in stem/progenitor cell restitution of damaged gastric mucosa
during chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori. SHH up-regulation, IHH
upregulation and HHIP down-regulation lead to aberrant activation of Hedgehog
signaling through PTCH1 to GLI1 in gastric cancer. Small molecule compounds
targeted to SMO (KADD-cyclopamine, SANT1-4, Cur61414) as well as humanized
anti-SHH antibodies are potent anti-cancer drugs for gastric cancer. Cocktail of 
Hedgehog inhibitors would be developed as novel therapeutics for gastric cancer. 
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number polymorphism (CNP) of
Hedgehog signaling genes would be utilized for genetic screening of gastric
cancer, while cDNA-PCR, microarray and ELISA detecting aberrant Hedgehog
signaling activation would be utilized for therapeutic optional choice. Genetic
screening and precise selection of therapeutic options would contribute to the
realization of personalized medicine.

PMID: 16258256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. PLoS Genet. 2005 Oct;1(4):e53. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Gli2 and Gli3 localize to cilia and require the intraflagellar transport protein 
polaris for processing and function.

Haycraft CJ(1), Banizs B, Aydin-Son Y, Zhang Q, Michaud EJ, Yoder BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins are essential for cilia assembly and have
recently been associated with a number of developmental processes, such as
left-right axis specification and limb and neural tube patterning. Genetic
studies indicate that IFT proteins are required for Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling downstream of the Smoothened and Patched membrane proteins but upstream
of the Glioma (Gli) transcription factors. However, the role that IFT proteins
play in transduction of Shh signaling and the importance of cilia in this process
remain unknown. Here we provide insights into the mechanism by which defects in
an IFT protein, Tg737/Polaris, affect Shh signaling in the murine limb bud. Our
data show that loss of Tg737 results in altered Gli3 processing that abrogates
Gli3-mediated repression of Gli1 transcriptional activity. In contrast to the
conclusions drawn from genetic analysis, the activity of Gli1 and truncated forms
of Gli3 (Gli3R) are unaffected in Tg737 mutants at the molecular level,
indicating that Tg737/Polaris is differentially involved in specific activities
of the Gli proteins. Most important, a negative regulator of Shh signaling,
Suppressor of fused, and the three full-length Gli transcription factors localize
to the distal tip of cilia in addition to the nucleus. Thus, our data support a
model where cilia have a direct role in Gli processing and Shh signal
transduction.

PMCID: PMC1270009
PMID: 16254602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 1;288(1):206-20. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Differential susceptibility of midbrain and spinal cord patterning to floor plate
defects in the talpid2 mutant.

Agarwala S(1), Aglyamova GV, Marma AK, Fallon JF, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurobiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-0248,
USA. agarwala@mail.utexas.edu

The chick talpid2 mutant displays polydactylous digits attributed to defects of
the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway. We examined the talpid2 neural tube and show
that patterning defects in the spinal cord and the midbrain are distinct from
each other and from the limb. Unlike the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) source in the limb,
the SHH-rich floor plate (FP) is reduced in the talpid2 midbrain. This is
accompanied by a severe depletion of medial cell populations that encounter high 
concentrations of SHH, an expansion of lateral cell populations that experience
low concentrations of SHH and a broad deregulation of HH's principal effectors
(PTC1, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3). Together with the failure of SHH misexpression to
rescue the talpid2 phenotype, these results suggest that talpid2 is likely to
have a tissue-autonomous, bidirectional (positive and negative) role in HH
signaling that cannot be attributed to the altered expression of several newly
cloned HH pathway genes (SUFU, DZIP1, DISP1, BTRC). Strikingly, FP defects in the
spinal cord are accompanied by relatively normal patterning in the talpid2
mutant. We propose that this differential FP dependence may be due to the
prolonged apposition of the notochord to the spinal cord, but not the midbrain
during development.

PMID: 16246323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochem J. 2006 Feb 15;394(Pt 1):19-26.

Inhibition of GLI1 gene activation by Patched1.

Rahnama F(1), Shimokawa T, Lauth M, Finta C, Kogerman P, Teglund S, Toftgård R,
Zaphiropoulos PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences at Novum, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.
fahimeh.rahnama@cnt.ki.se

Patched1 (PTCH1) is a human tumour suppressor that acts as an HH (Hedgehog)
receptor protein and is important for embryonic patterning. PTCH1 mediates its
effects through SMO (Smoothened) and represses the expression of HH target genes 
such as the transcription factor GLI1 (glioma 1) as well as PTCH1. Up-regulation 
of these genes has been observed in several cancer forms, including basal cell
carcinoma, digestive track tumours and small cell lung cancer. The fact that
PTCH1 down-regulates its own expression via 'negative feedback' is an important
feature in HH signalling, as it keeps the balance between HH and PTCH1 activities
that are essential for normal development. In the present study, we provide
evidence that a novel mechanism allowing PTCH1 to maintain this balance may also 
exist. We show that gene activation by GLI1, the transcriptional effector of the 
pathway, can be down-regulated by PTCH1 without involvement of the canonical
cascade of HH signalling events. Specifically, the SMO antagonist cyclopamine has
no appreciable effects in blocking this PTCH1-mediated inhibition. Moreover, the 
negative GLI1 regulator SUFU (Suppressor of Fused) was also found to be
dispensable. Additionally, deletion mapping of PTCH1 has revealed that the
domains encompassed by amino acids 180-786 and 1058-1210 are of highest
significance in inhibiting GLI1 gene activation. This contrasts with the
importance of the PTCH1 C-terminal domain for HH signalling.

PMCID: PMC1385998
PMID: 16229683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nature. 2005 Oct 6;437(7060):894-7.

In vivo analysis of quiescent adult neural stem cells responding to Sonic
hedgehog.

Ahn S(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine and Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) has been implicated in the ongoing neurogenesis in postnatal
rodent brains. Here we adopted an in vivo genetic fate-mapping strategy, using
Gli1 (GLI-Kruppel family member) as a sensitive readout of Shh activity, to
systematically mark and follow the fate of Shh-responding cells in the adult
mouse forebrain. We show that initially, only a small population of cells
(including both quiescent neural stem cells and transit-amplifying cells)
responds to Shh in regions undergoing neurogenesis. This population subsequently 
expands markedly to continuously provide new neurons in the forebrain. Our study 
of the behaviour of quiescent neural stem cells provides in vivo evidence that
they can self-renew for over a year and generate multiple cell types.
Furthermore, we show that the neural stem cell niches in the subventricular zone 
and dentate gyrus are established sequentially and not until late embryonic
stages.

PMID: 16208373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Dev Biol. 2005 Nov 1;287(1):98-110. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

STAR proteins quaking-6 and GLD-1 regulate translation of the homologues GLI1 and
tra-1 through a conserved RNA 3'UTR-based mechanism.

Lakiza O(1), Frater L, Yoo Y, Villavicencio E, Walterhouse D, Goodwin EB,
Iannaccone P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine 
and Children's Memorial Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 15;307(2):551-3.

The binding of the STAR protein GLD-1 to an element in the tra-2 3' untranslated 
region (3'UTR), called the TGE (tra GLI element), represses tra-2 translation,
allowing for hermaphrodite spermatogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans. GLD-1 is a 
member of the STAR family that includes the mammalian quaking (Qk) proteins.
Here, we show that the 3'UTR of the nematode homologue of GLI1, called tra-1,
also contains a TGE, through which translation is regulated by GLD-1. We find
that GLD-1 activity is required for proper TRA-1 protein expression in
hermaphrodites. RNA gel shift assays show that GLD-1 binds the predicted sites.
Using reporter transgenes, we show that the human GLI1 (hGLI1) 3'UTR controls
translation in the mouse embryo. We demonstrate that the addition of the mouse QK
isoform-6 (QKI-6) protein to a mammalian cell line that lacks QKI-6 can confer
regulation on reporter and GLI1 mRNAs in a TGE-specific manner, and reduction of 
QKI-6 activity with siRNA disrupts translational control. Further, siRNA
knockdown of QKI-6 increases the activity of a reporter transgene that monitors
the transcriptional activity of mouse Gli1 (mGli1) and increases mouse Gli1
protein. We show by immunoprecipitation that QKI-6 antibody specifically
co-purifies TGE-containing mRNAs in ribonucleoproteins. Thus, we find that the
mouse QKI-6 protein acts through the mGli1 and hGLI1 RNAs to repress translation.
Our results suggest that STAR family-dependent translational control of GLI mRNAs
is ancient, and that it existed before the division of nematodes and mammals.

PMID: 16198329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Oct;125(4):638-46.

Modulation of hair growth with small molecule agonists of the hedgehog signaling 
pathway.

Paladini RD(1), Saleh J, Qian C, Xu GX, Rubin LL.

Author information: 
(1)Curis Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. rpaladini@curis.com

The hedgehog (Hh) family of intercellular signaling proteins is intricately
linked to the development and patterning of almost every major vertebrate organ
system. In the skin, sonic hedgehog (Shh) is required for hair follicle
morphogenesis during embryogenesis and for regulating follicular growth and
cycling in the adult. We recently described the identification and
characterization of synthetic, non-peptidyl small molecule agonists of the Hh
pathway. In this study, we examined the ability of a topically applied Hh-agonist
to modulate follicular cycling in adult mouse skin. We report that the Hh-agonist
can stimulate the transition from the resting (telogen) to the growth (anagen)
stage of the hair cycle in adult mouse skin. Hh-agonist-induced hair growth
caused no detectable differences in epidermal proliferation, differentiation, or 
in the endogenous Hh-signaling pathway as measured by Gli1, Shh, Ptc1, and Gli2
gene expression when compared with a normal hair cycle. In addition, we
demonstrate that Hh-agonist is active in human scalp in vitro as measured by Gli1
gene expression. These results suggest that the topical application of Hh-agonist
could be effective in treating conditions of decreased proliferation and aberrant
follicular cycling in the scalp including androgenetic alopecia (pattern hair
loss).

PMID: 16185261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Jan;6(2):206-12. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Expression patterns of Hedgehog signalling pathway members during mouse palate
development.

Rice R(1), Connor E, Rice DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Floor 28 Guy's 
Tower, St Thomas Street, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Hedgehog signalling regulates morphogenesis of many developing organs. Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signalling has been shown to regulate the growth and morphogenesis
of the palatal shelves prior to their elevation and fusion. Here, we show that
Shh expression is limited to a thickened palatal oral epithelium prior to palatal
shelf elevation. After palatal shelf elevation above the tongue, Shh is expressed
only in small areas of thickened palatal oral epithelium that corresponded to
developing rugae. The receptor Ptc1 and a regulator of Hh signalling Hhip1 are
expressed in the mesenchyme adjacent to the palatal oral epithelium so that the
highest level of transcripts localize to the palatal mesenchyme surrounding the
Shh-expressing thickened epithelium. Smoothened and transcriptional effectors
Gli1-3, and Hh regulator Gas1 are expressed widely in the palatal mesenchyme. No 
differences were found in the expression patterns of Hh pathway members along the
anterior-posterior axis of the developing palate.

PMID: 16168717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2004 Jan;2(1):17, 20, 63.

The emerging role of the hedgehog signaling pathway in gastrointestinal cancers.

Thayer S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA.

PMID: 16163153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 26;25(4):609-21.

Snail induction is an early response to Gli1 that determines the efficiency of
epithelial transformation.

Li X(1), Deng W, Nail CD, Bailey SK, Kraus MH, Ruppert JM, Lobo-Ruppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35294-3300,
USA.

Gli family members mediate constitutive Hedgehog signaling in the common skin
cancer, basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Snail/Snai1 is rapidly induced by Gli1 in
vitro, and is coexpressed with Gli1 in human hair follicles and skin tumors. In
the current study, we generated a dominant-negative allele of Snail, SnaZFD,
composed of the zinc-finger domain and flanking sequence. In promoter-reporter
assays, SnaZFD blocked the activity of wild-type Snail on the E-cadherin
promoter. Snail loss-of-function mediated by SnaZFD or by one of several short
hairpin RNAs inhibited transformation of RK3E epithelial cells by Gli1.
Conversely, enforced expression of Snail promoted transformation in vitro by
Gli1, but not by other genes that were tested, including Notch1, ErbB2, and
N-Ras. As observed for Gli1, wild-type Snail repressed E-cadherin in RK3E cells
and induced blebbing of the cytoplasmic membrane. Induction of a conditional Gli1
transgene in the basal keratinocytes of mouse skin led to rapid upregulation of
Snail transcripts and to cell proliferation in the interfollicular epidermis.
Established Gli1-induced skin lesions exhibited molecular similarities to BCC,
including loss of E-cadherin. The results identify Snail as a Gli1-inducible
effector of transformation in vitro, and an early Gli1-responsive gene in the
skin.

PMCID: PMC1361531
PMID: 16158046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Neurosci. 2005 Sep 7;25(36):8338-46.

Hedgehog antagonist REN(KCTD11) regulates proliferation and apoptosis of
developing granule cell progenitors.

Argenti B(1), Gallo R, Di Marcotullio L, Ferretti E, Napolitano M, Canterini S,
De Smaele E, Greco A, Fiorenza MT, Maroder M, Screpanti I, Alesse E, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza,
00161 Rome, Italy.

During the early development of the cerebellum, a burst of granule cell
progenitor (GCP) proliferation occurs in the outer external granule layer (EGL), 
which is sustained mainly by Purkinje cell-derived Sonic Hedgehog (Shh). Shh
response is interrupted once GCPs move into the inner EGL, where granule
progenitors withdraw proliferation and start differentiating and migrating toward
the internal granule layer (IGL). Failure to interrupt Shh signals results in
uncoordinated proliferation and differentiation of GCPs and eventually leads to
malignancy (i.e., medulloblastoma). The Shh inhibitory mechanisms that are
responsible for GCP growth arrest and differentiation remain unclear. Here we
report that REN, a putative tumor suppressor frequently deleted in human
medulloblastoma, is expressed to a higher extent in nonproliferating inner EGL
and IGL granule cells than in highly proliferating outer EGL cells. Accordingly, 
upregulated REN expression occurs along GCP differentiation in vitro, and, in
turn, REN overexpression promotes growth arrest and increases the proportion of
p27/Kip1+ GCPs. REN also impairs both Gli2-dependent gene transcription and
Shh-enhanced expression of the target Gli1 mRNA, thus antagonizing the
Shh-induced effects on the proliferation and differentiation of cultured GCPs.
Conversely, REN functional knock-down impairs Hedgehog antagonism and
differentiation and sustains the proliferation of GCPs. Finally, REN enhances
caspase-3 activation and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
biotinylated UTP nick end labeling apoptotic GCP numbers; therefore, the pattern 
of REN expression, its activity, and its antagonism on the Hedgehog pathway
suggest that this gene may represent a restraint of Shh signaling at the outer to
inner EGL GCP transitions. Medulloblastoma-associated REN loss of function might 
withdraw such a limiting signal for immature cell expansion, thus favoring
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16148242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Oncol Rep. 2005 Oct;14(4):1087-90.

Comparative genomics on Sonic hedgehog orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Indian hedgehog (IHH), and Desert hedgehog (DHH) are key
molecules for the integrome network in oncology and regenerative medicine.
Soluble Hedgehog ligands bind to Patched receptor to activate Smoothened
seven-transmembrane receptor with Frizzled domain. KIF27 and KIF7 are human
homologs of Drosophila Costal-2 (Cos2), associating with Smoothened, GLI homolog,
Fused, and microtubule. Smoothened activation leads to GLI1, GLI2, or
GLI3-dependent transcription of Hedgehog target genes. Here, comparative
proteomics analyses and comparative genomics analyses on SHH orthologs were
performed by using bioinformatics. Human SHH representative transcript was
assembled by using BX461534 EST, NM_000193.2 RefSeq, AA503654 EST, and AC078834.5
genome sequence. Human SHH mRNA was expressed in fetal brain, infant brain, and
also in colorectal cancer. Chimpanzee SHH gene, consisting of three exons, was
located within AC147335.2 genome sequence. Human SHH and chimpanzee SHH (462 aa) 
showed E284G and T416P amino-acid substitutions. Vertebrate SHH orthologs shared 
the common domain architecture, consisting of N-terminal signal peptide, Hedgehog
signaling domain, Hint domain, and C-terminal HPLGMxxxxS motif. Evolutionarily
conserved SHH promoter region (nucleotide position 104429-104083 of human genome 
sequence AC078834.5) was identified. Double bHLH binding sites, CCAAT box, and
TATA box were conserved among human SHH promoter, chimpanzee SHH promoter, rat
Shh promoter, and mouse Shh promoter.

PMID: 16142377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Orthop Res. 2005 Sep;23(5):1152-9. Epub 2005 Apr 18.

Expression patterns of hedgehog signaling peptides in naturally acquired equine
osteochondrosis.

Semevolos SA(1), Strassheim ML, Haupt JL, Nixon AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Orthopaedics Laboratory, Department of Clinical Sciences, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Hypertrophic differentiation and endochondral ossification of growth cartilage
are regulated by a complex array of signaling peptides, including parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTH-rP), Indian hedgehog (Ihh), and bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs). This study investigated the expression of Ihh, Patched1 and 2
(Ptc1, Ptc2), Smoothened (Smo), Gli1, and Gli3, in naturally acquired articular
osteochondrosis, using an equine model. Cartilage was harvested from
osteochondrosis (OC) affected femoropatellar or scapulohumeral joints from
immature horses and normal control horses of similar age. Ihh, Ptc1, Smo, Gli1,
and Gli3 mRNA expression levels were evaluated by real-time quantitative PCR.
Spatial tissue expression was determined by in situ hybridization for Ihh and Smo
and immunohistochemistry for Ptc1 and Ptc2. The expression of Ihh was
significantly increased in OC cartilage compared to normal control cartilage and 
was localized mainly to the deep layer of articular cartilage, just above the
calcified zone, with some mild expression also present in the middle cartilage
layer. The expression of Gli1 was significantly decreased in OC samples, but
there was no significant difference in expression of Gli3, Ptc1 and Smo in OC
cartilage compared to normal cartilage. The expression of Ptc1 protein was
present at the junction of deep and calcified layers, while Ptc2 protein was
expressed throughout the middle, deep, and calcified cartilage layers. Spatial
expression of Smo was variable between animals and confined mainly to the middle 
and deep layers when present. Half of the OC samples displayed areas of moderate 
to strong Smo expression compared to mild or minimal expression in normal
controls. The increased Ihh expression in OC suggests a role of Ihh in diseased
cartilage, although it is not known if a PTH-rP/Ihh feedback cycle exists in
articular cartilage. The disparity between increased Ihh expression and decreased
Gli1 expression in OC cartilage suggests a different primary transcription factor
for Ihh or the presence of an elevated Ihh inhibitor in these tissues.

PMID: 16140195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. N Engl J Med. 2005 Aug 25;353(8):811-22.

Neural stem cells and the origin of gliomas.

Sanai N(1), Alvarez-Buylla A, Berger MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Brain Tumor Research Center, and the
Developmental Stem Cell Biology Program, University of California, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA. sanain@neurosurg.ucsf.edu

PMID: 16120861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Cancer. 2006 Jan 1;118(1):139-48.

Hedgehog signaling is activated in subsets of esophageal cancers.

Ma X(1), Sheng T, Zhang Y, Zhang X, He J, Huang S, Chen K, Sultz J, Adegboyega
PA, Zhang H, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, Shandong
University, Jinan, China.

The hedgehog pathway plays a critical role in the development of the foregut.
However, the role of the hedgehog pathway in primary esophageal cancers is not
well studied. Here, we report that elevated expression of hedgehog target genes
occurs in 14 of 22 primary esophageal cancers. The hedgehog signaling activation 
is not associated with tumor subtypes, stages, or differentiation. While the
sonic hedgehog (Shh) transcript is localized to the tumor tissue, expression of
Gli1 and PTCH1 is observed both in the tumor and in the stroma. We discovered
that 4 esophageal squamous cell carcinomas, which overexpress Shh, have genomic
amplification of the Shh gene. Treatment of esophageal cancer cells with
smoothened antagonist, KAAD-cyclopamine, or the neutralizing antibodies of Shh
reduces cell growth and induces apoptosis. Overexpression of Gli1 under the CMV
promoter renders these cells resistant to the treatments. Thus, our results
indicate that elevated expression of Shh and its target genes is quite common in 
esophageal cancers. Our data also indicate that downregulation of Gli1 expression
may be an important mechanism by which KAAD-cyclopamine inhibits growth and
induces apoptosis in esophageal cancer cells.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16003737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Dev Biol. 2005 Aug 1;284(1):48-61.

Molecular interactions coordinating the development of the forebrain and face.

Marcucio RS(1), Cordero DR, Hu D, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University School
of Medicine, 257 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

From an architectural point of view, the forebrain acts as a framework upon which
the middle and upper face develops and grows. In addition to serving a structural
role, we present evidence that the forebrain is a source of signals that shape
the facial skeleton. In this study, we inhibited Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
from the neuroectoderm then examined the molecular changes and the skeletal
alterations resulting from the treatment. One of the first changes we noted was
that the dorsoventral polarity of the forebrain was disturbed, which manifested
as a loss of Shh in the ventral telencephalon, a reduction in expression of the
ventral markers Nkx2.1 and Dlx2, and a concomitant expansion of the dorsal marker
Pax6. In addition to changes in the forebrain neuroectoderm, we observed altered 
gene expression patterns in the facial ectoderm. For example, Shh was not induced
in the frontonasal ectoderm, and Ptc and Gli1 were reduced in both the ectoderm
and adjacent mesenchyme. As a consequence, a signaling center in the frontonasal 
prominence was disrupted and the prominence failed to undergo proximodistal and
mediolateral expansion. After 15 days of development, the upper beaks of the
treated embryos were truncated, and the skeletal elements were located in more
medial and proximal locations in relation to the skeletal elements of the lower
jaw elements. These data indicate that a role of Shh in the forebrain is to
regulate Shh expression in the face, and that together, these Shh domains mediate
patterning within the frontonasal prominence and proximodistal outgrowth of the
middle and upper face.

PMID: 15979605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2005 Aug;20(7):736-44.

The cartilage thickness distribution in the tibiofemoral joint and its
correlation with cartilage-to-cartilage contact.

Li G(1), Park SE, DeFrate LE, Schutzer ME, Ji L, Gill TJ, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate whether regions of
cartilage in the tibiofemoral joint where cartilage-to-cartilage contact occurred
was thicker than other regions.
DESIGN: In vivo human subjects.
BACKGROUND: The thickness of the cartilage in the knee has been investigated in
various studies. However, the factors that influence the thickness distribution
within the joint remain unclear.
METHODS: Six healthy living knees (5 male, 1 female, average age = 27) were
scanned using magnetic resonance imaging. Three-dimensional models of the tibial 
and femoral cartilage layers were created. The cartilage thickness distribution
was compared between regions where cartilage-to-cartilage contact was observed
during in vivo weightbearing flexion and regions with no contact.
RESULTS: The regions with cartilage-to-cartilage contact were significantly
thicker than the regions without cartilage-to-cartilage contact (P < 0.05). On
the medial condyle, the cartilage-to-cartilage contact regions were up to 40%
thicker than regions with no contact. On the lateral femoral condyle, the maximum
difference between these regions was 20%. On the tibial plateau, the maximal
differences between regions with and without cartilage-to-cartilage contact were 
found to be 40% on the medial side and 50% on the lateral side.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggested that in normal knees, the cartilage was thicker
in regions where cartilage-to-cartilage contact was present. Future studies
should investigate the effects of in vivo loading on cartilage maintenance and
growth. Relevance Injuries that alter knee kinematics might load regions of the
joint where the cartilage is thinner. This might alter the stress distributions
within the cartilage.

PMID: 15963613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):3103-11. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Mouse intraflagellar transport proteins regulate both the activator and repressor
functions of Gli transcription factors.

Liu A(1), Wang B, Niswander LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences
Center, Mailstop 8322, Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is an active event in which cargo is transported
along microtubules by motor proteins such as kinesin and dynein. IFT proteins are
required for the formation and maintenance of flagella and cilia. We have
previously shown that mouse mutants for two IFT proteins, IFT88 and IFT172, as
well as Kif3a, a subunit of mouse kinesin 2, exhibit ventral spinal cord
patterning defects that appear to result from reduced hedgehog (Hh) signaling.
Although genetic epistasis experiments place IFT proteins downstream of the Hh
receptor and upstream of the Gli transcription factors, the mechanism by which
IFT regulates Gli function is unknown. The developing limb provides an excellent 
system to study Hh signaling, in particular as it allows a biological and
molecular readout of both Gli activator and repressor function. Here we report
that homozygous mutants for flexo (Fxo), a hypomorphic allele of mouse IFT88
generated in our ENU mutagenesis screen, exhibit polydactyly in all four limbs.
Molecular analysis indicates that expression domains of multiple posteriorly
restricted genes are expanded anteriorly in the mutant limbs, similar to loss of 
Gli3 transcriptional repressor function. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression is
normal, yet Ptch1 and Gli1, two known targets of Hh signaling, are greatly
reduced, consistent with loss of Shh signaling. Expression of Gli3 and Hand2 in
the mutant limb indicates that the limb prepattern is abnormal. In addition, we
show that partial loss-of-function mutations in another mouse IFT gene, Ift52
(Ngd5), result in similar phenotypes and abnormal Hh signaling as Fxo, indicating
a general requirement for IFT proteins in Hh signaling and patterning of multiple
organs. Analysis of Ift88 and Shh double mutants indicates that, in mouse, IFT
proteins are required for both Gli activator and repressor functions, and Gli
proteins are insensitive to Hh ligand in the absence of IFT proteins. Finally,
our biochemical studies demonstrate that IFT proteins are required for
proteolytic processing of Gli3 in mouse embryos. In summary, our results indicate
that IFT function is crucial in the control of both the positive and negative
transcriptional activities of Gli proteins, and essential for Hh ligand-induced
signaling cascade.

PMID: 15930098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jul;233(3):829-36.

Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates the expression of insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-6 during fetal prostate development.

Lipinski RJ(1), Cook CH, Barnett DH, Gipp JJ, Peterson RE, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

At the onset of ductal morphogenesis in the developing prostate, Shh expression
condenses at evaginations of urogenital sinus epithelium and activates Gli
transcription factors in the adjacent mesenchyme. Abrogation of Hedgehog
signaling disrupts proper prostatic budding, ductal growth, and branching. We now
show that Hedgehog signaling regulates the expression of insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-6 (Igfbp-6) in the developing mouse prostate. Igfbp-6 is a
secreted factor that specifically binds insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II),
prevents its binding to the IGF-I receptor, and is thought to regulate the
activity of IGF-II in growth and differentiation. Igfbp-6 is expressed in both
the developing and adult prostate. In the urogenital sinus, Igfbp-6 mRNA
colocalized with Ptc1 and Gli1 mRNA in the mesenchyme, while Igfbp-6 protein was 
found in both the mesenchymal and epithelial layers. Exogenous Shh peptide
induced expression of Igfbp-6 in the developing prostate while the chemical
inhibitor of Hedgehog signaling, cyclopamine, reduced its expression. These
studies show that Igfbp-6 is an actual target of Shh signaling in the urogenital 
sinus and provide the first evidence for a linkage between the Hedgehog and IGF
signaling pathways in prostate development.

PMID: 15906375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Carcinogenesis. 2005 Oct;26(10):1698-705. Epub 2005 May 19.

Frequent activation of the hedgehog pathway in advanced gastric adenocarcinomas.

Ma X(1), Chen K, Huang S, Zhang X, Adegboyega PA, Evers BM, Zhang H, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, Shandong
University, Jinan, PR China.

The hedgehog pathway plays a critical role in the development of the foregut.
Recent studies indicate that the hedgehog pathway activation occurs in the
stomach and other gastrointestinal cancers. However, the association of hedgehog 
pathway activation with tumor stage, differentiation and tumor subtype is not
well documented. Here, we report our findings that the elevated expression of
hedgehog target genes human patched gene 1 (PTCH1) or Gli1 occurs in 63 of the 99
primary gastric cancers. Activation of the hedgehog pathway is associated with
poorly differentiated and more aggressive tumors. The sonic hedgehog (Shh)
transcript is localized to the cancer tissue, whereas expression of Gli1 and
PTCH1 is observed both in the cancer and in the surrounding stroma. Treatment of 
gastric cancer cells with KAAD-cyclopamine, a hedgehog signaling inhibitor,
decreases expression of Gli1 and PTCH1, resulting in cell growth inhibition and
apoptosis. Overexpression of Gli1 under the control of the cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
promoter renders these cells resistant to cyclopamine-induced apoptosis. Thus,
our analysis of in vivo tissues indicates that the hedgehog pathway is frequently
activated in advanced gastric adenocarcinomas; our in vitro studies suggest that 
hedgehog signaling contributes to gastric cancer cell growth. These data predict 
that targeted inhibition of the hedgehog pathway may be effective in the
prevention and treatment of advanced gastric adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 15905200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dev Biol. 2005 Jun 15;282(2):550-70.

Gli function is essential for motor neuron induction in zebrafish.

Vanderlaan G(1), Tyurina OV, Karlstrom RO, Chandrasekhar A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211,
USA.

The Gli family of zinc-finger transcription factors mediates Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling in all vertebrates. However, their roles in ventral neural tube
patterning, in particular motor neuron induction, appear to have diverged across 
species. For instance, cranial motor neurons are essentially lost in zebrafish
detour (gli1(-)) mutants, whereas motor neuron development is unaffected in mouse
single gli and some double gli knockouts. Interestingly, the expression of some
Hh-regulated genes (ptc1, net1a, gli1) is mostly unaffected in the detour mutant 
hindbrain, suggesting that other Gli transcriptional activators may be involved. 
To better define the roles of the zebrafish gli genes in motor neuron induction
and in Hh-regulated gene expression, we examined these processes in you-too (yot)
mutants, which encode dominant repressor forms of Gli2 (Gli2(DR)), and following 
morpholino-mediated knockdown of gli1, gli2, and gli3 function. Motor neuron
induction at all axial levels was reduced in yot (gli2(DR)) mutant embryos. In
addition, Hh target gene expression at all axial levels except in rhombomere 4
was also reduced, suggesting an interference with the function of other Glis.
Indeed, morpholino-mediated knockdown of Gli2(DR) protein in yot mutants led to a
suppression of the defective motor neuron phenotype. However, gli2 knockdown in
wild-type embryos generated no discernable motor neuron phenotype, while gli3
knockdown reduced motor neuron induction in the hindbrain and spinal cord.
Significantly, gli2 or gli3 knockdown in detour (gli1(-)) mutants revealed roles 
for Gli2 and Gli3 activator functions in ptc1 expression and spinal motor neuron 
induction. Similarly, gli1 or gli3 knockdown in yot (gli2(DR)) mutants resulted
in severe or complete loss of motor neurons, and of ptc1 and net1a expression, in
the hindbrain and spinal cord. In addition, gli1 expression was greatly reduced
in yot mutants following gli3, but not gli1, knockdown, suggesting that Gli3
activator function is specifically required for gli1 expression. These
observations demonstrate that Gli activator function (encoded by gli1, gli2, and 
gli3) is essential for motor neuron induction and Hh-regulated gene expression in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC2219918
PMID: 15890329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Orthop Res. 2005 May;23(3):536-41.

Anterior tibial post impingement in a posterior stabilized total knee
arthroplasty.

Li G(1), Papannagari R, Most E, Park SE, Johnson T, Tanamal L, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, 02114, USA. gli1@partners.org

Despite the numerous long-term success reports of posterior stabilized (PS) total
knee arthroplasty (TKA), recent retrieval studies of various PS TKA designs
revealed wear and deformation on the anterior side of the tibial post. This study
investigated the mechanisms of anterior impingement of the post with the femoral 
component. Seven cadaveric knees were tested to study kinematics and tibial post 
biomechanics during simulated heel strike using an in vitro robotic testing
system. Intact knee kinematics and in situ anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
forces were determined at hyperextension (0 degree to -9 degrees) and low flexion
angles (0 degrees to 30 degrees) under the applied loads. The same knee was
reconstructed using a PS TKA. The kinematics and the tibial post contact forces
of the TKA were measured under the same loading condition. The ACL in the intact 
knee carried load and contributed to knee stability at low flexion angles and
hyperextension. After TKA, substantial in situ contact forces (252.4 +/- 173 N at
9 degrees of hyperextension) occurred in the tibial post, indicating anterior
impingement with the femoral component. Consequently, the TKA showed less
posterior femoral translation compared to the intact knee after the impingement. 
At 9 degrees of hyperextension, the medial condyle of the intact knee translated 
0.1 +/- 1.1 mm whereas the medial condyle of the TKA knee translated 5.6 +/- 6.9 
mm anteriorly. The lateral condyle of the intact knee translated 1.5 +/- 1.0 mm
anteriorly whereas the lateral condyle of the TKA knee translated 2.1 +/- 5.8 mm 
anteriorly. The data demonstrated that anterior tibial post impingement functions
as a substitute for the ACL during hyperextension, contributing to anterior
stability. However, anterior post impingement may result in additional
polyethylene wear and tibial post failure. Transmitted impingement forces might
cause backside wear and component loosening. Understanding the advantages and
disadvantages of the tibial post function at low flexion angles may help to
further improve component design and surgical techniques and thus enhance knee
stability and component longevity after TKA.

PMID: 15885472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Trends Mol Med. 2005 May;11(5):199-203.

Interference with HH-GLI signaling inhibits prostate cancer.

Stecca B(1), Mas C, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, 8242 CMU, 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The Hedgehog-Gli (Hh-Gli) signaling pathway controls many aspects of tissue
patterning, cell proliferation, differentiation and regeneration and regulates
cell number in various organs. In adults, the Hh-Gli pathway remains active in a 
number of stem cells and regenerating tissues. Inappropriate and uncontrolled
HH-GLI pathway activation has been demonstrated in a variety of human cancers.
Three recent papers show that components of the pathway are expressed in human
prostate tumors and, more importantly, that prostate cancers depend on sustained 
HH-GLI signaling. These data raise the possibility of a new therapeutic approach 
to treat this often lethal disease.

PMID: 15882606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Int J Cancer. 2005 Oct 20;117(1):82-9.

Subtype-specific expression and genetic alterations of the chemokinereceptor gene
CXCR4 in medulloblastomas.

Schüller U(1), Koch A, Hartmann W, Garrè ML, Goodyer CG, Cama A, Sörensen N,
Wiestler OD, Pietsch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn,
Germany.

Recent findings indicate that the chemokine receptor Cxcr4 is essential for
normal development of the cerebellar cortex. As medulloblastomas (MBs), the most 
common malignant brain tumors of childhood, are believed to arise from neuronal
cerebellar precursors, we asked whether there is a potential role for Cxcr4 in
the pathogenesis of MB. RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry revealed expression of
Cxcr4 in different variants of MBs. Whereas 18/20 classic MBs showed very low
levels of CXCR4 mRNA, high amounts were expressed in 17/18 desmoplastic and 6/7
extensively nodular MBs. In addition, a significant correlation of high CXCR4
mRNA levels and presence of the neurotrophin receptor p75NTR or expression of
ATOH1 and GLI1 suggests that CXCR4 is a reliable marker for tumors derived from
the cerebellar external granular layer. Because Cxcr4 is important for migration 
and cell cycle control of granular precursors, we screened for mutations in the
coding region by SSCP and gene sequencing. In a series of 90 MBs and 8 MB cell
lines, we found one germline and one somatic mutation resulting in amino acid
substitutions in the first (Ile53Leu) and second (Asp97Asn) transmembrane
regions, respectively. These data suggest that Cxcr4 may be involved in the
pathogenesis of MBs.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15880586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Endocrinology. 2005 Aug;146(8):3558-66. Epub 2005 May 5.

Hedgehog signaling in mouse ovary: Indian hedgehog and desert hedgehog from
granulosa cells induce target gene expression in developing theca cells.

Wijgerde M(1), Ooms M, Hoogerbrugge JW, Grootegoed JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproduction and Development, Erasmus University Medical Center,
P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.wijgerde@erasmusmc.nl

Follicle development in the mammalian ovary requires interactions among the
oocyte, granulosa cells, and theca cells, coordinating gametogenesis and
steroidogenesis. Here we show that granulosa cells of growing follicles in mouse 
ovary act as a source of hedgehog signaling. Expression of Indian hedgehog and
desert hedgehog mRNAs initiates in granulosa cells at the primary follicle stage,
and we find induced expression of the hedgehog target genes Ptch1 and Gli1, in
the surrounding pre-theca cell compartment. Cyclopamine, a highly specific
hedgehog signaling antagonist, inhibits this induced expression of target genes
in cultured neonatal mouse ovaries. The theca cell compartment remains a target
of hedgehog signaling throughout follicle development, showing induced expression
of the hedgehog target genes Ptch1, Ptch2, Hip1, and Gli1. In periovulatory
follicles, a dynamic synchrony between loss of hedgehog expression and loss of
induced target gene expression is observed. Oocytes are unable to respond to
hedgehog because they lack expression of the essential signal transducer Smo
(smoothened). The present results point to a prominent role of hedgehog signaling
in the communication between granulosa cells and developing theca cells.

PMID: 15878962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Lab Invest. 2005 Jul;85(7):921-31.

Patterns of gene amplification in gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST).

Tornillo L(1), Duchini G, Carafa V, Lugli A, Dirnhofer S, Di Vizio D, Boscaino A,
Russo R, Tapia C, Schneider-Stock R, Sauter G, Insabato L, Terracciano LM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, CH-4003 Basel, Switzerland.
tornillol@uhbs.ch

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are the most common primary mesenchymal
tumors of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). They represent a wide
clinico-pathological spectrum of tumors. No single histological or clinical
parameter can predict the prognosis while the response to therapy is related to
the type of KIT or PDGFRA mutation. Cytogenetic and CGH studies have identified
frequent gross chromosomal aberrations but the target genes of these changes are 
unknown. To determine whether known oncogenes take part in genomic rearrangements
and to investigate the potential clinical significance of their amplifications,
nine known oncogenes (CMYC, MDM2, GLI1, CDK4, HER2, EGFR1, CCND1, FGF3, EMS) were
analyzed by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) on a tissue microarray (TMA)
containing 94 primary GIST. Clinical follow-up information was available for 57
of these patients. Amplification was found for CMYC in three of 90 (3.3%), for
MDM2 in five of 94 (5.3%), for EGFR1 in five of 94 (5.3%), and for CCND1 in seven
of 79 (8.9%) evaluable cases. No amplifications were seen for HER2, GLI1, CDK4,
FGF3, and EMS. Amplifications of MDM2 and CCND1 were associated with clinical and
histological malignancy. In conclusion, our data show that gene amplification
does occur in a subset of GIST. Identification of MDM2/CCND1 amplification may
represent another molecular feature that could help in the evaluation of the
behavior of GISTs.

PMID: 15864317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jun;233(2):313-25.

Shh signaling in limb bud ectoderm: potential role in teratogen-induced postaxial
ectrodactyly.

Bell SM(1), Schreiner CM, Goetz JA, Robbins DJ, Scott WJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. sheila.belle@cchmc.org

A variety of teratogens induce the loss of postaxial forelimb structures when
administered during mid-gestation to the mouse. Previous studies demonstrated
that teratogen exposure is associated with a reduction in zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA) -related polarizing activity without a noticeable loss of Shh
expression. Herein, we quantitatively confirm that expression of Shh, Ptch1, and 
Gli3 are unaltered by teratogen exposure and demonstrate that sonic hedgehog
(Shh) translation is unaffected. Examination of the polarizing response of host
chick wings to teratogen-exposed ZPA tissue revealed an induced growth response
and ectopic induction of Fgf4, Bmp2, Ptch1, and Gli1 expression similar to
control ZPA tissue. Control ZPA tissue altered the fate of cells destined to die 
in the anterior necrotic zone, whereas cell death ensued in hosts receiving
teratogen-exposed grafts. Immunohistochemical studies localized Shh protein in
the mouse limb to the posterior mesoderm and overlying ectoderm. We postulate
that teratogen exposure alters the ability of Shh to signal to the ectoderm and
present microarray and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction data,
indicating that Shh signaling could occur in the limb bud ectoderm.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15858818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Clin Invest. 2005 Apr;115(4):900-9.

An inversion involving the mouse Shh locus results in brachydactyly through
dysregulation of Shh expression.

Niedermaier M(1), Schwabe GC, Fees S, Helmrich A, Brieske N, Seemann P, Hecht J, 
Seitz V, Stricker S, Leschik G, Schrock E, Selby PB, Mundlos S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2005 Apr;115(4):833-6.

Short digits (Dsh) is a radiation-induced mouse mutant. Homozygous mice are
characterized by multiple defects strongly resembling those resulting from Sonic 
hedgehog (Shh) inactivation. Heterozygous mice show a limb reduction phenotype
with fusion and shortening of the proximal and middle phalanges in all digits,
similar to human brachydactyly type A1, a condition caused by mutations in Indian
hedgehog (IHH). We mapped Dsh to chromosome 5 in a region containing Shh and were
able to demonstrate an inversion comprising 11.7 Mb. The distal breakpoint is
13.298 kb upstream of Shh, separating the coding sequence from several putative
regulatory elements identified by interspecies comparison. The inversion results 
in almost complete downregulation of Shh expression during E9.5-E12.5, explaining
the homozygous phenotype. At E13.5 and E14.5, however, Shh is upregulated in the 
phalangeal anlagen of Dsh/+ mice, at a time point and in a region where WT Shh is
never expressed. The dysregulation of Shh expression causes the local
upregulation of hedgehog target genes such as Gli1-3, patched, and Pthlh, as well
as the downregulation of Ihh and Gdf5. This results in shortening of the digits
through an arrest of chondrocyte differentiation and the disruption of joint
development.

PMCID: PMC1070420
PMID: 15841179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Pathol. 2005 Jun;206(2):143-50.

Dysregulation of hedgehog signalling predisposes to synovial chondromatosis.

Hopyan S(1), Nadesan P, Yu C, Wunder J, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Synovial chondromatosis is a condition affecting joints in which metaplastic
cartilage nodules arise from the synovium, causing pain, joint dysfunction, and
ultimately joint destruction. Because dysregulation of hedgehog signalling is a
feature of several benign cartilaginous tumours, expression of the hedgehog
target genes PTC1 and GLI1 was examined in this study in samples from human
synovial chondromatosis. Significantly higher expression levels were found in
synovial chondromatosis than in the synovium, from which it arises. To determine 
if hedgehog-mediated transcription predisposes to synovial chondromatosis, the
extra-toes mutant mouse, which harbours a heterozygous mutation in the hedgehog
transcriptional repressor, Gli3, resulting in decreased expression of Gli3
protein, was studied. The extra-toes mutant mouse has a phenotype consistent with
overactive hedgehog signalling, suggesting that Gli3 acts as a transcriptional
repressor of limb development. Eighty-five per cent of Gli3 mutant mice developed
synovial chondromatosis at 18 months of age, compared with 30% of wild-type
littermates (p < 0.05). Three of the ten Gli3 mutant mice treated with
triparanol, which blocks hedgehog signalling upstream of the Gli transcription
factors, developed synovial chondromatosis, compared with eight of ten control
mice. These data demonstrate that hedgehog signalling plays an important role in 
the development of synovial chondromatosis and suggest that blockade of hedgehog 
signalling may be a potential treatment for this disorder.

Copyright 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 15834844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Differentiation. 2005 Mar;73(2-3):109-19.

Gli1 is not required for Pdgfralpha expression during mouse embryonic
development.

Zhang XQ(1), Afink GB, Hu XR, Forsberg-Nilsson K, Nistér M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Pdgfra is expressed in the mesenchyme of multiple organs during embryonic
development and Pdgfralpha is involved in cell proliferation, differentiation,
migration, and apoptosis in many tissues. A fine-tuned regulation of gene
transcription is required to achieve these effects. To investigate if the Shh
signaling pathway is involved in the tightly regulated Pdgfra expression during
embryogenesis, we systematically compared Gli1 and Pdgfralpha mRNA expression
patterns in vivo from mouse embryonic day 9.5 to 14.5. We found that an initial
partly overlapping expression of Gli1 and Pdgfralpha in the mesenchyme of foregut
and somites was changed to different expression patterns when the mesenchyme
differentiated into specialized structures such as intestinal villi and
chondrocytes. Gli1 and Pdgfra were also expressed differently in the developing
lung, heart, central nervous system, skin, tooth, and eye. Importantly, neither
Pdgfralpha mRNA patterns nor levels were altered in Ihh mutant embryos although
Gli1 and Ptc mRNA levels were dramatically reduced. Our results demonstrate that 
Gli1 is not required to induce Pdgfra expression during embryonic bone
development, and are consistent with previous findings that Pdgfralpha and Hh
pathways serve different functions in, e.g., bone, gut, and lung development.
However, we cannot exclude the possibility that Glis can have more complex
regulatory effects on Pdgfra gene activity, nor can we exclude such effects in
pathological conditions.

PMID: 15811134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 9;24(25):4026-36.

Gli1 is important for medulloblastoma formation in Ptc1+/- mice.

Kimura H(1), Stephen D, Joyner A, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Germline mutations in the human homolog of the patched1 (PTCH1) are associated
with basal cell nevus carcinoma syndrome (BCNS or Gorlin syndrome), which is
characterized by developmental anomalies, radiation hypersensitivity and a
predisposition to medulloblastomas and skin tumors. Patched1 (Ptc1) functions as 
a receptor for Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in a wide range of biological processes.
Binding of Shh to Ptc1 results in activation of Smoothened (Smo), which in turn
stimulates expression of downstream target genes including Ptc1 and Gli1. Gli1 is
a member of a family of DNA-binding zinc-finger proteins, including Gli2 and
Gli3, that function in transcription control. Here, we report that inactivation
of both Gli1 alleles in Ptc1+/- mice significantly reduces spontaneous
medulloblastoma formation. Therefore, Gli1 is not only a marker of pathway
activation but also plays a functional role in medulloblastoma formation.
Interestingly, Gli2 levels were elevated in medulloblastoma cells but not in
normal granule neuron precursors during cerebellar development in mice lacking
Gli1. In cultured fibroblasts, Gli1 was more potent than Gli2 at inducing cell
transformation. These results demonstrate that Gli1 plays a central role in
medulloblastoma formation in Ptc1+/- mice and that Gli2 may also contribute to
oncogenesis.

PMID: 15806168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21022-8. Epub 2005 Mar 26.

Hedgehog signaling induces cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells.

Gianakopoulos PJ(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is a critical signaling factor for a variety of
developmental pathways during embryogenesis, including the specification of
left-right asymmetry in the heart. Mice that lack Hedgehog signaling show a delay
in the induction of cardiomyogenesis, as indicated by a delayed expression of
Nkx2-5. To further examine a role for Shh in cardiomyogenesis, clonal populations
of P19 cells that stably express Shh, termed P19(Shh) cells, were isolated. In
monolayer P19(Shh) cultures the Shh pathway was functional as shown by the
up-regulation of Ptc1 and Gli1 expression, but no cardiac muscle markers were
activated. However, Shh expression induced cardiomyogenesis following cellular
aggregation, resulting in the expression of factors expressed in cardiac muscle
including GATA-4, MEF2C, and Nkx2-5. Furthermore, aggregated P19 cell lines
expressing Gli2 or Meox1 also up-regulated the expression of cardiac muscle
factors, leading to cardiomyogenesis. Meox1 up-regulated the expression of Gli1
and Gli2 and, thus, can modify the Shh signaling pathway. Finally, Shh, Gli2, and
Meox1 all up-regulated BMP-4 expression, implying that activation of the Hedgehog
pathway can regulate bone morphogenetic protein signals. Taken together, we
propose a model in which Shh, functioning via Gli1/2, can specify mesodermal
cells into the cardiac muscle lineage.

PMID: 15793308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Am J Pathol. 2005 Apr;166(4):1153-62.

Insulin-like growth factor II is involved in the proliferation control of
medulloblastoma and its cerebellar precursor cells.

Hartmann W(1), Koch A, Brune H, Waha A, Schüller U, Dani I, Denkhaus D, Langmann 
W, Bode U, Wiestler OD, Schilling K, Pietsch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center,
Sigmund-Freud-St. 25, D-53105 Bonn, Germany.

Medulloblastomas (MBs), the most frequent malignant brain tumors of childhood,
presumably originate from cerebellar neural precursor cells. An essential fetal
mitogen involved in the pathogenesis of different embryonal tumors is
insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II). We screened human MB biopsies of the
classic (CMB) and desmoplastic (DMB) variants for IGF2 transcripts of the four
IGF2 promoters. We found IGF2 transcription from the imprinted promoter P3 to be 
significantly increased in the desmoplastic variant compared to the classic
subgroup. This was not a result of loss of imprinting of IGF2 in desmoplastic
tumors. We next examined the interaction of IGF-II and Sonic hedgehog (Shh),
which serves as a critical mitogen for cerebellar granule cell precursors (GCPs) 
in the external granule cell layer from which DMBs are believed to originate.
Mutations of genes encoding components of the Shh-Patched signaling pathway occur
in approximately 50% of DMBs. To analyze the effects of IGF-II on Hedgehog
signaling, we cultured murine GCP and human MB cells in the presence of Shh and
Igf-II. In GCPs, a synergistic effect of Shh and Igf-II on proliferation and gli1
and cyclin D1 mRNA expression was found. Igf-II, but not Shh, induced
phosphorylation of Akt and its downstream target Gsk-3beta. In six of nine human 
MB cell lines IGF-II displayed a growth-promoting effect that was mediated mainly
through the IGF-I receptor. Together, our data point to an important role of
IGF-II for the proliferation control of both cerebellar neural precursors and MB 
cells.

PMCID: PMC1602379
PMID: 15793295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Apr;42(4):183-92.

Localization of the human hedgehog-interacting protein (Hip) in the normal and
diseased pancreas.

Kayed H(1), Kleeff J, Esposito I, Giese T, Keleg S, Giese N, Büchler MW, Friess
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer
Feld 110, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive malignancy with a poor
prognosis. Previously, it has been shown that Indian hedgehog (Ihh) and its two
signaling receptors patched (Ptc) and smoothened (Smo) are involved in the
pathogenesis of chronic pancreatitis (CP) and PDAC. In the current study we
analyzed the expression, distribution, and function of another component of this 
signaling pathway, the human hedgehog-interacting protein (Hip), in the normal
pancreas, CP and PDAC utilizing real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR), immunohistochemistry,
immunofluorescence, Hip siRNA transfection, cell growth assays, and cell cycle
analysis. By QRT-PCR, Hip mRNA levels were fifteenfold and fourteenfold increased
in CP (n = 22) and PDAC (n = 31) tissues, respectively, compared to normal
pancreatic tissues (n=20) and correlated with glioma associated antigen (Gli1)
but not Ptc or Protein kinase A (PKA) mRNA levels. Only SU-8686 and BxPC-3
pancreatic cancer cells expressed Hip mRNA, whereas expression was below the
level of detection in the other six pancreatic cancer cell lines tested. As shown
by immunohistochemistry, Hip was expressed in normal pancreatic tissues mainly in
the cytoplasm of islet cells and in smooth muscle cells of blood vessels. In
contrast, in CP and PDAC there was a different distribution and staining
intensity within the islets. Moreover, Hip immunoreactivity was observed in the
tubular complexes, PanIN 1-3 lesions, as well as in pancreatic cancer cells.
Incubation of pancreatic cancer cell lines with recombinant Hip revealed a growth
inhibitory effect in SU-8686 and Capan-1 pancreatic cancer cells and no effect on
cell growth in the other tested cell lines. In addition, silencing of Hip
expression using specific siRNA molecules increased the growth of SU-8686 cells. 
In conclusion, Hip is expressed in the normal pancreas, CP and PDAC tissues. The 
different pattern of Hip expression and abnormal localization in the diseased
pancreas suggest that the enhanced activation of hedgehog signaling in CP and
PDAC is-at least in part-due to the aberrant responsiveness and expression of Hip
in these diseases.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15754313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 1;65(5):1619-26.

Gene expression profiles in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia reflect the
effects of Hedgehog signaling on pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.

Prasad NB(1), Biankin AV, Fukushima N, Maitra A, Dhara S, Elkahloun AG, Hruban
RH, Goggins M, Leach SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Invasive pancreatic cancer is thought to develop through a series of noninvasive 
duct lesions known as pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). We used cDNA 
microarrays interrogating 15,000 transcripts to identify 49 genes that were
differentially expressed in microdissected early PanIN lesions (PanIN-1B/2)
compared with microdissected normal duct epithelium. In this analysis, a cluster 
of extrapancreatic foregut markers, including pepsinogen C, MUC6, KLF4, and TFF1,
was found to be up-regulated in PanIN. Up-regulation of these genes was further
validated using combinations of real-time reverse transcription-PCR, in situ
hybridization, and immunohistochemistry in a total of 150 early PanIN lesions
from 81 patients. Identification of these gastrointestinal transcripts in human
PanIN prompted assessment of other foregut markers by both semiquantitative and
real-time reverse transcription-PCR, revealing similar up-regulation of Sox-2,
Gastrin, HoxA5, GATA4/5/6, Villin and Forkhead 6 (Foxl1). In contrast to frequent
expression of multiple gastric epithelial markers, the intestinal markers
intestinal fatty acid binding protein, CDX1 and CDX2 were rarely expressed either
in PanIN lesions or in invasive pancreatic cancer. Hedgehog pathway activation
induced by transfection of immortalized human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells 
with Gli1 resulted in up-regulation of the majority of foregut markers seen in
early PanIN lesions. These data show frequent up-regulation of foregut markers in
early PanIN lesions and suggest that PanIN development may involve
Hedgehog-mediated conversion to a gastric epithelial differentiation program.

PMID: 15753353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 2;24(24):3896-905.

Expression analysis of genes involved in brain tumor progression driven by
retroviral insertional mutagenesis in mice.

Johansson FK(1), Göransson H, Westermark B.

Author information: 
(1)The Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Pathology, University
Hospital, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Retroviral tagging previously identified putative cancer-causing genes in a mouse
brain tumor model where a recombinant Moloney murine leukemia virus encoding the 
platelet-derived growth factor B-chain (MMLV/PDGFB) was intracerebrally injected 
in newborn mice. In the present study, expression analysis using cDNA arrays
revealed several similarities of virus-induced mouse gliomas with human brain
tumors. Brain tumors with short latency contained on average 8.0 retroviral
insertions and resembled human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) whereas long-latency
gliomas were of lower grade, similar to human oligodendroglioma (OD) and had 2.3 
insertions per tumor. Several known and novel genes of tumor progression or cell 
markers were differentially expressed between OD- and GBM-like tumors. Array and 
quantitative real-time PCR analysis demonstrated elevated expression similar to
Pdgfralpha of retrovirally tagged genes Abhd2, Ddr1, Fos, Ng2, Ppfibp1, Rad51b
and Sulf2 in both glioma types compared to neonatal and adult normal brain. The
retrovirally tagged genes Plekhb1, Prex1, Prkg2, Sox10 and 1200004M23Rik were
upregulated in the tumors but had a different expression profile than Pdgfralpha 
whereas Rap1gap, Gli1, Neurl and Camk2b were downregulated in the tumors. The
present study accentuates the proposed role of the retrovirally tagged genes in
PDGF-driven gliomagenesis and indicates that insertional mutagenesis can promote 
glioma progression.

PMID: 15750623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Gene Expr Patterns. 2005 Apr;5(4):529-31. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

Asymmetric expression of Gli transcription factors in Hensen's node.

Granata A(1), Quaderi NA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th Floor
New Hunt's House, Guy's Hospital Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Avian left-right (L/R) axis determination involves the establishment of
asymmetric gene expression in Hensen's node, resulting in two discrete signalling
pathways on the left and right sides of the embryo. The extracellular signalling 
molecule Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) is known to be an important left-side determinant. 
Transcription of Shh is initially bilateral in Hensen's node (stage 4), but is
restricted to the left side by stage 5. The Gli genes (Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3) are
the main transcriptional mediators of the Hedgehog pathway in vertebrates. GLI1
and GLI2 are primarily transcriptional activators of Hedgehog target genes, while
GLI3 is primarily a transcriptional repressor of Hedgehog targets. In order to
gain insight into the mechanisms of asymmetrical Hedgehog signal transduction in 
the node, we have analysed the expression patterns of the Gli genes in Hensen's
node from stage 4 to stage 8. Here, we reveal that the Gli genes are
asymmetrically expressed in Hensen's node: Gli1 and Gli2, are expressed on the
left side, while Gli3 is expressed on the right side.

PMID: 15749082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Orthop Res. 2005 Mar;23(2):340-4.

In vivo kinematics of the ACL during weight-bearing knee flexion.

Li G(1), Defrate LE, Rubash HE, Gill TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, GRJ 1215 Boston, MA,
USA. gli1@partners.org

Erratum in
    J Orthop Res. 2005 Jul;23(4):977.

No study has investigated the three-dimensional morphological changes of the
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) during functional activities in vivo. The
purpose of this study was to analyze the elongation, rotation (twist), and
orientation of the ACL during weight-bearing flexion in five human subjects using
dual-orthogonal fluoroscopic images and MR image-based computer models. The ACL
consistently decreased in length with flexion. At 90 degrees , the length
decreased by 10% compared to its length at full extension. The ACL twisted
internally by only 20 degrees at 30 degrees of flexion. The ACL was oriented more
vertically (approximately 60 degrees ) and slightly laterally (approximately 10
degrees ) at low flexion angles. These data on in vivo ligament elongation
demonstrate that the ACL plays a more important role in lower flexion angles than
at higher flexion angles during weight-bearing flexion. These data also suggest
that successful ACL reconstruction should not only restore the ligament's
elongation behavior, but also its rotational and orientation characteristics, so 
that normal ACL biomechanics are restored.

PMID: 15734246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Mar 25;328(4):867-73.

Expression profile of Xenopus banded hedgehog, a homolog of mouse Indian
hedgehog, is related to the late development of endochondral ossification in
Xenopus laevis.

Moriishi T(1), Shibata Y, Tsukazaki T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Pathology and Bone Metabolism, Department of Developmental
and Reconstructive Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.

Late development of endochondral ossification occurs at the boundary between the 
growth cartilage and bone marrow during the formation of long bones in Xenopus
laevis. Since the Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is involved in endochondral ossification 
in mouse, we investigated the expression of Xenopus banded hedgehog (X-bhh),
which is a homolog of mouse Ihh. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that the X-bhh mRNA
was detected from an early stage of limb formation to formation of femurs in
mature frogs, and it was associated with the expression of Xenopus-ptc1 (X-ptc1),
Xenopus-gli1 (X-gli1), Xenopus-type II collagen (X-col II), Xenopus-runx2
(X-runx2), and Xenopus-osteocalcin (X-ocn) mRNAs. In situ hybridization revealed 
that chondrogenic cells observed at early limb development expressed X-bhh and
X-gli1. At later stages of limb development, chondrocytes, located slightly away 
from the boundary between the cartilage and bone marrow, expressed the X-bhh,
X-ptc1, and X-gli1 mRNAs; however, the mesenchymal cells at the boundary failed
to express these mRNAs. The X-bhh, X-ptc1, and X-gli1 mRNAs as well as those of
X-runx2 and X-ocn were expressed by the mesenchymal cells in the periosteal
region at the tip of the cortical bone, indicating an intimate relationship
between X-bhh expression and bone formation in this region. Considered
collectively, the present study suggests that X-bhh evolutionally acquired the
function to induce osteogenesis; however, the expression profile of X-bhh in
epiphysis is closely related to the late development of endochondral ossification
in X. laevis.

PMID: 15707959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Development. 2005 Mar;132(5):1057-67. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

Indian hedgehog synchronizes skeletal angiogenesis and perichondrial maturation
with cartilage development.

Colnot C(1), de la Fuente L, Huang S, Hu D, Lu C, St-Jacques B, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0514, USA.

A null mutation in the morphogen Indian hedgehog (IHH) results in an embryonic
lethal phenotype characterized by the conspicuous absence of bony tissue in the
extremities. We show that this ossification defect is not attributable to a
permanent arrest in cartilage differentiation, since Ihh(-/-) chondrocytes
undergo hypertrophy and terminal differentiation, express angiogenic markers such
as Vegf, and are invaded, albeit aberrantly, by blood vessels. Subsequent steps, 
including vessel expansion and persistence, are impaired, and the net result is
degraded cartilage matrix that is devoid of blood vessels. The absence of blood
vessels is not because the Ihh(-/-) skeleton is anti-angiogenic; in fact, in an
ex vivo environment, both wild-type and Ihh mutant vessels invade the Ihh(-/-)
cartilage, though only wild-type vessels expand to create the marrow cavity. In
the ex vivo setting, Ihh(-/-) cells differentiate into osteoblasts and deposit a 
bony matrix, without benefit of exogenous hedgehog in the new environment. Even
more surprising is our finding that the earliest IHH-dependent skeletal defect is
obvious by the time the limb mesenchyme segregates into chondrogenic and
perichondrogenic condensations. Although Ihh(-/-) cells organize into
chondrogenic condensations similar in size and shape to wild-type condensations, 
perichondrial cells surrounding the mutant condensations are clearly faulty. They
fail to aggregate, elongate and flatten into a definitive, endothelial cell-rich 
perichondrium like their wild-type counterparts. Normally, these cells
surrounding the chondrogenic condensation are exposed to IHH, as evidenced by
their expression of the hedgehog target genes, patched (Ptch) and Gli1. In the
mutant environment, the milieu surrounding the cartilage -- comprising osteoblast
precursors and endothelial cells -- as well as the cartilage itself, develop in
the absence of this important morphogen. In conclusion, the skeletal phenotype of
Ihh(-/-) embryos represents the sum of disturbances in three separate cell
populations, the chondrocytes, the osteoblasts and the vasculature, each of which
is a direct target of hedgehog signaling.

PMID: 15689378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Dent Res. 2005 Feb;84(2):138-43.

Runx2 (Cbfa1) inhibits Shh signaling in the lower but not upper molars of mouse
embryos and prevents the budding of putative successional teeth.

Wang XP(1), Aberg T, James MJ, Levanon D, Groner Y, Thesleff I.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter,
PO Box 56, FIN-00014, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Heterozygous mutations in the RUNX2 (CBFA1) gene cause cleidocranial dysplasia,
characterized by multiple supernumerary teeth. This suggests that Runx2 inhibits 
successional tooth formation. However, in Runx2 knockout mice, molar development 
arrests at the late bud stage, and lower molars are more severely affected than
upper ones. We have proposed that compensation by Runx3 may be involved. We
compared the molar phenotypes of Runx2/Runx3 double-knockouts with those of Runx2
knockouts, but found no indication of such compensation. Shh and its mediators
Ptc1, Ptc2, and Gli1 were down-regulated only in the lower but not the upper
molars of Runx2 and Runx2/Runx3 knockouts. Interestingly, in front of the mutant 
upper molar, a prominent epithelial bud protruded lingually with active Shh
signaling. Similar buds were also present in Runx2 heterozygotes, and they may
represent the extension of dental lamina for successional teeth. The results
suggest that Runx2 prevents the formation of Shh-expressing buds for successional
teeth.

PMID: 15668330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Br J Dermatol. 2005 Jan;152(1):43-51.

Somatic mutations in the PTCH, SMOH, SUFUH and TP53 genes in sporadic basal cell 
carcinomas.

Reifenberger J(1), Wolter M, Knobbe CB, Köhler B, Schönicke A, Scharwächter C,
Kumar K, Blaschke B, Ruzicka T, Reifenberger G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstrasse 5, D-40225
Düsseldorf, Germany. reifenbergerj@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

BACKGROUND: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin is the most common human
cancer. The genetic alterations underlying BCC development are only partly
understood.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate further the molecular genetics of sporadic BCCs, we
performed mutation analyses of 10 skin cancer-associated genes in 42 tumours.
METHODS: Single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis followed by DNA
sequencing was used to screen for mutations in the sonic hedgehog pathway genes
PTCH, SMOH, SUFUH and GLI1, in the TP53 tumour suppressor gene, and in the
proto-oncogenes NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF and CTNNB1. Microsatellite markers
flanking the PTCH, SUFUH and TP53 loci at 9q22, 10q24 and 17p13, respectively,
were studied for loss of heterozygosity (LOH).
RESULTS: PTCH mutations were found in 28 of 42 tumours (67%). Microsatellite
analysis revealed LOH on 9q22 in 20 of 38 tumours investigated (53%), including
14 tumours with and six tumours without PTCH mutations. SMOH mutations were
identified in four of the 42 BCCs (10%) while two tumours demonstrated mutations 
in SUFUH, including one missense mutation and one silent mutation. None of the
BCCs showed LOH at markers flanking the SUFUH locus. Seventeen BCCs (40%) carried
TP53 mutations, with only three tumours showing evidence of biallelic TP53
inactivation. TP53 mutations were present in BCCs with and without mutations in
PTCH, SMOH or SUFUH. Interestingly, 72% of the TP53 alterations were presumably
ultraviolet (UV)-induced transition mutations. In contrast, only 40% of the PTCH 
and SMOH alterations corresponded to UV signature mutations. No mutations were
identified in GLI1, NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF or CTNNB1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm the importance of PTCH, SMOH and TP53 mutations in 
the pathogenesis of sporadic BCCs. SUFUH alterations are restricted to individual
cases while the other investigated genes do not appear to be important targets
for mutations in BCCs.

PMID: 15656799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Int J Oncol. 2005 Feb;26(2):545-9.

Identification and characterization of rat Desert hedgehog and Indian hedgehog
genes in silico.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Desert hedgehog (DHH) and Indian hedgehog (IHH) bind to
Patched family receptors (PTCH1 and PTCH2) to transduce signals to GLI1, GLI2 and
GLI3. GLI family transcription factors then activate transcription of Hedgehog
target genes, such as FOXE1 and FOXM1 encoding Forkhead-box transcription
factors. Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in a variety of human
tumors, such as gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer, breast
cancer, prostate cancer, basal cell carcinoma and brain tumors. Rat orthologs for
human DHH and IHH remain to be identified. Here, we identified and characterized 
rat Dhh and Ihh genes by using bioinformatics. Rat Dhh complete coding sequence
(CDS) was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 426397-426963,
429715-429976 and 430244-430898 of the AC114446.3 genome sequence. Rat Ihh
complete CDS was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 63433-64033,
66432-66693 and 68242-69169 of AC095777.6 genome sequence. Rat Dhh mRNA was
expressed in prostate, duodenum and dorsal root ganglia, while rat Ihh mRNA was
expressed in cartilage. Rat Dhh showed 99.7% total-amino-acid identity with mouse
Dhh, and 96.5% total-amino-acid identity with human DHH. Rat Ihh and human IHH
were shorter than mouse Ihh by 38 amino acids. Rat Ihh showed 97.6%
total-amino-acid identity with mouse Ihh and 94.4% total-amino-acid identity with
human IHH. Hedgehog family proteins consist of signal peptide, Hedgehog ligand
peptide and C-terminal peptide. Hedgehog ligand peptides derived from mammalian
Hedgehog family proteins were conserved well, while C-terminal peptides were
relatively divergent. The HPLGMXXXXS motif in the C-terminus was conserved in Shh
orthologs and Ihh orthologs, but not in Dhh orthologs.

PMID: 15645142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Dev Biol. 2005 Jan 15;277(2):537-56.

Zebrafish Gli3 functions as both an activator and a repressor in Hedgehog
signaling.

Tyurina OV(1), Guner B, Popova E, Feng J, Schier AF, Kohtz JD, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-9297,
USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates cell differentiation and patterning in a wide
variety of embryonic tissues. In vertebrates, at least three Gli transcription
factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) are involved in Hh signal transduction.
Comparative studies have revealed divergent requirements for Gli1 and Gli2 in
zebrafish and mouse. Here, we address the question of whether Gli3 function has
also diverged in zebrafish and analyze the regulatory interactions between Hh
signaling and Gli activity. We find that zebrafish Gli3 has an early function as 
an activator of Hh target genes that overlaps with Gli1 activator function in the
ventral neural tube. In vitro reporter analysis shows that Gli3 cooperates with
Gli1 to activate transcription in the presence of high concentrations of Hh.
During late somitogenesis stages, Gli3 is required as a repressor of the Hh
response. Gli3 shares this repressor activity with Gli2 in the dorsal spinal
cord, hindbrain, and midbrain, but not in the forebrain. Consistently, zebrafish 
Gli3 blocks Gli1-mediated activation of a reporter gene in the absence of Hh in
vitro. In the eye, Gli3 is also required for proper ath5 expression and the
differentiation of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). These results reveal a
conserved role for Gli3 in vertebrate development and uncover novel regional
functions and regulatory interactions among gli genes.

PMID: 15617692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Dev Dyn. 2005 Feb;232(2):282-92.

Expression of the mouse Fgf15 gene is directly initiated by Sonic hedgehog
signaling in the diencephalon and midbrain.

Saitsu H(1), Komada M, Suzuki M, Nakayama R, Motoyama J, Shiota K, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted molecule that is thought to regulate tissue
growth and patterning in vertebrate embryos. Although it has been reported that
Gli transcription factors mediate Shh signaling to the nucleus, little is known
about developmental target genes of Gli. In the previous genetic study, we showed
that Shh is required for Fgf15 expression in the diencephalon and midbrain. Here,
we examined whether Fgf15 is a direct target of Shh signaling through Gli. Shh
was expressed in the midline cells and Fgf15 in the medial region of the
diencephalon/midbrain by the seven-somite stage. The Fgf15 expression domain
coincided with that of Gli1 and overlapped with that of Gli2 at this stage. Fgf15
expression in the diencephalon/midbrain was greatly reduced in the seven-somite
Shh mutant embryos. Transgenic analysis showed that the 3.6-kb 5'-flanking region
of the Fgf15 gene is sufficient for induction of Fgf15 in the medial/ventral
diencephalon/midbrain. Luciferase assay showed that the 3.6-kb Fgf15
enhancer/promoter was activated by Gli2. A Gli-binding site was located 1 kb
upstream of the transcription start site and was required for expression in the
medial/ventral diencephalon/midbrain in transgenic embryos and for activation in 
luciferase assay. These findings indicate that Fgf15 is directly regulated by Shh
signaling through Gli proteins.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15614767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Sports Med. 2005 Jan;33(1):102-7.

In vivo articular cartilage contact kinematics of the knee: an investigation
using dual-orthogonal fluoroscopy and magnetic resonance image-based computer
models.

Li G(1), DeFrate LE, Park SE, Gill TJ, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Quantifying the in vivo cartilage contact mechanics of the knee may
improve our understanding of the mechanisms of joint degeneration and may
therefore improve the surgical repair of the joint after injury.
OBJECTIVE: To measure tibiofemoral articular cartilage contact kinematics during 
in vivo knee flexion.
STUDY DESIGN: Descriptive laboratory study.
METHODS: Orthogonal fluoroscopic images and magnetic resonance image-based
computer models were used to measure the motion of the cartilage contact points
during a quasi-static lunge in 5 human subjects.
RESULTS: On the tibial plateau, the contact point moved in both the
anteroposterior and the mediolateral directions during knee flexion. On the
medial tibial plateau, flexion angle did not have a statistically significant
effect on the location of the contact points. The total translation of the
contact point from full extension to 90 degrees of flexion was less than 1.5 mm
in the anteroposterior direction, whereas the translation in the mediolateral
direction was more than 5.0 mm. In the anteroposterior direction, the contact
points were centered on the medial tibial plateau. On the lateral tibial plateau,
there was a statistically significant difference between the location of the
contact point at full extension and the locations of the contact points at other 
flexion angles in the anteroposterior direction. No significant difference was
detected between the location of the contact points at other flexion angles. The 
overall range of contact point motion was about 9.0 mm in the anteroposterior
direction and about 4.0 mm in the mediolateral direction. The contact points were
primarily on the inner half of the medial and lateral tibial plateaus (the half
closest to the tibial spine). The contact points on both femoral condyles were
also on the inner half of the condyles (near the condylar notch).
CONCLUSIONS: The tibiofemoral contact points move in 3 dimensions during
weightbearing knee flexion. The medial tibiofemoral contact points remained
within the central portion of the tibial plateau in the anteroposterior
direction. Both the medial and lateral tibiofemoral contact points were located
on the inner portions of the tibial plateau and femoral condyles (close to the
tibial spine), indicating that the tibial spine may play an important role in
knee stability.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The results of this study may provide important insight as to
the mechanisms contributing to the development of osteoarthritis after ligament
injuries.

PMID: 15611005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Cutan Pathol. 2005 Feb;32(2):131-6.

Molecular diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma and other basaloid cell neoplasms of 
the skin by the quantification of Gli1 transcript levels.

Hatta N(1), Hirano T, Kimura T, Hashimoto K, Mehregan DR, Ansai S, Takehara K,
Takata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Postgraduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Distinguishing basal cell carcinoma (BCC) from other benign and
malignant skin tumors is sometimes a difficult task for the pathologists. Because
the activation of hedgehog signals and the up-regulation of its critical
transcriptional factor Gli1 are well documented in BCC, a molecular technique
measuring Gli1 transcripts may aide the diagnosis.
METHODS: Gli1 transcript levels were measured by real-time quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using RNA extracted from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues of 68 cases of various skin tumors.
Hematoxylin and eosin-stained pathology slides were independently reviewed by
three expert dermatopathologists.
RESULTS: The histological diagnoses were unambiguous in 53 tumors. The tumors
included BCC (21), squamous cell carcinoma (13), seborrheic keratoses (8),
trichoepithelioma (5), eccrine poroma/porocarcinoma (4), and sebaceous
epithelioma/carcinoma (2). In these unambiguous cases, all BCC and
trichoepithelioma tumors showed high expression of Gli1mRNA, while the expression
was virtually absent in other tumors. The diagnosis was discordant among three
pathologists in the remaining 15 tumors. Histological diagnoses included BCC, BCC
with sebaceous differentiation, sebaceoma/sebaceous epithelioma, trichoblastoma, 
trichoepithelioma, basaloid follicular harmartoma, basosquamous carcinoma, etc.
Six of them showed high Gli1 transcript levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantification of Gli1 transcripts by RT-PCR is helpful in
discriminating BCC and trichoepithelioma from other skin tumors.

PMID: 15606671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):345-57. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Gli2 and Gli3 have redundant and context-dependent function in skeletal muscle
formation.

McDermott A(1), Gustafsson M, Elsam T, Hui CC, Emerson CP Jr, Borycki AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Firth Court,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The Gli family of zinc finger transcription factors are mediators of Shh
signalling in vertebrates. In previous studies, we showed that Shh signalling,
via an essential Gli-binding site in the Myf5 epaxial somite (ES) enhancer, is
required for the specification of epaxial muscle progenitor cells. Shh signalling
is also required for the normal mediolateral patterning of myogenic cells within 
the somite. In this study, we investigate the role and the transcriptional
activities of Gli proteins during somite myogenesis in the mouse embryo. We
report that Gli genes are differentially expressed in the mouse somite. Gli2 and 
Gli3 are essential for Gli1 expression in somites, establishing Gli2 and Gli3 as 
primary mediators and Gli1 as a secondary mediator of Shh signalling. Combining
genetic studies with the use of a transgenic mouse line expressing a reporter
gene under the control of the Myf5 epaxial somite enhancer, we show that Gli2 or 
Gli3 is required for Myf5 activation in the epaxial muscle progenitor cells.
Furthermore, Gli3, but not Gli2 represses Myf5 transcription in a dose-dependent 
manner in the absence of Shh. Finally, we provide evidence that hypaxial and
myotomal gene expression is mispatterned in Gli2-/-Gli3-/- and Gli3-/-Shh-/-
somites. Together, our data demonstrate both positive and negative regulatory
functions for Gli2 and Gli3 in the control of Myf5 activation in the epaxial
muscle progenitor cells and in dorsoventral and mediolateral patterning of the
somite.

PMID: 15604102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):335-44. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Sonic hedgehog controls stem cell behavior in the postnatal and adult brain.

Palma V(1), Lim DA, Dahmane N, Sánchez P, Brionne TC, Herzberg CD, Gitton Y,
Carleton A, Alvarez-Buylla A, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, NYU School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY
10016, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling controls many aspects of ontogeny, orchestrating
congruent growth and patterning. During brain development, Shh regulates early
ventral patterning while later on it is critical for the regulation of precursor 
proliferation in the dorsal brain, namely in the neocortex, tectum and
cerebellum. We have recently shown that Shh also controls the behavior of cells
with stem cell properties in the mouse embryonic neocortex, and additional
studies have implicated it in the control of cell proliferation in the adult
ventral forebrain and in the hippocampus. However, it remains unclear whether it 
regulates adult stem cell lineages in an equivalent manner. Similarly, it is not 
known which cells respond to Shh signaling in stem cell niches. Here we
demonstrate that Shh is required for cell proliferation in the mouse forebrain's 
subventricular zone (SVZ) stem cell niche and for the production of new olfactory
interneurons in vivo. We identify two populations of Gli1+ Shh signaling
responding cells: GFAP+ SVZ stem cells and GFAP- precursors. Consistently, we
show that Shh regulates the self-renewal of neurosphere-forming stem cells and
that it modulates proliferation of SVZ lineages by acting as a mitogen in
cooperation with epidermal growth factor (EGF). Together, our data demonstrate a 
critical and conserved role of Shh signaling in the regulation of stem cell
lineages in the adult mammalian brain, highlight the subventricular stem cell
astrocytes and their more abundant derived precursors as in vivo targets of Shh
signaling, and demonstrate the requirement for Shh signaling in postnatal and
adult neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1431583
PMID: 15604099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 27;24(5):902-15.

Constitutive activation of the shh-ptc1 pathway by a patched1 mutation identified
in BCC.

Barnes EA(1), Heidtman KJ, Donoghue DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Molecular Genetics,
University of California, 9500 Gilman Drive, Urey Hall-6114, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0367, USA.

Mutations in the transmembrane receptor patched1 (ptc1) are responsible for the
majority of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) cases. Many of these mutations, including 
ptc1-Q688X, result in premature truncation of the ptc1 protein. ptc1-Q688X has
been identified in patients with both BCC and nevoid basal cell carcinoma
syndrome, an inheritable disorder causing a predisposition to cancer
susceptibility. Here we describe a mechanism by which ptc1-Q688X causes
constitutive cellular signaling. Cells expressing ptc1-Q688X demonstrate an
increase in cell cycle progression and induce cell transformation. The ptc1-Q688X
mutant enhances Gli1 activity, a downstream reporter of sonic hedgehog (shh)-ptc1
signaling, independent of shh stimulation. In contrast to wild-type ptc1,
ptc1-Q688X fails to associate with endogenous cyclin B1. Expression of
nuclear-targeted cyclin B1 derivatives promotes Gli1-dependent transcription,
which correlates temporally with cyclin B1-cdk1 kinase activity. Coexpression of 
wild-type ptc1 with a nuclear-targeted cyclin B1 derivative, mutated to mimic
constitutive phosphorylation, dramatically decreases Gli1 activity. In addition, 
the coexpression of this constitutively nuclear cyclin B1 derivative with
ptc1-Q688X substantially enhances foci formation. These studies therefore
describe a molecular mechanism for the aberrant activity of ptc1-Q688X that
includes the premature activation of the transcription factor Gli1.

PMID: 15592520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Gene Ther. 2004 Dec;11(24):1742-52.

Neuronal expression of the transcription factor Gli1 using the Talpha1
alpha-tubulin promoter is neuroprotective in an experimental model of Parkinson's
disease.

Suwelack D(1), Hurtado-Lorenzo A, Millan E, Gonzalez-Nicolini V, Wawrowsky K,
Lowenstein PR, Castro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapeutics Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

Nigrostriatal neurons degenerate during Parkinson's disease. Experimentally,
neurotoxins such as 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) in rodents, and MPTP in mice and
non-human primates, are used to model the disease-induced degeneration of
midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Glial-cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is a
very powerful neuroprotector of dopaminergic neurons in all species examined.
However, recent reports have indicated the possibility that GDNF may, in the long
term and if expressed in an unregulated manner, exert untoward effects on
midbrain dopaminergic neuronal structure and function. Although GDNF remains a
powerful neurotrophin, the search for alternative therapies based on alternative 
and complementary mechanisms of action to GDNF is warranted. Recently,
recombinant adenovirus-derived vectors encoding the differentiation factor Sonic 
Hedgehog (Shh) and its downstream transcriptional activator (Gli1) were shown to 
protect dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta from
6-OHDA-induced neurotoxicity in rats in vivo. A pancellular human CMV (hCMV)
promoter was used to drive the expression of both Shh and Gli1. Since Gli1 is a
transcription factor and therefore exerts its actions intracellularly, we decided
to test whether expression of Gli1 within neurons would be effective for
neuroprotection. We demonstrate that neuronal-specific expression of Gli1 using
the neuron-specific Talpha1 alpha-tubulin (Talpha1) promoter was neuroprotective,
and its efficiency was comparable to the pancellular strong viral hCMV promoter. 
These results suggest that expression of the transcription factor Gli1 solely
within neurons is neuroprotective for dopaminergic neurons in vivo and,
furthermore, that neuronal-specific promoters are effective within the context of
adenovirus-mediated gene therapy-induced neuroprotection of dopaminergic midbrain
neurons. Since cell-type specific promoters are known to be weaker than the viral
hCMV promoter, our data demonstrate that neuronal-specific expression of
transcription factors is an effective, specific, and sufficient targeted approach
for neurological gene therapy applications, potentially minimizing side effects
due to unrestricted promiscuous gene expression within target tissues.

PMCID: PMC1249480
PMID: 15573088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. FASEB J. 2005 Feb;19(2):281-3. Epub 2004 Nov 30.

Sonic hedgehog regulates CRH signal transduction in the adult pituitary.

Vila G(1), Papazoglou M, Stalla J, Theodoropoulou M, Stalla GK, Holsboer F,
Paez-Pereda M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstrasse 10, Munich 80804,
Germany.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a signaling protein that binds to Patched and mediates
its effects through Gli transcription factors. Shh is important in regulating
survival and growth in both the embryo and the adult. It is known to be involved 
in pituitary development, but its role in the adult pituitary has not been
investigated. Here, we show Shh and Gli1 immunoreactivity in adult human
corticotroph cells. Administration of Shh (5 microg/ml) alone and in combination 
with corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH; 100 nM) in dispersed rat anterior
pituitary and AtT-20 mouse corticotrophinoma cells increased corticotrophin
(ACTH) secretion and pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) promoter activity. Shh and CRH
act additively in increasing CRH receptor 1 (CRH-R1). Unexpectedly, we found that
CRH on its own increased Gli-dependent transcription, which in turn stimulated
POMC transcription. Gli1 is necessary for CRH signaling, since knocking down Gli1
by RNA interference abolished the stimulatory effect of CRH on POMC. Taken
together, our results demonstrate a new role for Shh and Gli1 in corticotroph
function and provide a new link between Shh and CRH signaling pathways.

PMID: 15572433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 24;325(4):1318-23.

Molecular genetic characterization of the genomic ACTB-GLI fusion in pericytoma
with t(7;12).

Dahlén A(1), Mertens F, Mandahl N, Panagopoulos I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden. 
anna.dahlen@klingen.lu.se

"Pericytoma with t(7;12)" is a newly defined soft tissue tumor characterized by
fusion of the ACTB and GLI genes through the translocation t(7;12)(p22;q13).
Recently, we reported the structure of the ACTB-GLI and GLI-ACTB fusion
transcripts in five cases, and herein the corresponding genomic breakpoints were 
investigated. Overall, the findings at the DNA level corresponded well with the
structure of the expressed transcripts. In three cases, the fusions were due to
junction of intronic sequences, in two cases breakpoints were found in exonic
sequences. In four cases the fusions corresponded to the juxtapositioning of
unaltered DNA sequences, and in one case, a micro-inversion was found at the
junction. All five fusions were molecularly unbalanced, including the two cases
with reciprocal GLI-ACTB chimeras. Whereas large repeats or recombinase
recognition sequences were not detected, sequences of shared oligonucleotides,
possibly important for recombination, were found in the proximity of the
respective breakpoints.

PMID: 15555571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Differentiation. 2004 Sep;72(7):348-62.

Craniofacial development in the talpid3 chicken mutant.

Buxton P(1), Davey MG, Paton IR, Morrice DR, Francis-West PH, Burt DW, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, Floor 27 Guy's
Tower, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

The talpid(3) chicken mutant has a pleiotropic phenotype including polydactyly
and craniofacial abnormalities. Limb polydactyly in talpid(3) suggests a gain of 
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, whereas, paradoxically, absence of midline facial
structures suggests a loss of Hh function. Here we analyze the status of Shh
signaling in the talpid(3) mutant head. We show that Shh expression domains are
lost from the talpid(3) head--in hindbrain, midbrain, zona limitans
intrathalamica, and stomodeal ectoderm--and that direct targets of Hedgehog
signaling, Ptc1, Ptc2, and Gli1, are also absent even in areas associated with
primary Shh expression. These data suggest that the talpid(3) mutation leads to
defective activation of the Shh pathway and, furthermore, that tissue-to-tissue
transduction of Shh expression in the developing head depends on Hh pathway
activation. Failure to activate the Shh pathway can also explain absence of floor
plate and Hnf-3beta and Netrin-1 expression in midbrain and hindbrain and absence
of Fgf-8 expression in commissural plate. Other aspects of gene expression in the
talpid(3) head, however, suggest misspecification, such as maintenance of floor
plate-like gene expression in telencephalon. In branchial arches and lower jaw,
where Shh is expressed, changes in expression of genes involved in patterning and
mesodermal specification suggest both gain and loss of Hedgehog function. Thus,
analysis of gene expression in talpid(3) head shows that, as in talpid(3) limb,
expression of some genes is lost, while others are ectopically expressed. Unlike 
the limb, many head regions depend on Hh induction of a secondary domain of Shh
expression, and failure of this induction in talpid(3), together with the
inability to activate the Shh pathway, explain the loss-of-function head
phenotype. This gene expression analysis in the talpid(3) head also confirms and 
extends knowledge of the importance of Shh signaling and the balance between
activation and repression of Shh targets in many aspects of craniofacial
morphogenesis.

PMID: 15554946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Oncol. 2004 Dec;25(6):1875-80.

KIF27 is one of orthologs for Drosophila Costal-2.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Signals of Hedgehog family proteins (SHH, IHH and DHH) are transduced through
Patched family receptors (PTCH1 and PTCH2) and Smoothened (SMO) to GLI family
transcription factors (GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3). SHH plays a key role in development 
and progression of pancreatic cancer, gastric cancer, basal cell carcinoma, and
brain tumors. Drosophila Costal-2 (Cos2) is implicated in the Hedgehog pathway
through the interaction with Smoothened (Smo), Cubitus interruptus (Ci), Fused
(Fu), and microtubule; however, mammalian ortholog of Drosophila Cos2 remained to
be identified. Here we identified and characterized human ortholog of Drosophila 
Cos2 by using bioinformatics. Full-length Drosophila Cos2 was most homologous to 
human KIF27, followed by mouse Kif7, and other KIF family members. KIF27 gene at 
human chromosome 9q22.1 and KIF7 gene at human chromosome 15q26.1 were paralogs
within the human genome. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that KIF27, Kif7, KIF4A, 
KIF4B and KIF21A constitute the KIF27 subfamily among mammalian Kinesin family.
Drosophila Cos2 protein consists of Kinesin motor (KISc) domain, Ci-binding
domain, and Smo-binding domain. KIF27 itself shared the common domain structure
with Drosophila Cos2, while other members of KIF27 subfamily shared partial
domain structure with Drosophila Cos2. These facts indicate that KIF27 is one of 
mammalian orthologs for Drosophila Cos2.

PMID: 15547729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Genes Dev. 2004 Nov 15;18(22):2724-9.

MIM/BEG4, a Sonic hedgehog-responsive gene that potentiates Gli-dependent
transcription.

Callahan CA(1), Ofstad T, Horng L, Wang JK, Zhen HH, Coulombe PA, Oro AE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology and Department of Pathology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a critical role during development and
carcinogenesis. While Gli family members govern the transcriptional output of Shh
signaling, little is known how Gli-mediated transcriptional activity is
regulated. Here we identify the actin-binding protein Missing in Metastasis (MIM)
as a new Shh-responsive gene. Together, Gli1 and MIM recapitulate Shh-mediated
epidermal proliferation and invasion in regenerated human skin. MIM is part of a 
Gli/Suppressor of Fused complex and potentiates Gli-dependent transcription using
domains distinct from those used for monomeric actin binding. These data define
MIM as both a Shh-responsive gene and a new member of the pathway that modulates 
Gli responses during growth and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC528890
PMID: 15545630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Dermatology. 2004;209(4):284-7.

Plexiform neurofibromas express the transcription factor Gli1.

Endo H(1), Oikawa A, Utani A, Shinkai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Chiba Aoba Municipal Hospital, Chiba University,
Aoba-cho,Chuo-ku, Japan. chw92121@syd.odn.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: Plexiform neurofibromas occur commonly in individuals with
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and consist of neurofibromatous change in multiple
nerve fascicles. Previously, we had observed that both plexiform neurofibromas
and normal cutaneous nerves expressed Hedgehogs (Hhs), which are intercellular
signaling molecules and regulate growth and patterning during embryonic
development, and their receptors. In the present study, we examined the
expression of Gli1, a transcription factor which mediates Hh signaling to
investigate the activation of Hh signaling in plexiform neurofibromas and normal 
cutaneous nerves.
METHODS: An antihuman Gli1 antibody was used with a standard immunoperoxidase
technique to determine Gli1 expression in 5 specimens of plexiform neurofibromas 
and 5 specimens of normal cutaneous nerves.
RESULTS: Our results showed Gli1 expression in S-100-positive tumor cells within 
the involved nerve fascicles in plexiform neurofibromas but not in control normal
skins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the Hh signaling pathway is activated in 
plexiform neurofibromas.

Copyright (c) 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15539889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Neurosci. 2004 Nov 10;24(45):10074-83.

Interferon-gamma induced medulloblastoma in the developing cerebellum.

Lin W(1), Kemper A, McCarthy KD, Pytel P, Wang JP, Campbell IL, Utset MF, Popko
B.

Author information: 
(1)Jack Miller Center for Peripheral Neuropathy, Department of Neurology,
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

We have generated a mouse model system with a high incidence of medulloblastoma, 
a malignant neoplasm believed to arise from immature precursors of cerebellar
granule neurons. These animals ectopically express interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)
in astrocytes in the CNS in a controlled manner, exploiting the
tetracycline-controllable system. More than 80% of these mice display severe
ataxia and develop cerebellar tumors that express synaptophysin, the mouse atonal
homolog MATH1, sonic hedgehog (SHH), and Gli1. IFN-gamma-induced tumorigenesis in
these mice is associated with increased expression of SHH, and SHH induction and 
tumorigenesis are dependent on signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(STAT1). When IFN-gamma expression is shut down with doxycycline at postnatal day
12 (P12), the clinical symptoms dissipate and the mice do not develop tumors,
whereas if transgene expression is shut down at P16, the clinical symptoms and
tumors progress to lethality, indicating that IFN-gamma is required for tumor
induction but not progression. The tumors that occur in the continued presence of
IFN-gamma display extensive necrosis and apoptosis as well as macrophage and
lymphocytic infiltration, whereas the tumors that develop in mice in which
IFN-gamma expression is shut down at P16 do not. Thus, IFN-gamma expression in
the perinatal period can induce SHH expression and medulloblastoma in the
cerebellum by a STAT1-dependent mechanism, and its continued presence appears to 
promote a host response to the tumor.

PMID: 15537876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Cell Physiol. 2005 May;203(2):372-7.

Hedgehog signaling in normal urothelial cells and in urothelial carcinoma cell
lines.

Thievessen I(1), Wolter M, Prior A, Seifert HH, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Urologische Klinik, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Constitutive activation of hedgehog signaling, often caused by PTCH1 inactivation
and leading to inappropriate activation of GLI target genes, is crucial for the
development of several human tumors including basal cell carcinoma of the skin
and medulloblastoma. The PTCH1 gene at 9q22 is also considered as a candidate
tumor suppressor in transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), of which >50% show LOH in 
this region. However, only rare mutations have been found in PTCH1. We have
therefore investigated GLI-dependent promoter activity and expression of hedgehog
pathway components in TCC cell lines and proliferating normal urothelial cells.
Normal urothelial cells cultured in serum-free medium, but not TCC lines
exhibited low, but significant promoter activity under standard growth
conditions. Accordingly, GLI1-3 and PTCH1 mRNAs were expressed at moderate
levels, and sonic hedgehog (SHH) mRNA expression was low to undetectable. In
co-transfection experiments GLI1 increased promoter activity significantly in one
TCC line and further in normal urothelial cells, but less strongly in other TCC
lines. Expression patterns of GLI factor mRNAs did not correlate with
inducibility. No significant effects of SHH or cyclopamine on proliferation were 
observed, ruling out autocrine effects. However, SHH induced GLI-dependent
promoter activity in normal urothelial cells. Taken together, our data suggest
that the hedgehog pathway is weakly active in normal adult urothelial cells and
of limited importance in TCC.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15521068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7794-800.

The SmoA1 mouse model reveals that notch signaling is critical for the growth and
survival of sonic hedgehog-induced medulloblastomas.

Hallahan AR(1), Pritchard JI, Hansen S, Benson M, Stoeck J, Hatton BA, Russell
TL, Ellenbogen RG, Bernstein ID, Beachy PA, Olson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

To develop a genetically faithful model of medulloblastoma with increased tumor
incidence compared with the current best model we activated the Sonic Hedgehog
(Shh) pathway by transgenically expressing a constitutively active form of
Smoothened in mouse cerebellar granule neuron precursors (ND2:SmoA1 mice). This
resulted in early cerebellar granule cell hyper-proliferation and a 48% incidence
of medulloblastoma formation. Gene expression studies showed an increase in the
known Shh targets Gli1 and Nmyc that correlated with increasing hyperplasia and
tumor formation. Notch2 and the Notch target gene, HES5, were also significantly 
elevated in Smoothened-induced tumors showing that Shh pathway activation is
sufficient to induce Notch pathway signaling. In human medulloblastomas reverse
transcription-PCR for Shh and Notch targets revealed activation of both of these 
pathways in most tumors when compared with normal cerebellum. Notch pathway
inhibition with soluble Delta ligand or gamma secretase inhibitors resulted in a 
marked reduction of viable cell numbers in medulloblastoma cell lines and primary
tumor cultures. Treatment of mice with D283 medulloblastoma xenografts with a
gamma secretase inhibitor resulted in decreased proliferation and increased
apoptosis, confirming that Notch signaling contributes to human medulloblastoma
proliferation and survival. Medulloblastomas in ND2:SmoA1 mice and humans have
concomitant increase in Shh and Notch pathway activities, both of which
contribute to tumor survival.

PMID: 15520185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7724-31.

Activation of the BCL2 promoter in response to Hedgehog/GLI signal transduction
is predominantly mediated by GLI2.

Regl G(1), Kasper M, Schnidar H, Eichberger T, Neill GW, Philpott MP, Esterbauer 
H, Hauser-Kronberger C, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Genomics, University of Salzburg,
Salzburg, Austria.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signaling pathway has been
implicated in the development of basal cell carcinoma (BCC). The zinc finger
transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2 are considered mediators of the HH signal in 
epidermal cells, although their tumorigenic nature and their relative
contribution to tumorigenesis are only poorly understood. To shed light on the
respective role of these transcription factors in epidermal neoplasia, we
screened for genes preferentially regulated either by GLI1 or GLI2 in human
epidermal cells. We show here that expression of the key antiapoptotic factor
BCL2 is predominantly activated by GLI2 compared with GLI1. Detailed promoter
analysis and gel shift assays identified three GLI binding sites in the human
BCL2 cis-regulatory region. We found that one of these binding sites is critical 
for conferring GLI2-specific activation of the human BCL2 promoter and that the
selective induction of BCL2 expression depends on the zinc finger DNA binding
domain of GLI2. In vivo, GLI2 and BCL2 were coexpressed in the outer root sheath 
of hair follicles and BCC and in plasma cells that infiltrated BCC tumor islands.
On the basis of the latter observation, we analyzed plasma cell-derived tumors
and found strong expression of GLI2 and BCL2 in neoplastic cells of plasmacytoma 
patients, implicating HH/GLI signaling in the development of plasma cell-derived 
malignancies. The results reveal a central role for GLI2 in activating the
prosurvival factor BCL2, which may represent an important mechanism in the
development or maintenance of cancers associated with inappropriate HH signaling.

PMID: 15520176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5581-90. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Spatial pattern of sonic hedgehog signaling through Gli genes during cerebellum
development.

Corrales JD(1), Rocco GL, Blaess S, Guo Q, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The cerebellum consists of a highly organized set of folia that are largely
generated postnatally during expansion of the granule cell precursor (GCP) pool. 
Since the secreted factor sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in Purkinje cells and
functions as a GCP mitogen in vitro, it is possible that Shh influences foliation
during cerebellum development by regulating the position and/or size of lobes. We
studied how Shh and its transcriptional mediators, the Gli proteins, regulate GCP
proliferation in vivo, and tested whether they influence foliation. We
demonstrate that Shh expression correlates spatially and temporally with
foliation. Expression of the Shh target gene Gli1 is also highest in the anterior
medial cerebellum, but is restricted to proliferating GCPs and Bergmann glia. By 
contrast, Gli2 is expressed uniformly in all cells in the developing cerebellum
except Purkinje cells and Gli3 is broadly expressed along the anteroposterior
axis. Whereas Gli mutants have a normal cerebellum, Gli2 mutants have greatly
reduced foliation at birth and a decrease in GCPs. In a complementary study using
transgenic mice, we show that overexpressing Shh in the normal domain does not
grossly alter the basic foliation pattern, but does lead to prolonged
proliferation of GCPs and an increase in the overall size of the cerebellum.
Taken together, these studies demonstrate that positive Shh signaling through
Gli2 is required to generate a sufficient number of GCPs for proper lobe growth.

PMID: 15496441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Nov;14(5):793-9.

Analysis of the PTCH1 signaling pathway in ovarian dermoids.

Levanat S(1), Kappler R, Hemmerlein B, Döring P, Musani V, Komar A, Oreskovic S, 
Pavelic B, Hahn H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Ruder Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, 10000 
Zagreb, Croatia. levanat@rudjer.irb.hr.

Dermoids belong to the group of developmental cysts and arise from germ cells.
Studies on these tumors may therefore increase our understanding of normal germ
cell development within different environments and cell lines derived from these 
lesions may also constitute an important vehicle for studying neoplasia and
differentiation. Recently, we investigated the status of the PTCH1 locus in a
large set of sporadic non-inflammatory, developmental cystic lesions. Our data
showed allelic loss of microsatellite markers in close vicinity to the PTCH1
locus in both odontogenic keratocysts and dentigerous cysts as well as in ovarian
dermoid cysts (ODC). In this study, we closely examined the status of the PTCH1
gene in ODCs. Although about 25% of cysts demonstrated LOH at the PTCH1 locus, no
nonsense or missense mutations in the coding region of PTCH1 were detected in
genomic DNA isolated from any of the ODCs examined by direct sequencing. Staining
with PTCH1 and GLI1 antibodies showed that proteins were present in virtually all
epithelial linings, with variable staining intensity not correlated with LOH and 
generally weaker for GLI1. However, cDNA microarray analysis performed on cell
lines derived from ODCs did not show any significant alteration in the expression
of the analyzed target genes of PTCH1 signaling in any of the cell lines
examined, except for CyclinD1 (and several other genes generally not associated
with PTCH1 signaling).

PMID: 15492847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Cancer. 2004 Oct 13;3:29.

Activation of the hedgehog pathway in advanced prostate cancer.

Sheng T(1), Li C, Zhang X, Chi S, He N, Chen K, McCormick F, Gatalica Z, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Centers for Cancer Cell Biology and Environmental Health, Department of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas
77555-1048, USA. tasheng@utmb.edu

BACKGROUND: The hedgehog pathway plays a critical role in the development of
prostate. However, the role of the hedgehog pathway in prostate cancer is not
clear. Prostate cancer is the second most prevalent cause of cancer death in
American men. Therefore, identification of novel therapeutic targets for prostate
cancer has significant clinical implications.
RESULTS: Here we report that activation of the hedgehog pathway occurs frequently
in advanced human prostate cancer. We find that high levels of hedgehog target
genes, PTCH1 and hedgehog-interacting protein (HIP), are detected in over 70% of 
prostate tumors with Gleason scores 8-10, but in only 22% of tumors with Gleason 
scores 3-6. Furthermore, four available metastatic tumors all have high
expression of PTCH1 and HIP. To identify the mechanism of the hedgehog signaling 
activation, we examine expression of Su(Fu) protein, a negative regulator of the 
hedgehog pathway. We find that Su(Fu) protein is undetectable in 11 of 27 PTCH1
positive tumors, two of them contain somatic loss-of-function mutations of
Su(Fu). Furthermore, expression of sonic hedgehog protein is detected in majority
of PTCH1 positive tumors (24 out of 27). High levels of hedgehog target genes are
also detected in four prostate cancer cell lines (TSU, DU145, LN-Cap and PC3). We
demonstrate that inhibition of hedgehog signaling by smoothened antagonist,
cyclopamine, suppresses hedgehog signaling, down-regulates cell invasiveness and 
induces apoptosis. In addition, cancer cells expressing Gli1 under the CMV
promoter are resistant to cyclopamine-mediated apoptosis. All these data suggest 
a significant role of the hedgehog pathway for cellular functions of prostate
cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that activation of the hedgehog pathway, through
loss of Su(Fu) or overexpression of sonic hedgehog, may involve tumor progression
and metastases of prostate cancer. Thus, targeted inhibition of hedgehog
signaling may have significant implications of prostate cancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC524523
PMID: 15482598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Chem Biol. 2004 Sep;11(9):1229-38.

Purmorphamine induces osteogenesis by activation of the hedgehog signaling
pathway.

Wu X(1), Walker J, Zhang J, Ding S, Schultz PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Previously, a small molecule, purmorphamine, was identified that selectively
induces osteogenesis in multipotent mesenchymal progenitor cells. In order to
gain insights into the mechanism of action of purmorphamine, high-density
oligonucleotide microarrays were used to profile gene expression in multipotent
mesenchymal progenitor cells treated with either purmorphamine or bone
morphogenetic protein-4 (BMP-4). In contrast to BMP-4 treatment, purmorphamine
activates the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, resulting in the up- and
downregulation of its downstream target genes, including Gli1 and Patched.
Moreover, the known Hh signaling antagonists, cyclopamine and forskolin,
completely block the osteogenesis and Glimediated transcription induced by
purmorphamine. These results demonstrate that purmorphamine is a small molecule
agonist of Hedgehog signaling, and it may ultimately be useful in the treatment
of bone-related disease and neurodegenerative disease.

PMID: 15380183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(19):8627-41.

Suppressor of fused regulates Gli activity through a dual binding mechanism.

Merchant M(1), Vajdos FF, Ultsch M, Maun HR, Wendt U, Cannon J, Desmarais W,
Lazarus RA, de Vos AM, de Sauvage FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. mmerch@gene.com

The Hedgehog pathway drives proliferation and differentiation by activating the
Gli/Ci family of zinc finger transcription factors. Gli/Ci proteins form Hedgehog
signaling complexes with other signaling components, including the kinesin-like
protein Costal-2, the serine-threonine kinase Fused, and Suppressor of Fused
[Su(fu)]. In these complexes Gli/Ci proteins are regulated by cytoplasmic
sequestration, phosphorylation, and proteolysis. Here we characterize structural 
and functional determinants of Su(fu) required for Gli regulation and show that
Su(fu) contains at least two distinct domains: a highly conserved
carboxy-terminal region required for binding to the amino-terminal ends of the
Gli proteins and a unique amino-terminal domain that binds the carboxy-terminal
tail of Gli1. While each domain is capable of binding to different Gli1 regions
independently, interactions between Su(fu) and Gli1 at both sites are required
for cytoplasmic tethering and repression of Gli1. Furthermore, we have solved the
crystal structure of the amino-terminal domain of human Su(fu)(27-268) at 2.65 A 
resolution. This domain forms a concave pocket with a prominent acidic patch.
Mutation at Asp(159) in the acidic patch disrupts Gli1 tethering and repression
while not strongly disrupting binding, indicating that the amino-terminal domain 
of Su(fu) likely impacts Gli binding through a mechanism distinct from that for
tethering and repression. These studies provide a structural basis for
understanding the function of Su(fu).

PMCID: PMC516763
PMID: 15367681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6071-4.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is a new therapeutic target for patients with breast
cancer.

Kubo M(1), Nakamura M, Tasaki A, Yamanaka N, Nakashima H, Nomura M, Kuroki S,
Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway functions as an organizer in embryonic
development. Genetic analysis has demonstrated a critical role for the Hh pathway
in mammary gland morphogenesis. Disruption of Patched1, a component of the Hh
pathway, results in abnormal growth of mammary duct. Recent studies have shown
constitutive activation of the Hh pathway in various types of malignancies.
However, it remains unclear whether this pathway is activated in human breast
cancer. Here, we determined the expression of the components, including Sonic Hh,
Patched1, and Gli1, of the Hh pathway by immunohistochemical staining in a series
of 52 human breast carcinomas. All of 52 tumors display staining of high
intensity for Gli1 when compared with adjacent normal tissue. The nuclear
staining ratio of Gli1 correlates with expression of estrogen receptor and
histologic type. Exposure to cyclopamine, a steroidal alkaloid that blocks the Hh
pathway, suppresses expression of Gli1 and the growth of the Hh pathway-activated
breast carcinoma cells. These data indicate that the Hh pathway is a new
candidate for therapeutic target of breast cancer.

PMID: 15342389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Cell Biol. 2004 Aug 30;166(5):673-84.

Sonic hedgehog regulates the proliferation, differentiation, and migration of
enteric neural crest cells in gut.

Fu M(1), Lui VC, Sham MH, Pachnis V, Tam PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Rd., Pokfulam, 
Hong Kong, HKSAR China.

Enteric neural crest cells (NCCs) migrate and colonize the entire gut and
proliferate and differentiate into neurons and glia of the enteric nervous system
in vertebrate embryos. We have investigated the mitogenic and morphogenic
functions of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) on enteric NCCs in cell and organ culture.
Enteric NCCs expressed Shh receptor Patched and transcripts encoding the Shh
signal transducer (Gli1). Shh promoted the proliferation and inhibited the
differentiation of NCCs. The pro-neurogenic effect of glial cell line--derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) on NCCs was abolished by Shh. In gut explants, NCCs
migrated from the explants onto the adjacent substratum if GDNF was added,
whereas addition of Shh abolished this migration. Neuronal differentiation and
coalescence of neural crest--derived cells into myenteric plexuses in explants
was repressed by the addition of Shh. Our data suggest that Shh controls the
proliferation and differentiation of NCCs and modulates the responsiveness of
NCCs toward GDNF inductions.

PMCID: PMC2172437
PMID: 15337776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 15;273(2):257-75.

Sonic hedgehog-patched Gli signaling in the developing rat prostate gland:
lobe-specific suppression by neonatal estrogens reduces ductal growth and
branching.

Pu Y(1), Huang L, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

While prostate gland development is dependent on androgens, other hormones
including retinoids and estrogens can influence this process. Brief exposure to
high-dose estrogen during the neonatal period in rats leads to permanent,
lobe-specific aberrations in the prostate gland, a phenomenon referred to as
developmental estrogenization. We have previously shown that this response is
mediated through alterations in steroid receptor expression; however, further
downstream mechanisms remain unclear. Herein, we examined Sonic hedgehog
(Shh)-patched (ptc)-gli in the developing rat prostate gland, its role in
branching morphogenesis, and the effects of neonatal estrogens on its expression 
and localization to determine whether a disturbance in this signaling pathway is 
involved in mediating the estrogenized phenotype. Shh was expressed in epithelial
cells at the distal tips of elongating ducts in discreet, heterogeneous foci,
while ptc and gli1-3 were expressed in the adjacent mesenchymal cells in the
developing gland. The addition of Shh protein to cultured neonatal prostates
reduced ductal growth and branching, decreased Fgf10 transcript, and increased
Bmp4 expression in the adjacent mesenchyme. Shh-induced growth suppression was
reversed by exogenous Fgf10, but not noggin, indicating that Fgf10 suppression is
the proximate cause of the growth inhibition. A model is proposed to show how
highly localized Shh expression along with regulation of downstream morphogens
participates in dichotomous branching during prostate morphogenesis. Neonatal
exposure to high-dose estradiol suppressed Shh, ptc, gli1, and gli3 expressions
and concomitantly blocked ductal branching in the dorsal and lateral prostate
lobes specifically. In contrast, ventral lobe branching and Shh-ptc-gli
expression were minimally affected by estrogen exposure. Organ culture studies
with lateral prostates confirmed that estradiol suppressed Shh-ptc-gli expression
directly at the prostatic level. Taken together, the present findings indicate
that lobe-specific decreases in Shh-ptc-gli expression are involved in mediating 
estradiol-induced suppression of dorsal and lateral lobe ductal growth and
branching during prostate morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2978068
PMID: 15328011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 24;101(34):12561-6. Epub 2004 Aug 16.

Inhibition of prostate cancer proliferation by interference with SONIC
HEDGEHOG-GLI1 signaling.

Sanchez P(1), Hernández AM, Stecca B, Kahler AJ, DeGueme AM, Barrett A, Beyna M, 
Datta MW, Datta S, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute and Department of Cell Biology, New York University School 
of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Prostate cancer is the most common solid tumor in men, and it shares with all
cancers the hallmark of elevated, nonhomeostatic cell proliferation. Here we have
tested the hypothesis that the SONIC HEDGEHOG (SHH)-GLI signaling pathway is
implicated in prostate cancer. We report expression of SHH-GLI pathway components
in adult human prostate cancer, often with enhanced levels in tumors versus
normal prostatic epithelia. Blocking the pathway with cyclopamine or anti-SHH
antibodies inhibits the proliferation of GLI1+/PSA+ primary prostate tumor
cultures. Inversely, SHH can potentiate tumor cell proliferation, suggesting that
autocrine signaling may often sustain tumor growth. In addition, pathway blockade
in three metastatic prostate cancer cell lines with cyclopamine or through GLI1
RNA interference leads to inhibition of cell proliferation, suggesting
cell-autonomous pathway activation at different levels and showing an essential
role for GLI1 in human cells. Our data demonstrate the dependence of prostate
cancer on SHH-GLI function and suggest a novel therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC514658
PMID: 15314219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Am J Sports Med. 2004 Sep;32(6):1415-20. Epub 2004 Jul 20.

In vivo elongation of the anterior cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate
ligament during knee flexion.

Li G(1), DeFrate LE, Sun H, Gill TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Most knowledge regarding cruciate ligament function is based on in
vitro experiments.
PURPOSE: To investigate the in vivo elongation of the functional bundles of the
anterior cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate ligament during weightbearing
flexion.
HYPOTHESIS: The biomechanical role of functional bundles of the anterior cruciate
ligament and posterior cruciate ligament under in vivo loading is different from 
that measured in cadavers.
STUDY DESIGN: In vivo biomechanical study.
METHODS: Elongation of the anterior cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate
ligament was measured during a quasi-static lunge using imaging and 3-dimensional
computer-modeling techniques.
RESULTS: The anterior-medial bundle of the anterior cruciate ligament had a
relatively constant length from full extension to 90 degrees of flexion. The
posterior-lateral bundle of the anterior cruciate ligament decreased in length
with flexion. Both bundles of the posterior cruciate ligament had increased
lengths with flexion.
CONCLUSION: The data did not demonstrate the reciprocal function of the 2 bundles
of the anterior cruciate ligament or the posterior cruciate ligament with flexion
observed in previous studies. Instead, the data suggest that there is a
reciprocal function between the anterior cruciate ligament and posterior cruciate
ligament with flexion. The anterior cruciate ligament plays a more important role
in low-flexion angles, whereas the posterior cruciate ligament plays a more
important role in high flexion.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Understanding the biomechanical role of the knee ligaments in
vivo is essential to reproduce the structural behavior of the ligament after
injury (especially for 2-bundle reconstructions) and thus improve surgical
outcomes.

PMID: 15310565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2004 Sep;33(6):584-92.

PTC gene mutations and expression of SHH, PTC, SMO, and GLI-1 in odontogenic
keratocysts.

Ohki K(1), Kumamoto H, Ichinohasama R, Sato T, Takahashi N, Ooya K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Surgery, Division of Maxillofacial Surgery,
Graduate School of Dentistry, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
k-ohki@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

The Patched (PTC) gene is responsible for basal cell nevus syndrome (BCNS)
accompanied by multiple odontogenic keratocysts (OKCs), and its product plays a
role in the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway involving smoothened (SMO) and
GLI-1. To clarify the role of SHH signaling in OKCs, the expression of SHH, PTC, 
SMO, and GLI-1 and mutations of PTC were examined in 18 sporadic, 4
BCNS-associated OKCs and 7 control gingivae. SHH, PTC, SMO, and GLI-1 were
detected in all OKC and gingiva samples by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Immunoreactivity for SHH and GLI-1 was markedly higher in
epithelial components than in subepithelial cells, while immunoreactivity for PTC
and SMO was similar in epithelial components and subepithelial cells in OKCs. The
positive rate of PTC and SMO expression in subepithelial cells of OKCs was
significantly higher than that in gingivae. The positive rate of GLI-1 expression
in subepithelial cells of BCNS-associated OKCs was significantly higher than that
in primary OKCs. These results suggest that the SHH signaling might be involved
in the pathophysiologic nature of OKCs. While mutations of the PTC gene could not
be detected in 4 BCNS-associated OKCs by direct DNA sequencing, 3 of 5 primary
and 4 of 4 recurrent OKCs had several mutations of this gene. These results
suggest that PTC mutations are probably related not only to BCNS-associated OKCs 
but also to sporadic OKCs.

PMID: 15308259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Neuron. 2004 Aug 5;43(3):345-57.

Cell behaviors and genetic lineages of the mesencephalon and rhombomere 1.

Zervas M(1), Millet S, Ahn S, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Brain structures derived from the mesencephalon (mes) and rhombomere 1 (r1)
modulate distinct motor and sensory modalities. The precise origin and cellular
behaviors underpinning the cytoarchitectural organization of the mes and r1,
however, are unknown. Using a novel inducible genetic fate mapping approach in
mouse, we determined the fate and lineage relationships of mes/r1 cells with fine
temporal and spatial resolution. We demonstrate that the mes and r1 are
neuromeres that along with the isthmic organizer are partitioned along the
anterior-posterior axis by lineage restriction boundaries established
sequentially between E8.5 and E9.5. Furthermore, a small group of cells
originating from the most posterior mes exhibit anterior intracompartmental
expansion and contribute throughout the inferior colliculus. Finally, we also
uncovered transient and differential genetic lineages of ventral midbrain
dopaminergic and ventral hindbrain serotonergic neuronal precursors with respect 
to Wnt1 and Gli1 expression.

Copyright 2004 Cell Press

PMID: 15294143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2004 Aug;86-A(8):1721-9.

Knee kinematics with a high-flexion posterior stabilized total knee prosthesis:
an in vitro robotic experimental investigation.

Li G(1), Most E, Sultan PG, Schule S, Zayontz S, Park SE, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
gli1@partners.org

BACKGROUND: An analysis of contemporary total knee arthroplasty reveals that, on 
the average, patients rarely flex the knee beyond 120 degrees. The biomechanical 
mechanisms that inhibit further flexion after total knee arthroplasty are
unknown. The objective of the present study was to investigate the capability of 
a single design of a fixed-bearing, high-flexion posterior stabilized total knee 
arthroplasty system (LPS-Flex) to restore the range of flexion to that of the
intact knee.
METHODS: Thirteen cadaveric human knees were tested, with use of a robotic
testing system, before and after total knee arthroplasty with the LPS-Flex
prosthesis. The passive path and the kinematics under an isolated quadriceps
force of 400 N, under an isolated hamstring force of 200 N, and with these forces
combined were determined. Posterior femoral translation of the lateral and medial
femoral condyles and tibial rotation were recorded from 0 degrees to 150 degrees 
of flexion.
RESULTS: The medial and lateral condyles of the intact knee translated
posteriorly from full extension to 150 degrees, reaching a mean peak (and
standard deviation) of 22.9 +/- 11.3 mm and 31.9 +/- 12.5 mm, respectively, under
the combined muscle forces. Following total knee arthroplasty, the amount of
posterior femoral translation was lower than that observed in the intact knee. At
150 degrees, approximately 90% of the intact posterior femoral translation was
recovered by the total knee replacement. Internal tibial rotation was observed
for all knees throughout the range of motion. The cam-spine mechanism engaged at 
approximately 80 degrees and disengaged at 135 degrees. Despite the absence of
cam-spine engagement, further posterior femoral translation occurred from 135
degrees to 150 degrees.
CONCLUSIONS: The tibiofemoral articular geometry of the intact knee and the knee 
after total knee arthroplasty with use of the LPS-Flex design demonstrated
similar kinematics at high flexion angles. The cam-spine mechanism enhanced
posterior femoral translation only at the mid-range of flexion. The femoral
component geometry of the LPS-Flex total knee prosthesis may improve posterior
tibiofemoral articulation contact in high flexion angles.

PMID: 15292421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Nat Med. 2004 Aug;10(8):789-99.

Cancer genes and the pathways they control.

Vogelstein B(1), Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland
21231, USA. vogelbe@welch.jhu.edu

The revolution in cancer research can be summed up in a single sentence: cancer
is, in essence, a genetic disease. In the last decade, many important genes
responsible for the genesis of various cancers have been discovered, their
mutations precisely identified, and the pathways through which they act
characterized. The purposes of this review are to highlight examples of progress 
in these areas, indicate where knowledge is scarce and point out fertile grounds 
for future investigation.

PMID: 15286780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. BMC Genomics. 2004 Jul 22;5(1):49.

The FU gene and its possible protein isoforms.

Østerlund T(1), Everman DB, Betz RC, Mosca M, Nöthen MM, Schwartz CE,
Zaphiropoulos PG, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences at Novum, Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 57 Huddinge,
Sweden. torben.osterlund@klkemi.mas.lu.se

BACKGROUND: FU is the human homologue of the Drosophila gene fused whose product 
fused is a positive regulator of the transcription factor Cubitus interruptus
(Ci). Thus, FU may act as a regulator of the human counterparts of Ci, the GLI
transcription factors. Since Ci and GLI are targets of Hedgehog signaling in
development and morphogenesis, it is expected that FU plays an important role in 
Sonic, Desert and/or Indian Hedgehog induced cellular signaling.
RESULTS: The FU gene was identified on chromosome 2q35 at 217.56 Mb and its
exon-intron organization determined. The human developmental disorder Syndactyly 
type 1 (SD1) maps to this region on chromosome 2 and the FU coding region was
sequenced using genomic DNA from an affected individual in a linked family. While
no FU mutations were found, three single nucleotide polymorphisms were
identified. The expression pattern of FU was thoroughly investigated and all
examined tissues express FU. It is also clear that different tissues express
transcripts of different sizes and some tissues express more than one transcript.
By means of nested PCR of specific regions in RT/PCR generated cDNA, it was
possible to verify two alternative splicing events. This also suggests the
existence of at least two additional protein isoforms besides the FU protein that
has previously been described. This long FU and a much shorter isoform were
compared for the ability to regulate GLI1 and GLI2. None of the FU isoforms
showed any effects on GLI1 induced transcription but the long form can enhance
GLI2 activity. Apparently FU did not have any effect on SUFU induced inhibition
of GLI.
CONCLUSIONS: The FU gene and its genomic structure was identified. FU is a
candidate gene for SD1, but we have not identified a pathogenic mutation in the
FU coding region in a family with SD1. The sequence information and expression
analyses show that transcripts of different sizes are expressed and subjected to 
alternative splicing. Thus, mRNAs may contain different 5'UTRs and encode
different protein isoforms. Furthermore, FU is able to enhance the activity of
GLI2 but not of GLI1, implicating FU in some aspects of Hedgehog signaling.

PMCID: PMC512281
PMID: 15268766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jul 20;101(29):10833-8. Epub 2004 Jul 12.

REN(KCTD11) is a suppressor of Hedgehog signaling and is deleted in human
medulloblastoma.

Di Marcotullio L(1), Ferretti E, De Smaele E, Argenti B, Mincione C, Zazzeroni F,
Gallo R, Masuelli L, Napolitano M, Maroder M, Modesti A, Giangaspero F, Screpanti
I, Alesse E, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza, 324
Viale Regina Elena, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog signaling is suggested to be a major oncogenic pathway in
medulloblastoma, which arises from aberrant development of cerebellar granule
progenitors. Allelic loss of chromosome 17p has also been described as the most
frequent genetic defect in this human neoplasia. This observation raises the
question of a possible interplay between 17p deletion and the Hedgehog
tumorigenic pathway. Here, we identify the human orthologue of mouse REN(KCTD11),
previously reported to be expressed in differentiating and low proliferating
neuroblasts. Human REN(KCTD11) maps to 17p13.2 and displays allelic deletion as
well as significantly reduced expression in medulloblastoma. REN(KCTD11) inhibits
medulloblastoma cell proliferation and colony formation in vitro and suppresses
xenograft tumor growth in vivo. REN(KCTD11) seems to inhibit medulloblastoma
growth by negatively regulating the Hedgehog pathway because it antagonizes the
Gli-mediated transactivation of Hedgehog target genes, by affecting Gli1 nuclear 
transfer, and its growth inhibitory activity is impaired by Gli1 inactivation.
Therefore, we identify REN(KCTD11) as a suppressor of Hedgehog signaling and
suggest that its inactivation might lead to a deregulation of the tumor-promoting
Hedgehog pathway in medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC490020
PMID: 15249678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. BMC Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 6;4:9.

Hedgehog can drive terminal differentiation of amniote slow skeletal muscle.

Li X(1), Blagden CS, Bildsoe H, Bonnin MA, Duprez D, Hughes SM.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, UK. xpengli@biovex.com

BACKGROUND: Secreted Hedgehog (Hh) signalling molecules have profound influences 
on many developing and regenerating tissues. Yet in most vertebrate tissues it is
unclear which Hh-responses are the direct result of Hh action on a particular
cell type because Hhs frequently elicit secondary signals. In developing skeletal
muscle, Hhs promote slow myogenesis in zebrafish and are involved in
specification of medial muscle cells in amniote somites. However, the extent to
which non-myogenic cells, myoblasts or differentiating myocytes are direct or
indirect targets of Hh signalling is not known.
RESULTS: We show that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) can act directly on cultured C2
myoblasts, driving Gli1 expression, myogenin up-regulation and terminal
differentiation, even in the presence of growth factors that normally prevent
differentiation. Distinct myoblasts respond differently to Shh: in some slow
myosin expression is increased, whereas in others Shh simply enhances terminal
differentiation. Exposure of chick wing bud cells to Shh in culture increases
numbers of both muscle and non-muscle cells, yet simultaneously enhances
differentiation of myoblasts. The small proportion of differentiated muscle cells
expressing definitive slow myosin can be doubled by Shh. Shh over-expression in
chick limb bud reduces muscle mass at early developmental stages while inducing
ectopic slow muscle fibre formation. Abundant later-differentiating fibres,
however, do not express extra slow myosin. Conversely, Hh loss of function in the
limb bud, caused by implanting hybridoma cells expressing a functionally blocking
anti-Hh antibody, reduces early slow muscle formation and differentiation, but
does not prevent later slow myogenesis. Analysis of Hh knockout mice indicates
that Shh promotes early somitic slow myogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the data show that Hh can have direct
pro-differentiative effects on myoblasts and that early-developing muscle
requires Hh for normal differentiation and slow myosin expression. We propose a
simple model of how direct and indirect effects of Hh regulate early limb
myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC471547
PMID: 15238161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Androl. 2004 Jul-Aug;25(4):514-22.

Sonic hedgehog pathway genes are expressed and transcribed in the adult mouse
epididymis.

Turner TT(1), Bomgardner D, Jacobs JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, 22903, USA. ttt@virginia.edu

One role of the hedgehog (hh) signaling pathway during development is to assist
in establishing pattern orientation in the embryo. The structure and function in 
the adult epididymis is highly patterned, and since the sonic hedgehog (Shh)
pathway is known to be functional in the developing male tract and the expression
of other pattern-influencing genes has recently been found in the adult
epididymis, we have examined the adult mouse epididymis for Shh pathway
molecules. Examination was at both the gene and protein level. Shh, the secreted 
signal molecule, patched (Ptc), its membrane receptor, and Gli-1, a downstream
transcription factor, were detected at the gene level with semiquantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and at the protein level
with Western blot analysis. Immunohistochemical localization further detected Shh
specifically in the epididymal epithelium. It was hypothesized that efferent duct
ligation (EDL) would alter epididymal segmentation within 30 days of the
ligation, especially in the proximal segments of the caput epididymis. It was
further hypothesized that these alterations would be correlated with changes in
the expression of genes in the Shh pathway. EDL did not alter epididymal
segmentation, but Shh, Ptc, and Gli1 expression was significantly altered at
specific times after the ligation. The presence of the signaling pathway in the
adult epididymis is a novel finding, as is the fact that in the distal
epididymis, the specific gene expressions are altered by EDL. This suggests that 
the genes are capable of being regulated in a manner that is influenced by
testicular contribution, and it implies that those genes have a function in the
epididymis subject to that regulation.

PMID: 15223840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3593-604. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

Transduction of graded Hedgehog signaling by a combination of Gli2 and Gli3
activator functions in the developing spinal cord.

Lei Q(1), Zelman AK, Kuang E, Li S, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UMDNJ/Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The three vertebrate Gli proteins play a central role in mediating Hedgehog
(Hh)-dependent cell fate specification in the developing spinal cord; however,
their individual contributions to this process have not been fully characterized.
In this paper, we have addressed this issue by examining patterning in the spinal
cord of Gli2;Gli3 double mutant embryos, and in chick embryos transfected with
dominant activator forms of Gli2 and Gli3. In double homozygotes, Gli1 is also
not expressed; thus, all Gli protein activities are absent in these mice. We show
that Gli3 contributes activator functions to ventral neuronal patterning, and
plays a redundant role with Gli2 in the generation of V3 interneurons. We also
show that motoneurons and three classes of ventral neurons are generated in the
ventral spinal cord in double mutants, but develop as intermingled rather than
discrete populations. Finally, we provide evidence that Gli2 and Gli3 activators 
control ventral neuronal patterning by regulating progenitor segregation. Thus,
multiple ventral neuronal types can develop in the absence of Gli function, but
require balanced Gli protein activities for their correct patterning and
differentiation.

PMID: 15215207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Orthop Res. 2004 Jul;22(4):801-6.

The effect of tibiofemoral joint kinematics on patellofemoral contact pressures
under simulated muscle loads.

Li G(1), DeFrate LE, Zayontz S, Park SE, Gill TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Biomechanics Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital/Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
gli1@partners.org

Altered patellofemoral joint contact pressures are thought to contribute to
patellofemoral joint symptoms. However, little is known about the relationship
between tibiofemoral joint kinematics and patellofemoral joint contact pressures.
The objective of this paper was to investigate the effect of tibiofemoral joint
kinematics on patellofemoral joint pressures using an established in vitro
robotic testing experimental setup. Eight cadaveric knee specimens were tested at
0 degrees, 30 degrees, 60 degrees, 90 degrees, and 120 degrees of flexion under
an isolated quadriceps load of 400 N and a combined quadriceps/hamstrings load of
400 N/200 N. Tibiofemoral joint kinematics were measured by the robot and contact
pressures by a TekScan pressure sensor. The isolated quadriceps loading caused
anterior translation and internal rotation of the tibia up to 60 degrees of
flexion and posterior translation and external rotation of the tibia beyond 60
degrees. The co-contraction of the hamstring muscles caused a posterior
translation and external rotation of the tibia relative to the motion of the
tibia under the quadriceps load. Correspondingly, the contact pressures were
elevated significantly at all flexion angles. For example, at 60 degrees of
flexion, the hamstrings co-contraction increased the posterior tibial translation
by approximately 2.8 mm and external tibial rotation by approximately 3.6
degrees. The peak contact pressure increased from 1.4+/-0.8 to 1.7+/-1.0 MPa, a
15% increase. The elevated contact pressures after hamstrings co-contraction
indicates an intrinsic relation between the tibiofemoral joint kinematics and the
patellofemoral joint biomechanics. An increase in posterior tibial translation
and external rotation is accompanied by an increase in contact pressure in the
patellofemoral joint. These results imply that excessive strength conditioning
with the hamstring muscles might not be beneficial to the patellofemoral joint.
Knee pathology that causes an increase in tibial posterior translation and
external rotation might contribute to degeneration of the patellofemoral joint.
These results suggest that conservative treatment of posterior cruciate ligament 
injury should be reconsidered.

PMID: 15183437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biomech Eng. 2004 Apr;126(2):314-8.

Feasibility of using orthogonal fluoroscopic images to measure in vivo joint
kinematics.

Li G(1), Wuerz TH, DeFrate LE.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. gli1@partners.orq

Accurately determining in vivo knee kinematics is still a challenge in biomedical
engineering. This paper presents an imaging technique using two orthogonal images
to measure 6 degree-of-freedom (DOF) knee kinematics during weight-bearing
flexion. Using this technique, orthogonal images of the knee were captured using 
a 3-D fluoroscope at different flexion angles during weight-bearing flexion. The 
two orthogonal images uniquely characterized the knee position at the specific
flexion angle. A virtual fluoroscope was then created in solid modeling software 
and was used to reproduce the relative positions of the orthogonal images and
X-ray sources of the 3-D fluoroscope during the actual imaging procedure. Two
virtual cameras in the software were used to represent the X-ray sources. The 3-D
computer model of the knee was then introduced into the virtual fluoroscope and
was projected onto the orthogonal images by the two virtual cameras. By matching 
the projections of the knee model to the orthogonal images of the knee obtained
during weight-bearing flexion, the knee kinematics in 6 DOF were determined.
Using regularly shaped objects with known positions and orientations, this
technique was shown to have an accuracy of 0.1 mm and 0.1 deg in determining the 
positions and orientations of the objects, respectively.

PMID: 15179865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Jun;122(6):1503-9.

GLI2 is expressed in normal human epidermis and BCC and induces GLI1 expression
by binding to its promoter.

Ikram MS(1), Neill GW, Regl G, Eichberger T, Frischauf AM, Aberger F, Quinn A,
Philpott M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cutaneous Research, Barts and The London Queen Mary's School of
Medicine & Dentistry, University of London, UK. m.s.ikram@qmul.ac.uk

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) binds to its receptor patched (PTCH), leading to the
activation and repression of target genes via the GLI family of zinc-finger
transcription factors. Deregulation of the Shh pathway is associated with basal
cell carcinoma (BCC) due to upregulation of GLI1 and GLI2. We recently
demonstrated a positive feedback loop between GLI1 and GLI2, which revealed that 
GLI1 may be a direct target of GLI2. Using band shift and luciferase reporter
assays, we now show that GLI2 binds the GLI-binding consensus sequence in the
GLI1 promoter. These data suggest that GLI2 directly activates GLI1 and that
retrovirally expressed GLI2 induces expression of endogenous GLI1 in human
primary keratinocytes. Finally, using in situ hybridization, we show that GLI2 is
expressed in the interfollicular epidermis and the outer root sheath of hair
follicles in normal skin as well as in BCC tumor islands. These results suggest
an important role for GLI2 in regulating epidermal proliferation and skin
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15175043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Jun 1;10(11):3763-71.

Molecular profiles of neurofibromatosis type 1-associated plexiform
neurofibromas: identification of a gene expression signature of poor prognosis.

Lévy P(1), Bièche I, Leroy K, Parfait B, Wechsler J, Laurendeau I, Wolkenstein P,
Vidaud M, Vidaud D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire - UPRES EA 3618, Faculté des Sciences
Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Université Paris V, Paris.

PURPOSE: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant disorder with a 
complex variety of clinical symptoms. The hallmark of NF1 is the development of
heterogeneous benign neurofibromas, which may appear as dermal neurofibromas or
plexiform neurofibromas. NF1 patients with plexiform neurofibromas are at risk of
developing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To obtain additional insight into the molecular pathogenesis
of plexiform neurofibromas, we used real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR assays to quantify the mRNA expression of 349 selected genes in
plexiform neurofibromas in comparison with dermal neurofibromas and
patient-matched malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
RESULTS: Thirty genes were significantly up-regulated in plexiform neurofibromas 
compared with dermal neurofibromas. None were down-regulated. The up-regulated
genes mainly encoded transcription factors and growth factors and secreted
proteins, cytokines, and their receptors, pointing to a role of paracrine and
autocrine signaling defects in the genesis of plexiform neurofibromas. We also
identified a gene expression profile, based on MMP9, FLT4/VEGFR3,
TNFRSF10B/TRAILR2, SHH, and GLI1, which discriminated those plexiform
neurofibromas most likely to undergo malignant transformation.
CONCLUSION: Our study has identified a limited number of signaling pathways that 
could be involved, when altered, in plexiform neurofibroma development. Some of
the up-regulated genes could be useful diagnostic or prognostic markers or form
the basis of novel therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 15173083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int J Cancer. 2004 Jul 20;110(6):831-7.

Hedgehog signalling in colorectal tumour cells: induction of apoptosis with
cyclopamine treatment.

Qualtrough D(1), Buda A, Gaffield W, Williams AC, Paraskeva C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Colorectal Tumour Biology Research Group, Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, United Kingdom.

Hedgehog (Hh) signalling controls many aspects of development. It also regulates 
cell growth and differentiation in adult tissues and is activated in a number of 
human malignancies. Hh and Wnt signalling frequently act together in controlling 
cell growth and tissue morphogenesis. Despite the fact that the majority of
colorectal tumours have a constitutively activated canonical Wnt pathway, few
previous studies have investigated the expression of Hh signalling components in 
colorectal tumours. We describe here epithelial cell lines derived from both
nonmalignant colorectal adenomas and colorectal adenocarcinomas that express both
Sonic and Indian Hh. Interestingly, these cells also express the Hh receptor
Patched and the downstream signalling components Smoothened and Gli1, suggesting 
autocrine Hh signalling in these cells. To test whether autocrine Hh signalling
contributes to cell survival, we treated colorectal tumour cells with
cyclopamine, a known inhibitor of Hh signalling. Cyclopamine treatment induced
apoptosis in both adenoma- and carcinoma-derived cell lines, which could be
partially rescued by further stimulation of Hh signalling. These data suggest
that autocrine Hh signalling can increase aberrant cell survival in colorectal
tumour cells and may be a novel target for colon cancer therapy using drugs such 
as cyclopamine.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15170664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Development. 2004 Jun;131(12):2875-85. Epub 2004 May 19.

Restriction of sonic hedgehog signalling during early tooth development.

Cobourne MT(1), Miletich I, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Orthodontics, GKT Dental Institute,
King's College London, Floor 28, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

The signalling peptide encoded by the sonic hedgehog gene is restricted to
localised thickenings of oral epithelium, which mark the first morphological
evidence of tooth development, and is known to play a crucial role during the
initiation of odontogenesis. We show that at these stages in the murine
mandibular arch in the absence of epithelium, the Shh targets Ptc1 and Gli1 are
upregulated in diastema mesenchyme, an edentulous region between the sites of
molar and incisor tooth formation. This ectopic expression is not associated with
Shh transcription but with Shh protein, undetectable in the presence of
epithelium. These findings suggest that, in diastema mesenchyme, restriction of
Shh activity is dependent upon the overlying epithelium. This inhibitory activity
was demonstrated by the ability of transplanted diastema epithelium to
downregulate Ptc1 in tooth explants, and for isolated diastema mesenchyme to
express Ptc1. A candidate inhibitor in diastema mesenchyme is the
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked membrane glycoprotein Gas1. Gas1 is normally 
expressed throughout mandibular arch mesenchyme; however, in the absence of
epithelium this expression was downregulated specifically in the diastema where
ectopic Shh protein was identified. Although Shh signalling has no effect upon
Gas1 expression in mandibular arch mesenchyme, overexpression of Gas1 results in 
downregulation of ectopic Ptc1. Therefore, control of the position of tooth
initiation in the mandibular arch involves a combination of Shh signalling at
sites where teeth are required and antagonism in regions destined to remain
edentulous.

PMID: 15151988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 May;122(5):1180-7.

FOXE1, a new transcriptional target of GLI2 is expressed in human epidermis and
basal cell carcinoma.

Eichberger T(1), Regl G, Ikram MS, Neill GW, Philpott MP, Aberger F, Frischauf
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

Sonic hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a key role in epidermal development and skin 
cancer. Mutational inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene patched (PTCH) leads
to constitutive activation of the Hh signaling pathway, resulting in activation
of target gene transcription by the zinc finger transcription factors GLI1 and
GLI2. Recent experiments in mice point to GLI2 as the key mediator of Hh
signaling in skin. We have concentrated on the identification of candidate
mediators of GLI2 function in the human epidermis. We show here that the
forkhead/winged-helix domain transcription factor FOXE1 is likely to be a direct 
GLI2 target gene. The kinetics of FOXE1 induction are similar to the known direct
target PTCH, and a 2.5 kb upstream fragment containing five GLI-binding sites
activates transcription in a reporter assay. We show by in situ hybridization
that FOXE1 is expressed in the outer root sheath of the hair follicle, where
murine Gli2 is also expressed. FOXE1 expression is also found in basal
keratinocytes of the human epidermis and basal cell carcinoma (BCC). These data
point to a putative role of FOXE1 in mediating Hh signaling in the human
epidermis downstream of GLI2.

PMID: 15140221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Endocrinology. 2004 Aug;145(8):3961-70. Epub 2004 May 7.

Hedgehog signaling promotes prostate xenograft tumor growth.

Fan L(1), Pepicelli CV, Dibble CC, Catbagan W, Zarycki JL, Laciak R, Gipp J, Shaw
A, Lamm ML, Munoz A, Lipinski R, Thrasher JB, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Group, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02163, USA.

During fetal prostate development, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression by the
urogenital sinus epithelium activates Gli-1 expression in the adjacent mesenchyme
and promotes outgrowth of the nascent ducts. Shh signaling is down-regulated at
the conclusion of prostate ductal development. However, a survey of adult human
prostate tissues reveals substantial levels of Shh signaling in normal,
hyperplasic, and malignant prostate tissue. In cancer specimens, the Shh
expression is localized to the tumor epithelium, whereas Gli-1 expression is
localized to the tumor stroma. Tight correlation between the levels of Shh and
Gli-1 expression suggests active signaling between the tissue layers. To
determine whether Shh-Gli-1 signaling could be functionally important for tumor
growth and progression, we performed experiments with the LNCaP xenograft tumor
model and demonstrated that: 1). Shh expressed by LNCaP tumor cells activates
Gli-1 expression in the tumor stroma, 2). genetically engineered Shh
overexpression in LNCaP cells leads to increased tumor stromal Gli-1 expression, 
and 3). Shh overexpression dramatically accelerates tumor growth. These data
suggest that hedgehog signaling from prostate cancer cells to the stroma can
elicit the expression of paracrine signals, which promote tumor growth.

PMID: 15132968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Oral Pathol Med. 2004 Mar;33(3):185-90.

Expression of Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling molecules in ameloblastomas.

Kumamoto H(1), Ohki K, Ooya K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Pathology, Department of Oral Medicine and Surgery, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.
kumamoto@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: To clarify the roles of Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signal transduction in
oncogenesis and cytodifferentiation of odontogenic tumors, expression of SHH,
Patched (PTC), Smoothened (SMO), and GLI1 was analyzed in ameloblastomas as well 
as in tooth germs.
METHODS: Tissue specimens of 9 tooth germs, 36 benign ameloblastomas, and 1
malignant ameloblastoma were examined by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry for the expression of SHH, PTC, SMO,
and GLI1.
RESULTS: Expression of SHH, PTC, SMO, and GLI1 mRNA was detected in all tooth
germ and ameloblastoma samples. Immunohistochemical reactivity for SHH, PTC, SMO,
and GLI1 was detected in both normal and neoplastic odontogenic tissues.
Expression of SHH, PTC, and GLI1 was more evident in epithelial cells than in
mesenchymal cells, whereas SMO reactivity was marked in both epithelial and
mesenchymal components in tooth germs and ameloblastomas. In ameloblastomas,
these SHH signaling molecules were expressed more intensely in peripheral
columnar or cuboidal cells than in central polyhedral cells; keratinizing cells
and granular cells showed no or little reactivity.
CONCLUSION: Expression of SHH, PTC, SMO, and GLI1 in tooth germs and
ameloblastomas suggests that these SHH signaling molecules might play a role in
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and cell proliferation in tooth development
as well as in growth of these epithelial odontogenic tumors.

PMID: 15128061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Gene. 2004 Apr 14;330:101-14.

Expression of the PTCH1 tumor suppressor gene is regulated by alternative
promoters and a single functional Gli-binding site.

Agren M(1), Kogerman P, Kleman MI, Wessling M, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience at NOVUM, Center for Nutrition and Toxicology,
Karolinska Institute, Huddinge 141 57, Sweden.

The PTCH1 tumor suppressor gene encodes a receptor for secreted hedgehog (HH)
ligands and is important for proper proliferation, differentiation and patterning
in almost every tissue and organ during embryogenesis. The PTCH1 protein works as
a negative regulator of the HH-signaling pathway by repressing downstream
signaling by the coreceptor smoothened (SMOH). Mutations in PTCH1 lead to
constitutive expression of HH target genes and a relationship between mutated
PTCH1 and the most common tumor form in the Western world, Basal Cell Carcinoma
(BCC) has been clearly established. We here show that PTCH1 is transcriptionally 
regulated by three independent promoters generating transcripts with alternative 
first exons. We demonstrate that only one of two putative Gli-binding sites that 
were identified in the promoter region of PTCH1 is functional, and that the
transactivating Gli proteins, GLI1, Gli2 and GLI3, bind and enhance transcription
through this site. Moreover, a strong repression of both basal and induced PTCH1 
transcription was observed following expression of a truncated version of GLI3.
Most interestingly, the upstream components in the HH-signaling cascade, Sonic HH
(SHH) and SMOH, solely operate through the functional Gli-binding site because
mutation of the Gli-binding site resulted in the disappearance of the enhanced
transcription induced by the Gli proteins, as well as by SHH or SMOH. This
finding suggests that transcriptional activation of the PTCH1 gene mediated via
the HH-signaling pathway is dependent on the single functional Gli-binding site.

PMID: 15087129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biomech. 2004 May;37(5):779-83.

Effect of the posterior cruciate ligament on posterior stability of the knee in
high flexion.

Li G(1), Most E, DeFrate LE, Suggs JF, Gill TJ, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Biomechanics Laboratory, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
gli1@partners.org

Most biomechanical studies of the knee have focused on knee flexion angles
between 0 degrees and 120 degrees. The posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) has been
shown to constrain posterior laxity of the knee in this range of flexion.
However, little is known about PCL function in higher flexion angles (greater
than 120 degrees ). This in vitro study examined knee kinematics before and after
cutting the PCL at high flexion under a posterior tibial load and various muscle 
loads. The results demonstrated that although the PCL plays an important role in 
constraining posterior tibial translation at low flexion angles, the PCL had
little effect in constraining tibial translation at 150 degrees of flexion under 
the applied loads.

PMID: 15047008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Nature. 2004 Mar 18;428(6980):337-41.

Bmi1 is essential for cerebellar development and is overexpressed in human
medulloblastomas.

Leung C(1), Lingbeek M, Shakhova O, Liu J, Tanger E, Saremaslani P, Van Lohuizen 
M, Marino S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Zürich, Schmelzbergstrasse 12, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland.

Overexpression of the polycomb group gene Bmi1 promotes cell proliferation and
induces leukaemia through repression of Cdkn2a (also known as ink4a/Arf) tumour
suppressors. Conversely, loss of Bmi1 leads to haematological defects and severe 
progressive neurological abnormalities in which de-repression of the ink4a/Arf
locus is critically implicated. Here, we show that Bmi1 is strongly expressed in 
proliferating cerebellar precursor cells in mice and humans. Using Bmi1-null mice
we demonstrate a crucial role for Bmi1 in clonal expansion of granule cell
precursors both in vivo and in vitro. Deregulated proliferation of these
progenitor cells, by activation of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway, leads to
medulloblastoma development. We also demonstrate linked overexpression of BMI1
and patched (PTCH), suggestive of SHH pathway activation, in a substantial
fraction of primary human medulloblastomas. Together with the rapid induction of 
Bmi1 expression on addition of Shh or on overexpression of the Shh target Gli1 in
cerebellar granule cell cultures, these findings implicate BMI1 overexpression as
an alternative or additive mechanism in the pathogenesis of medulloblastomas, and
highlight a role for Bmi1-containing polycomb complexes in proliferation of
cerebellar precursor cells.

PMID: 15029199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Cancer Lett. 2004 Feb 20;204(2):145-57.

Hedgehog--Gli signaling in brain tumors: stem cells and paradevelopmental
programs in cancer.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1), Stecca B, Sánchez P.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, NYU School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY
10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

The Hedgehog-Gli signaling pathway is involved in the regulation of the
proliferation of precursors in different organs of the normal vertebrate embryo. 
These cells express Gli1 and may be the target of cancer-causing agents. Many
tumor types derived from organs that contain Gli1+ precursors appear to
consistently express Gli1, indicating their origin and/or the presence of an
active pathway. Inappropriate pathway activation in a variety of precursor cells 
in model organisms leads to tumor formation while inhibition of the pathway in
human tumor cells leads to a decrease in their proliferation. In the brain we
have documented the expression of Gli1 in germinative zones, and a variety of
brain tumors express GLI1, including medulloblastomas of the cerebellum and a
number of gliomas of the cerebral cortex. The requirement for SHH-Gli signaling
in the growth of the mouse brain, together with the ability of inappropriate
pathway activation in the cerebellum to cause medulloblastomas, and the
inhibition of the growth of a number of brain tumors with cyclopamine, a SHH
signaling inhibitor, underscores the critical role of the SHH-GLI pathway in
brain growth and tumor formation. Moreover, they highlight the components of this
pathway as prime targets for drug development, with special emphasis on the GLI
proteins. Such reagents would allow a rational therapeutic approach to highly
intractable diseases.

PMID: 15013214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Orthop Res. 2004 Mar;22(2):293-7.

In situ forces of the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments in high knee
flexion: an in vitro investigation.

Li G(1), Zayontz S, Most E, DeFrate LE, Suggs JF, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Biomechanics Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital/Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
gli1@partners.org

The function of the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments (ACL and PCL) in
the first 120 degrees of flexion has been reported extensively, but little is
known of their behavior at higher flexion angles. The aim of this investigation
was to study the effects of muscle loads on the in situ forces in both ligaments 
at high knee flexion (>120 degrees). Eighteen fresh-frozen human knee specimens
were tested on a robotic testing system from full extension to 150 degrees of
flexion in response to quadriceps (400 N), hamstrings (200 N), and combined
quadriceps and hamstrings (400 N/200 N) loads. The in situ forces in the ACL and 
PCL were measured using the principle of superposition. The force in the ACL
peaked at 30 degrees of flexion (71.7 +/- 27.9 N in response to the quadriceps
load, 52.3 +/- 24.4 N in response to the combined muscle load, 32.3 +/- 20.9 N in
response to the hamstrings load). At 150 degrees, the ACL force was approximately
30 N in response to the quadriceps load and 20 N in response to the combined
muscle load and isolated hamstring load. The PCL force peaked at 90 degrees (34.0
+/- 15.3 N in response to the quadriceps load, 88.6 +/- 23.7 N in response to the
combined muscle load, 99.8 +/- 24.0 N in response to the hamstrings load) and
decreased to around 35 N at 150 degrees in response to each of the loads. These
results demonstrate that the ACL and PCL carried significantly less load at high 
flexion in response to the simulated muscle loads compared to the peak loads they
carried in response to the same muscle loads at other flexion angles. The data
could provide a reference point for the investigation of non-weight bearing
flexion and extension knee exercises in high flexion. Furthermore, these data
could be useful in designing total knee implants to achieve high flexion.

PMID: 15013087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Plant J. 2004 Feb;37(4):617-25.

Glycerol-insensitive Arabidopsis mutants: gli1 seedlings lack glycerol kinase,
accumulate glycerol and are more resistant to abiotic stress.

Eastmond PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNAP, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, UK.
pje4@york.ac.uk

The aim of this study was to investigate the process of glycerol catabolism in
germinating Arabidopsis seed. A genetic screen was performed to isolate
glycerol-insensitive (gli) mutant seedlings. Three separate mutant loci were
identified (gli1, gli2 and gli3). Of these, only gli1 is unable to utilise
glycerol. Following germination, gli1 seedlings transiently accumulate glycerol
derived from the breakdown of storage oil and are more resistant to hyperosmotic 
stress, salt stress, oxidative stress, freezing and desiccation. Enzyme assays
revealed that gli1 lacks glycerol kinase activity. GLI1 mapped to chromosome 1
near the putative glycerol kinase gene NHO1. Mutations in this gene were
identified in three independent gli1 alleles. A cDNA encoding GLI1 was cloned and
its function was proven by complementation of an Escherichia coli glycerol kinase
(glpK) deletion strain. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that GLI1 is
expressed in all tissues, but is transiently upregulated during early
post-germinative growth and leaf senescence. These data show that glycerol kinase
is required for glycerol catabolism in Arabidopsis and that the accumulation of
glycerol can enhance resistance to a variety of abiotic stresses associated with 
dehydration.

PMID: 14756771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Dev Cell. 2004 Jan;6(1):103-15.

All mouse ventral spinal cord patterning by hedgehog is Gli dependent and
involves an activator function of Gli3.

Bai CB(1), Stephen D, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, and Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

An important question is how the gradient of Hedgehog is interpreted by cells at 
the level of the Gli transcription factors. The full range of Gli activity and
its dependence on Hh have not been determined, although the Gli2 activator and
Gli3 repressor have been implicated. Using the spinal cord as a model system, we 
demonstrate that Gli3 can transduce Hedgehog signaling as an activator. All
expression of the Hh target gene Gli1 is dependent on both Gli2 and Gli3. Unlike 
Gli2, however, Gli3 requires endogenous Gli1 for induction of floor plate and V3 
interneurons. Strikingly, embryos lacking all Gli function develop motor neurons 
and three ventral interneuron subtypes, similar to embryos lacking Hh signaling
and Gli3. Therefore, in the spinal cord all Hh signaling is Gli dependent.
Furthermore, a combination of Gli2 and Gli3 is required to regulate motor neuron 
development and spatial patterning of ventral spinal cord progenitors.

PMID: 14723851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Bone. 2003 Dec;33(6):899-910.

Hedgehog stimulates only osteoblastic differentiation of undifferentiated KS483
cells.

van der Horst G(1), Farih-Sips H, Löwik CW, Karperien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The involvement of hedgehog signaling in the initiation of osteoblastic
differentiation in the bone collar during endochondral bone formation has been
well established. The stages at which hedgehog acts during osteoblast
differentiation as well as its molecular mechanism of action are less well
understood. To address these questions, we have made use of the preosteoblastic
cell line KS483. First, a systematic survey of mRNA expression of osteoblastic
differentiation showed expression of Ihh and signaling intermediates at all
stages. Interestingly, expression of Ihh, Gli1 and Ptc1 peaked during the
maturation phase. Addition of recombinant human sonic hedgehog (rShh) potently
increased osteoblastic differentiation of KS483 cells dose-dependently as assayed
by a modest increase in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, a strong increase in
matrix mineralization, and increased mRNA expression of established osteoblast
marker genes. These effects were blocked by the hedgehog antagonist cyclopamine, 
which by itself was ineffective. Addition of rShh during early stages was
sufficient, while addition to mature osteoblasts had no effect. Furthermore,
hedgehog signaling could be completely blocked by the BMP antagonists, soluble
truncated BMPR-IA and noggin. In contrast, the BMP-induced differentiation of
KS483 cells could only be partly inhibited by high doses of cyclopamine. These
data demonstrate that Hh-induced osteoblastic differentiation requires functional
BMP signaling. In KS483 cells, Hh and BMP synergistically induced alkaline
phosphatase activity only when suboptimal concentrations of BMP were used. This
synergy did not occur at the level of immediate early BMP response, but at the
level of Hh response as determined by transient transfection studies using either
a BMP reporter or a Gli reporter construct. In addition, rShh inhibited
adipogenesis of KS483 cells cultured under adipogenic culture conditions,
suggesting that Hh is involved in directing differentiation of KS483 cells toward
osteoblasts at the expense of adipogenesis. Using in situ hybridization, we
demonstrated, for the first time, Ihh mRNA expression in vivo in osteoblasts and 
lining cells in the humerus of developing human skeleton. Our in vitro and in
vivo data indicate a stimulatory role for osteoblast-expressed Ihh in bone
formation in a positive feedback loop. It may recruit progenitor cells in the
osteoblastic lineage at the expense of adipocytes and it may stimulate maturation
of early osteoblasts.

PMID: 14678849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Orthop Res. 2004 Jan;22(1):90-5.

Kinematics of the knee at high flexion angles: an in vitro investigation.

Li G(1), Zayontz S, DeFrate LE, Most E, Suggs JF, Rubash HE.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Biomechanics Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital/Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
gli1@partners.org

Restoration of knee function after total knee, meniscus, or cruciate ligament
surgery requires an understanding of knee behavior throughout the entire range of
knee motion. However, little data are available regarding knee kinematics and
kinetics at flexion angles greater than 120 degrees (high flexion). In this
study, 13 cadaveric human knee specimens were tested using an in vitro robotic
experimental setup. Tibial anteroposterior translation and internal-external
rotation were measured along the passive path and under simulated muscle loading 
from full extension to 150 degrees of flexion. Anterior tibial translation was
observed in the unloaded passive path throughout, with a peak of 31.2+/-13.2 mm
at 150 degrees. Internal tibial rotation increased with flexion to 150 degrees on
the passive path to a maximum of 11.1+/-6.7 degrees. The simulated muscle loads
affected tibial translation and rotation between full extension and 120 degrees
of knee flexion. Interestingly, at high flexion, the application of muscle loads 
had little effect on tibial translation and rotation when compared to values at
120 degrees. The kinematic behavior of the knee at 150 degrees was markedly
different from that measured at other flexion angles. Muscle loads appear to play
a minimal role in influencing tibial translation and rotation at maximal flexion.
The results imply that the knee is highly constrained at high flexion, which
could be due in part to compression of the posterior soft tissues (posterior
capsule, menisci, muscle, fat, and skin) between the tibia and the femur.

PMID: 14656665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Oncogene. 2004 Feb 26;23(8):1608-17.

IFNalpha induces Fas expression and apoptosis in hedgehog pathway activated BCC
cells through inhibiting Ras-Erk signaling.

Li C(1), Chi S, He N, Zhang X, Guicherit O, Wagner R, Tyring S, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology, Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC), the most common form of human cancer, is understood
to be associated with activation of the sonic hedgehog pathway, through
loss-of-function mutations of tumor suppressor PTCH1 or gain-of-function
mutations of smoothened. Interferon (IFN)-based therapy is quite effective in BCC
treatment, but the molecular basis is not well understood. Here we report a novel
mechanism by which IFNalpha mediates apoptosis in BCCs. In the presence of
IFNalpha, we observed increased apoptosis in a BCC cell line ASZ001, in which PTC
is null, and therefore with constitutive activation of the sonic hedgehog
pathway. We demonstrate that SMO agonist Ag-1.4 mediates activation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) phosphorylation, which is abrogated
by IFNalpha in sonic hedgehog responsive C3H10T1/2 cells. In transient
transfection experiments, we demonstrate that IFNalpha inhibits Erk
phosphorylation and serum response element activation induced by expression of
SMO, Gli1, PDGFRalpha and activated Raf, but not activated mitogen-activated
Erk-regulating kinase (Mek), suggesting that IFNalpha targets mainly on Mek
function. We further show that IFNalpha induces expression of Fas in BCC cells
through interfering with Mek function. The role of the Fas-L/Fas signaling axis
in IFNalpha-mediated apoptosis is demonstrated by the fact that addition of Fas-L
neutralizing antibodies, just as caspase-8 inhibitor Z-IETD-FMK, effectively
prevents IFNalpha-mediated apoptosis. Thus, our data indicate that IFNalpha-based
BCC therapy induces Fas expression and apoptosis through interfering with Mek
function.

PMID: 14647422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Development. 2003 Dec;130(25):6233-43. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Interplays of Gli2 and Gli3 and their requirement in mediating Shh-dependent
sclerotome induction.

Buttitta L(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 115 West
University Parkway, Baltimore, MD 21210, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for sclerotome development in the
mouse. Gli2 and Gli3 are thought to be the primary transcriptional mediators of
Shh signaling; however, their roles in Shh induction of sclerotomal genes have
not been investigated. Using a combination of mutant analysis and in vitro
explant assays, we demonstrate that Gli2 and Gli3 are required for Shh-dependent 
sclerotome induction. Gli2(-/-)Gli3(-/-) embryos exhibit a severe loss of
sclerotomal gene expression, and somitic mesoderm from these embryos cannot
activate sclerotomal genes in response to exogenous Shh. We find that one copy of
either Gli2 or Gli3 is required to mediate Shh induction of sclerotomal markers
Pax1 and Pax9 in vivo and in vitro. Although Gli2 is generally considered an
activator and Gli3 a repressor, our results also reveal a repressor function for 
Gli2 and an activator function for Gli3 in the developing somite. To further
dissect the function of each Gli, we used adenovirus to overexpress Gli1, Gli2
and Gli3 in presomitic mesoderm explants. We find that each Gli preferentially
activates a distinct set of Shh target genes, suggesting that the functions of
Shh in patterning, growth and negative feedback are divided preferentially
between different Gli proteins in the somite.

PMID: 14602680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 9;279(2):1197-205. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

Transcriptional regulation of bcl-2 mediated by the sonic hedgehog signaling
pathway through gli-1.

Bigelow RL(1), Chari NS, Unden AB, Spurgers KB, Lee S, Roop DR, Toftgard R,
McDonnell TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) express high levels of the antiapoptotic
proto-oncogene, bcl-2, and we have shown that bcl-2 contributes to the malignant 
phenotype in a transgenic mouse model. The basis of bcl-2 transcriptional
regulation in keratinocytes is unknown. The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling
pathway is frequently altered in BCCs. Mediators of shh signaling include the
downstream transactivator, gli-1, and transrepressor, gli-3. Seven candidate gli 
binding sites were identified in the bcl-2 promoter. Cotransfection of increasing
amounts of gli-1 in keratinoycytes resulted in a corresponding dose-dependent
increase in bcl-2 promoter luciferase activity. Gli-1 was also able to
up-regulate endogenous bcl-2. Gli-3 cotransfection resulted in no significant
changes in bcl-2 promoter activity compared with control. Gli-3 has been
demonstrated to be proteolytically processed into an N-terminal repressive form
that can inhibit downstream transactivation by gli-1. Gli-3 mutants possessing
only the N-terminal region or the C-terminal region were made and used in
luciferase assays. The N terminus of gli-3 inhibited gli-1 transactivation of the
bcl-2 promoter. Gel shift analysis and luciferase assays demonstrated that gli
binding site 4 (-428 to -420), is important for gli transcriptional regulation.
Skin samples from transgenic mice expressing an RU486 gli-1 transgene exhibited
significantly higher levels of endogenous bcl-2 protein in epidermal
keratinocytes as assessed by immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry. Together,
these findings provide consistent evidence that gli proteins can
transcriptionally regulate the bcl-2 promoter and that gli-3 can inhibit
transactivation by gli-1. These studies further suggest that one consequence of
the deregulation of shh signaling in BCC is the up-regulation of bcl-2.

PMID: 14555646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 15;63(18):5691-6.

Identification of ZASC1 encoding a Krüppel-like zinc finger protein as a novel
target for 3q26 amplification in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas.

Imoto I(1), Yuki Y, Sonoda I, Ito T, Shimada Y, Imamura M, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Japan.

Among the transcription factors that direct proliferation, differentiation, and
death of cells, several Krüppel-like zinc finger molecules such as GLI1 and
ZNF147 can become oncogenic when the genes encoding them are overexpressed by the
DNA amplification mechanism. Here, we report the discovery of a novel member of
this class, ZASC1, from a recently reported critical region of 3q26 amplification
frequently observed in various squamous cell carcinomas, including esophageal
squamous cell carcinomas (ESCs). The deduced 485-amino acid protein product of
ZASC1 contained a putative nuclear localization signal; the exogenously
transfected ZASC1 was translocated into cell nuclei. ZASC1 was frequently
coamplified and subsequently overexpressed with PIK3CA in our panel of ESC cell
lines and primary tumors. In patients with ESC, a higher mRNA expression level of
ZASC1 appeared to be associated with shorter overall survival, and a multivariate
analysis demonstrated that ZASC1 mRNA expression was an independent
prognosticator. In addition, exogenous expression of ZASC1 promoted the growth of
ESC cells, whereas down-regulation of ZASC1 expression by means of an antisense
oligonucleotide suppressed the growth of ESC cells. Taken together, our results
suggest that ZASC1 might be involved in the pathogenesis of ESC as one of the
targets for 3q26 amplification, alone or in concert with other targets.

PMID: 14522885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Oct 1;31(19):5513-25.

GLIS3, a novel member of the GLIS subfamily of Krüppel-like zinc finger proteins 
with repressor and activation functions.

Kim YS(1), Nakanishi G, Lewandoski M, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

In this study, we describe the identification and characterization of a novel
transcription factor GLI-similar 3 (GLIS3). GLIS3 is an 83.8 kDa nuclear protein 
containing five C2H2-type Krüppel-like zinc finger motifs that exhibit 93%
identity with those of GLIS1, however, little homology exists outside their zinc 
finger domains. GLIS3 can function as a repressor and activator of transcription.
Deletion mutant analysis determined that the N- and C-termini are required for
optimal transcriptional activity. GLIS3 binds to the GLI-RE consensus sequence
and is able to enhance GLI-RE-dependent transcription. GLIS3(DeltaC496), a
dominant-negative mutant, inhibits transcriptional activation by GLIS3 and GLI1. 
Whole mount in situ hybridization on mouse embryos from stage E6.5 through E14.5 
demonstrated that GLIS3 is expressed in specific regions in developing kidney and
testis and in a highly dynamic pattern during neurulation. From E11.5 through
E12.5 GLIS3 was strongly expressed in the interdigital regions, which are fated
to undergo apoptosis. The temporal and spatial pattern of GLIS3 expression
observed during embryonic development suggests that it may play a critical role
in the regulation of a variety of cellular processes during development. Both the
repressor and activation functions of GLIS3 may be involved in this control.

PMCID: PMC206473
PMID: 14500813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Connect Tissue Res. 2003;44 Suppl 1:92-6.

Sonic hedgehog functions as a mitogen during bell stage of odontogenesis.

Wu C(1), Shimo T, Liu M, Pacifici M, Koyama E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology, University of Pennsylvania School of
Dental Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions are required for tissue growth and gene
expression patterns during odontogenesis. We showed previously that Sonic
hedgehog (SHH) is detectable in both dental epithelium and mesenchyme, while Shh 
transcripts are present in dental epithelium only, suggesting that SHH functions 
as an autocrine signal in epithelium and a paracrine signal in mesenchyme. This
hypothesis was tested here. We found by in situ hybridization that the SHH
autocrine receptor Ptch-2 is indeed expressed in dental epithelium whereas the
paracrine receptor Ptc is expressed in mesenchyme. Bovine bell stage tooth germs 
were microsurgically separated into epithelial and mesenchymal portions and the
resulting tissue fragments were organ-cultured. In epithelium fragments cultured 
by themselves, gene expression of Shh and Gli-1 (a putative transcriptional
mediator of hedgehog signaling) was significantly decreased in both inner dental 
epithelium and stratum intermedium layers; this was accompanied by a sharp drop
in epithelial cell proliferation. However, in companion control tissue fragments 
containing both epithelium and mesenchyme, Shh and Gli-1 expression as well as
cell proliferation were maintained. Treatment of dental epithelial or mesenchymal
cell populations in monolayer cultures with exogenous recombinant SHH stimulated 
cell proliferation. Together, the data provide clear evidence that Shh is
synthesized by dental epithelium, reaches the underlying mesenchyme, and appears 
to act as an autocrine mitogen for epithelial cells and a paracrine mitogen for
mesenchymal cells, thus exerting crucial functions in tooth germ growth,
morphogenesis, and tissue-tissue interactions of bell stage of odontogenesis.

PMID: 12952180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. FEBS Lett. 2003 Aug 28;550(1-3):46-50.

Transposition and targeting of the prokaryotic mobile element IS30 in zebrafish.

Szabó M(1), Müller F, Kiss J, Balduf C, Strähle U, Olasz F.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Biosafety Research Institute, Agricultural Biotechnology Center,
Szent-Györgyi Albert St. 4, H-2101 Gödöllo, Hungary.

We provide evidence that a prokaryotic insertion sequence (IS) element is active 
in a vertebrate system. The transposase of Escherichia coli element IS30
catalyzes both excision and integration in extrachromosomal DNA in zebrafish
embryos. The transposase has a pronounced target preference, which is shown to be
modified by fusing the enzyme to unrelated DNA binding proteins. Joining the
transposase to the cI repressor of phage lambda causes transposition primarily
into the vicinity of the lambda operator in E. coli, and linking to the DNA
binding domain of Gli1 also directs the recombination activity of transposase
near to the Gli1 binding site in zebrafish. Our results demonstrate the
possibility of fusion transposases to acquire novel target specificity in both
prokaryotes and eukaryotes.

PMID: 12935884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 30;100 Suppl 1:11873-80. Epub 2003 Aug 13.

Indian hedgehog and beta-catenin signaling: role in the sebaceous lineage of
normal and neoplastic mammalian epidermis.

Niemann C(1), Unden AB, Lyle S, Zouboulis ChC, Toftgård R, Watt FM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

In mammalian epidermis, the level of beta-catenin signaling regulates lineage
selection by stem cell progeny. High levels of beta-catenin stimulate formation
of hair follicles, whereas low levels favor differentiation into interfollicular 
epidermis and sebocytes. In transgenic mouse epidermis, overexpression of
beta-catenin leads to formation of hair follicle tumors, whereas overexpression
of N-terminally truncated Lef1, which blocks beta-catenin signaling, results in
spontaneous sebaceous tumors. Accompanying overexpression of beta-catenin is
up-regulation of Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and its receptor, Patched (PTCH/Ptch). In
DeltaNLef1 tumors Ptch mRNA is up-regulated in the absence of SHH. We now show
that PTCH is up-regulated in both human and mouse sebaceous tumors and is
accompanied by overexpression of Indian hedgehog (IHH). In normal sebaceous
glands IHH is expressed in differentiated sebocytes and the transcription factor 
GLI1 is activated in sebocyte progenitors, suggesting a paracrine signaling
mechanism. PTCH1 and IHH are up-regulated during human sebocyte differentiation
in vitro and inhibition of hedgehog signaling inhibits growth and stimulates
differentiation. Overexpression of DeltaNLef1 up-regulates IHH and stimulates
proliferation of undifferentiated sebocytes. We present a model of the
interactions between beta-catenin and hedgehog signaling in the epidermis in
which SHH promotes proliferation of progenitors of the hair lineages whereas IHH 
stimulates proliferation of sebocyte precursors.

PMCID: PMC304101
PMID: 12917489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 1;63(15):4692-7.

Loss of protein kinase Calpha expression may enhance the tumorigenic potential of
Gli1 in basal cell carcinoma.

Neill GW(1), Ghali LR, Green JL, Ikram MS, Philpott MP, Quinn AG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Barts and the London, Queen Mary's School of
Medicine and Dentistry, University of London, 2 Newark Street, Whitechapel,
London E1 2AT, United Kingdom.

Activation of the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway, primarily through mutational 
inactivation of the PTCH1 gene, is associated with the development of basal cell 
carcinoma (BCC). Gli1, a member of the Gli family of transcription factors, is
expressed in BCC and in transgenic mice targeted expression of Gli1 in basal
keratinocytes leads to BCC development. In addition to BCC, previous studies have
shown that Gli1 is expressed in the outer root sheath (ORS) of the hair follicle 
but is absent in interfollicular epidermis. In this study, we have characterized 
the expression pattern of two protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms expressed in BCC
and hair follicles. We have then used reporter assays to investigate the effects 
of these isoforms on Gli1 transcriptional activity. We report that in BCC
sections, PKCalpha but not PKCdelta was weakly expressed in the epidermis,
whereas in the hair follicle, PKCalpha was expressed in the ORS and PKCdelta in
the inner root sheath. In contrast, neither PKCalpha nor PKCdelta was expressed
in BCC tumor islands, although both isoforms were often expressed in the
surrounding stroma. In mammalian 293T cells, coexpression of constitutively
active PKCalpha reduced the activity of Gli1 in a dose-dependent manner, whereas 
constitutively active PKCdelta increased the activity of Gli1, although this
required higher expression levels. Regulation of mutant Gli1 protein localized
exclusively to the nucleus was similar to that of the wild-type protein,
indicating that nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling is not a determinant of Gli1
control by either PKC isoform. Furthermore, PKC regulation of Gli1 did not
involve activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. Finally, we
show that exogenous Gli1 does not alter the expression of PKCalpha in human
primary keratinocytes, suggesting that loss of this isoform in BCC is not via
Hedgehog signaling. As BCCs have been proposed to originate from the ORS, loss of
PKCalpha expression may be relevant to tumor formation; this may, in part, be
because of the predicted increase in Gli1 transcriptional activity.

PMID: 12907651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Curr Biol. 2003 Jul 15;13(14):1169-81.

Multiple muscle cell identities induced by distinct levels and timing of hedgehog
activity in the zebrafish embryo.

Wolff C(1), Roy S, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Intercellular Signalling Group, Centre for Developmental Genetics,
University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: In the zebrafish embryo, the differentiation of distinct muscle fiber
types has been shown to require the activity of members of the Hedgehog (Hh)
family of secreted proteins. Evidence from other systems suggests that Hh behaves
as a morphogen, inducing cell fates in a concentration-dependent manner. Exactly 
how Hh signaling contributes to the generation of the correct pattern of cells
within the zebrafish myotome, however, has remained obscure.
RESULTS: Here, we distinguish four distinct myotomal cell identities in the
zebrafish embryo on the basis of their position, morphology, and gene expression 
patterns. Using morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) to diminish the activities of
the Hh pathway components Patched (Ptc), Fused (Fu), and Suppressor of Fused
(Su(fu)), and the teratogen cyclopamine to inhibit the Hh transducer Smoothened
(Smo), we show that the appropriate differentiation of each cell type depends
upon the levels and range of Hh signaling within the myotome. In addition, by
transiently modulating Hh activity by using cyclopamine and a heat-inducible
transgene, we demonstrate that the competence of myotomal cells to respond to Hh 
changes with time. Finally, we show that the Gli1 and Gli2 transcription factors 
mediate most of the response of myotomal cells to Hh.
CONCLUSIONS: Hh signaling acts in a dosage-dependent manner to specify cell fate 
in the zebrafish myotome. Allocation of the correct number of cells to a specific
fate depends upon the range of Hh activity. The timing of exposure to Hh
determines the response of cells to the signal.

PMID: 12867027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Pathol. 2003 Jul;200(3):348-56.

Molecular characterization of Patched-associated rhabdomyosarcoma.

Kappler R(1), Calzada-Wack J, Schnitzbauer U, Koleva M, Herwig A, Piontek G,
Graedler F, Adamski J, Heinzmann U, Schlegel J, Hemmerlein B,
Quintanilla-Martinez L, Hahn H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technical University Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.

Mutations in the human homologue of Drosophila Patched1 (PTCH1) have been found
in several common tumours including basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma, and
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Medulloblastoma and RMS are also present in the murine
model for Ptch1 deficiency. Tumours in heterozygous Ptch1(neo67/+) mice
consistently exhibit elevated transcript levels of the proto-oncogene Gli1, of
Ptch1 itself, and of the insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2). The present study
has investigated additional molecular changes in RMSs of Ptch1 mutant mice by
means of microarray analysis and protein expression analysis. The data show
activation of the cell survival-promoting Akt/protein kinase B (Pkb).
Furthermore, RMSs express increased levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2
and of genes and proteins known to inhibit cell proliferation, including Gadd45a 
and p27kip1. Taken together, the data suggest that the formation of RMSs in Ptch1
mutants is associated with the ability of tumour cells to resist apoptosis.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12845631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Br J Dermatol. 2003 May;148(5):892-7.

Expression of the GLI2 oncogene and its isoforms in human basal cell carcinoma.

Tojo M(1), Kiyosawa H, Iwatsuki K, Nakamura K, Kaneko F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine, 1 
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of the patched (Ptc) gene, a developmental regulator
implicated in the signalling pathway via sonic hedgehog (Shh) and smoothened
(Smo), play an essential pathogenic role in the development of basal cell
carcinomas (BCCs). We previously reported the upregulation of Shh signal
transducers, including Ptc, Smo and hedgehog-interacting protein, in BCCs. In
vertebrates, specific downstream effectors in the Shh signalling pathway include 
three zinc-finger transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Gli1 possesses only
an activation domain, while Gli2 and Gli3 contain both activation and repression 
domains. It remains unclear which of these transcription factors are responsible 
for the development of BCCs.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the expression pattern of Gli2 mRNA by human BCCs in
comparison with those by normal human skin and various skin tumours.
METHODS: We performed quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction analyses with a series of samples from BCCs, other skin tumours and
normal skin.
RESULTS: We found that Gli2 mRNA expression was enhanced in the BCCs we examined,
whereas there was no significant increase in other skin tumours or normal skin.
Of four spliced Gli2 isoforms designated Gli2alpha, beta, gamma and delta, the
expression of Gli2beta mRNA was increased the most in BCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: As Gli2beta is an isoform spliced at the first splicing site
containing a repression domain and consists of an intact activation domain, its
overexpression may lead to the upregulation of the Shh signalling pathway,
thereby inducing BCCs.

PMID: 12786818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Biomech Eng. 2003 Apr;125(2):295-9.

Determination of optimal graft lengths for posterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction--a theoretical analysis.

Li G(1), DeFrate L, Suggs J, Gill T.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Biomechanics Laboratory, MGH/BIDMC and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02214, USA. gli1@partners.org

Various graft materials have been used in posterior cruciate ligament (PCL)
reconstruction. However, it is unclear if these grafts can reproduce the
structural behavior of the PCL. This paper analyzed the effect of graft length on
the structural behavior of the graft using a minimal deformation energy method.
An analytical solution was obtained to determine the optimal effective graft
length that can best reproduce the structural behavior of the PCL. This optimal
graft length was determined as a function of the axial rigidity of the graft. Two
typical grafts, bone-patella tendon-bone (BPTB) and Achilles tendon, were
analyzed. The data demonstrated that in order to reproduce the PCL behavior, the 
effective length of a BPTB graft (10 mm width) should be 34 mm, while the
Achilles tendon graft (with a cross sectional area of 55 mn2) needs to be 48 mm
in length. Longer grafts result in less resistance and shorter graft increased
the graft resistance. An initial graft tension cannot help recreate the overall
structural behavior of the PCL. These results suggest that graft length is an
important surgical variable in PCL reconstruction. An optimal reconstruction of
the PCL should reproduce the structural properties of the PCL by using a graft
with an optimal length.

PMID: 12751293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. EMBO J. 2003 May 15;22(10):2400-10.

Laminin-10 is crucial for hair morphogenesis.

Li J(1), Tzu J, Chen Y, Zhang YP, Nguyen NT, Gao J, Bradley M, Keene DR, Oro AE, 
Miner JH, Marinkovich MP.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 269
Campus Drive, Room 2145, CA 94305, USA.

The role of the extracellular matrix in cutaneous morphogenesis is poorly
understood. Here, we describe the essential role of laminin-10
(alpha5beta1gamma1) in hair follicle development. Laminin-10 was present in the
basement membrane of elongating hair germs, when other laminins were
downregulated, suggesting a role for laminin-10 in hair development. Treatment of
human scalp xenografts with antibodies to laminin-10, or its receptor beta1
integrin, produced alopecia. E16.5 Lama5 -/- mouse skin, lacking laminin-10,
contained fewer hair germs compared with controls, and after transplantation,
Lama5 -/- skin showed a failure of hair germ elongation followed by complete hair
follicle regression. Lama5 -/- skin showed defective basement membrane assembly, 
without measurable increases in anoikis. Instead, Lama5 -/- skin showed decreased
expression of early hair markers including sonic hedgehog and Gli1, implicating
laminin-10 in developmental signaling. Intriguingly, treatment of Lama5 -/- skin 
with purified laminin-10 corrected basement membrane defects and restored hair
follicle development. We conclude that laminin-10 is required for hair follicle
development and report the first use of exogenous protein to correct a cutaneous 
developmental defect.

PMCID: PMC155997
PMID: 12743034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Dev Biol. 2003 May 15;257(2):343-55.

The amino-terminal region of Gli3 antagonizes the Shh response and acts in
dorsoventral fate specification in the developing spinal cord.

Meyer NP(1), Roelink H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Department of Biological Structure,
Center for Developmental Biology, University of Washington, Box 357420, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.

A concentration gradient of Shh is thought to pattern the ventral neural tube,
and these ventral cell types are absent in shh-/- mice. Based on in vitro and
genetic studies, the zinc finger-containing transcription factors Gli 1, 2, and 3
are mediators of the Shh intracellular response. The floorplate and adjacent cell
types are absent in gli1-/-;gli2-/- mice, but part of the Shh-/- phenotype in the
neural tube is alleviated in the Shh-/-;gli3-/- double mutant. This is consistent
with the predicted role of Gli3 as a repressor of the Shh response. Gli3
repressor activity is blocked by Shh. In order to test the role of the repressor 
form of Gli3 in the neural tube, a truncated version of Gli3 (Gli3R*) was
designed to mimic a Pallister Hall allele. Gli3R* acts as a constitutive
repressor independent of Shh signaling. Misexpression of Gli3R* in the chick
neural tube caused a ventral expansion of class-I, dorsal progenitor proteins and
a loss of class-II, ventral progenitor proteins consistent with expected activity
as a repressor of the Shh response. Activation of the BMP response is sufficient 
to maintain gli3 expression in neural plate explants, which might be a mechanism 
by which BMPs antagonize the Shh response.

PMID: 12729563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Dev Biol. 2003 Mar 15;255(2):238-48.

Hair cycle regulation of Hedgehog signal reception.

Oro AE(1), Higgins K.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, CCSR 2145c, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. oro@cmgm.stanford.edu

Proper patterning of self-renewing organs, like the hair follicle, requires
exquisite regulation of growth signals. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling in skin
controls the growth and morphogenesis of hair follicle epithelium in part through
regulating the Gli transcription factors. While ectopic induction of Shh target
genes leads to hair follicle tumors, such as basal cell carcinomas, how Shh
signaling normally functions during the cyclic process of hair development is
unknown. Here, we show that, during the hair cycle, Shh expression and the
ability of skin cells to respond to Shh signaling is spatially and temporally
regulated. Induction of Shh target genes normally occurs only in the anagen hair 
follicle in response to expression of Shh. However, in patched1 heterozygous
mice, putative tumor precursors form with concomitant induction of Shh target
gene transcription only during anagen in follicular and interfollicular
keratinocytes. Ectopic production of Gli1 accumulates Gli protein and induces Shh
target genes and epithelial tumors at anagen but not other stages, pointing to a 
restricted competence occurring at the level of Gli protein accumulation.
Delivery and reception of growth signals among multipotent cells are restricted
in time and space to facilitate cyclic pattern formation.

PMID: 12648487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Development. 2003 Apr;130(8):1549-64.

Genetic analysis of zebrafish gli1 and gli2 reveals divergent requirements for
gli genes in vertebrate development.

Karlstrom RO(1), Tyurina OV, Kawakami A, Nishioka N, Talbot WS, Sasaki H, Schier 
AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.
karlstrom@bio.umass.edu

Gli proteins regulate the transcription of Hedgehog (Hh) target genes. Genetic
studies in mouse have shown that Gli1 is not essential for embryogenesis, whereas
Gli2 acts as an activator of Hh target genes. In contrast, misexpression studies 
in Xenopus and cultured cells have suggested that Gli1 can act as an activator of
Hh-regulated genes, whereas Gli2 might function as a repressor of a subset of Hh 
targets. To clarify the roles of gli genes during vertebrate development, we have
analyzed the requirements for gli1 and gli2 during zebrafish embryogenesis. We
report that detour (dtr) mutations encode loss-of-function alleles of gli1. In
contrast to mouse Gli1 mutants, dtr mutants and embryos injected with gli1
antisense morpholino oligonucleotides display defects in the activation of Hh
target genes in the ventral neuroectoderm. Mutations in you-too (yot) encode
C-terminally truncated Gli2. We find that these truncated proteins act as
dominant repressors of Hh signaling, in part by blocking Gli1 function. In
contrast, blocking Gli2 function by eliminating full-length Gli2 results in minor
Hh signaling defects and uncovers a repressor function of Gli2 in the
telencephalon. In addition, we find that Gli1 and Gli2 have activator functions
during somite and neural development. These results reveal divergent requirements
for Gli1 and Gli2 in mouse and zebrafish and indicate that zebrafish Gli1 is an
activator of Hh-regulated genes, while zebrafish Gli2 has minor roles as a
repressor or activator of Hh targets.

PMID: 12620981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Dev Biol. 2003 Feb 1;254(1):19-35.

Multiple roles for Hedgehog signaling in zebrafish pituitary development.

Sbrogna JL(1), Barresi MJ, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

The endocrine-secreting lobe of the pituitary gland, or adenohypophysis, forms
from cells at the anterior margin of the neural plate through inductive
interactions involving secreted morphogens of the Hedgehog (Hh), fibroblast
growth factor (FGF), and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) families. To better
understand when and where Hh signaling influences pituitary development, we have 
analyzed the effects of blocking Hh signaling both pharmacologically (cyclopamine
treatments) and genetically (zebrafish Hh pathway mutants). While current models 
state that Shh signaling from the oral ectoderm patterns the pituitary after
placode induction, our data suggest that Shh plays a direct early role in both
pituitary induction and patterning, and that early Hh signals comes from adjacent
neural ectoderm. We report that Hh signaling is necessary between 10 and 15 h of 
development for induction of the zebrafish adenohypophysis, a time when shh is
expressed only in neural tissue. We show that the Hh responsive genes ptc1 and
nk2.2 are expressed in preplacodal cells at the anterior margin of the neural
tube at this time, indicating that these cells are directly receiving Hh signals.
Later (15-20 h) cyclopamine treatments disrupt anterior expression of nk2.2 and
Prolactin, showing that early functional patterning requires Hh signals.
Consistent with a direct role for Hh signaling in pituitary induction and
patterning, overexpression of Shh results in expanded adenohypophyseal expression
of lim3, expansion of nk2.2 into the posterior adenohypophysis, and an increase
in Prolactin- and Somatolactin-secreting cells. We also use the zebrafish Hh
pathway mutants to document the range of pituitary defects that occur when
different elements of the Hh signaling pathway are mutated. These defects,
ranging from a complete loss of the adenohypophysis (smu/smo and yot/gli2
mutants) to more subtle patterning defects (dtr/gli1 mutants), may correlate to
human Hh signaling mutant phenotypes seen in Holoprosencephaly and other
congenital disorders. Our results reveal multiple and distinct roles for Hh
signaling in the formation of the vertebrate pituitary gland, and suggest that Hh
signaling from neural ectoderm is necessary for induction and functional
patterning of the vertebrate pituitary gland.

PMID: 12606279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2003 Feb;13(1):34-42.

Sonic hedgehog in normal and neoplastic proliferation: insight gained from human 
tumors and animal models.

Wetmore C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, and Program in Neuro-oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA. wetmore.cynthia@mayo.edu

Cancer arises when a cell accumulates multiple genetic changes that allow it to
elude the highly regulated balance between proliferation and apoptosis that an
organism employs to suppress inappropriate growth. It has become evident that
malignant transformation of a cell or group of cells often involves pathways that
are active during normal development but are inappropriately regulated in
neoplastic proliferation. Signaling via the Sonic hedgehog pathway is critical to
vertebrate development and also appears to play an integral role in the
initiation and propagation of some tumors of the muscle, skin and nervous system.
Analyses of human tumors have revealed mutations in various components of the
Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway that appear to result in the activation of this 
pathway, as inferred by the increased expression of the transcription factor,
Gli1. Interestingly, a proportion of the human tumors and most of those arising
in mouse models continue to express the normal Patched allele, suggesting the
involvement of additional molecular events in the transformation of the
haploinsufficient cells.

PMID: 12573433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Genet Res. 2002 Oct;80(2):131-43.

Molecular linkage map of Einkorn wheat: mapping of storage-protein and soft-glume
genes and bread-making quality QTLs.

Taenzler B(1), Esposti RF, Vaccino P, Brandolini A, Effgen S, Heun M,
Schäfer-Pregl R, Borghi B, Salamini F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institut für Züchtungsforschung, Carl-von-Linné-Weg 10, D-50829
Köln, Germany.

Two molecular maps of Triticum monococcum L were produced and integrated. The
integrated map includes a total of 477 markers, 32 RFLPs, 438 AFLPs, one
morphological (soft glume (Sog)) and six storage-protein markers, and covers 856 
cM. The trait Sog with the recessive allele sog maps to linkage group 2S.
Probably, this is the T. monococcum homologue of Tg and Tg2 in hexaploid and
tetraploid wheats, respectively. Loci coding for seed storage proteins were
allocated to chromosomes 1L (HMW GLU1,2 and Glu1), 1S (LMW GLU6,7, LMW GLU1-4,
omega GLI1-4, gamma GLI5 and Gli-1) and 6L (alpha/beta GLI7-14). Parameters
related to bread-making quality (SDS sedimentation volume, specific sedimentation
volume (SSV) and total protein content) were studied in one of the two
populations. A QTL that is consistently present across environments was detected 
for SDS sedimentation volume and for SSV. The position of the QTL on chromosome
1S was in close agreement with the map positions of storage-protein loci. A
second QTL was mapped on chromosome 5. For protein content, two significant QTLs 
were mapped to linkage groups 1 and 5.

PMID: 12534216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 7;278(10):8244-9. Epub 2003 Jan 3.

Sonic hedgehog induces capillary morphogenesis by endothelial cells through
phosphoinositide 3-kinase.

Kanda S(1), Mochizuki Y, Suematsu T, Miyata Y, Nomata K, Kanetake H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Endothelial
Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-7-1 Sakamoto,
Japan. shigeruk@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) acts as a morphogen in many cell types. Recent studies have 
shown that hedgehog signaling is involved in vascular development as well as
postnatal angiogenesis. However, the direct action of Shh on cultured endothelial
cells has not been clearly shown. To address this issue, we examined the effect
of Shh on morphological changes by murine brain capillary endothelial cells (IBE 
cells) and human umbilical endothelial cells (HUVECs). Shh induced capillary
morphogenesis by these cells. The effect was inhibited by cyclopamine or
pertussis toxin. Shh-induced capillary morphogenesis was also blocked by
LY294002, a phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) inhibitor. Shh rapidly
increased PI3-kinase activity in IBE cells and HUVECs; this activity was
inhibited by cyclopamine. Nuclear localization of Gli1 was increased in
Shh-treated IBE cells, which was not affected by LY294002. Actinomycin D and
cycloheximide inhibited Shh-induced capillary morphogenesis. In IBE cells
expressing kinase-inactive c-Fes, Shh failed to stimulate PI3-kinase activity and
capillary morphogenesis. Considered collectively, Shh induced capillary
morphogenesis of endothelial cells through both rapid activation of
c-Fes/PI3-kinase pathways and transcriptionally regulated pathways.

PMID: 12514186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Development. 2003 Feb;130(3):527-37.

The chick oligozeugodactyly (ozd) mutant lacks sonic hedgehog function in the
limb.

Ros MA(1), Dahn RD, Fernandez-Teran M, Rashka K, Caruccio NC, Hasso SM, Bitgood
JJ, Lancman JJ, Fallon JF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011
Santander, Spain.

We have analyzed a new limb mutant in the chicken that we name oligozeugodactyly 
(ozd). The limbs of this mutant have a longitudinal postaxial defect, lacking the
posterior element in the zeugopod (ulna/fibula) and all digits except digit 1 in 
the leg. Classical recombination experiments show that the limb mesoderm is the
defective tissue layer in ozd limb buds. Molecular analysis revealed that the ozd
limbs develop in the absence of Shh expression, while all other organs express
Shh and develop normally. Neither Ptc1 nor Gli1 are detectable in mutant limb
buds. However, Bmp2 and dHAND are expressed in the posterior wing and leg bud
mesoderm, although at lower levels than in normal embryos. Activation of
Hoxd11-13 occurs normally in ozd limbs but progressively declines with time.
Phase III of expression is more affected than phase II, and expression is more
severely affected in the more 5' genes. Interestingly, re-expression of Hoxd13
occurs at late stages in the distal mesoderm of ozd leg buds, correlating with
formation of digit 1. Fgf8 and Fgf4 expression are initiated normally in the
mutant AER but their expression is progressively downregulated in the anterior
AER. Recombinant Shh protein or ZPA grafts restore normal pattern to ozd limbs;
however, retinoic acid fails to induce Shh in ozd limb mesoderm. We conclude that
Shh function is required for limb development distal to the elbow/knee joints,
similar to the Shh(-/-) mouse. Accordingly we classify the limb skeletal elements
as Shh dependent or independent, with the ulna/fibula and digits other than digit
1 in the leg being Shh dependent. Finally we propose that the ozd mutation is
most likely a defect in a regulatory element that controls limb-specific
expression of Shh.

PMID: 12490559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46(7):975-82.

The mouse polydactylous mutation, luxate (lx), causes anterior shift of the
anteroposterior border in the developing hindlimb bud.

Yada Y(1), Makino S, Chigusa-Ishiwa S, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan.

Pattern formation along the anterior-posterior axis of the vertebrate limb is
established upon activation of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) in the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). Since many mouse mutants with preaxial polydactyly show ectopic
expression of Shh at the anterior margin of the limb buds, it has been thought to
be a primary defect caused by these mutations. We show here that the mouse
mutation luxate (lx) exhibits dose-dependent reduction in the size of the Fgf8
expression domain in the ectoderm from the initial stage of limb development.
This aberration was independent of Fgf10 expression in the limb mesenchyme. Shh
was induced in the mesenchyme underlying the posterior end of the Fgf8 expression
domain, indicating an anterior shift of Shh expression in lx hindlimb buds. Prior
to the ectopic induction of Shh, the expression domains of genes downstream from 
Shh, namely dHAND, Gli1, Ptc and Gre, which are normally expressed in posterior
mesenchyme of limb buds, expanded anteriorly on the lx hindlimb buds. Conversely,
the expression domains of anterior mesenchymal markers such as Gli3and Alx4
decreased in size. Thus, ectopic Shh is not a primary defect of the lx mutation. 
Rather, our results indicate that the lx mutation affects the positioning of the 
anteroposterior border in developing hindlimb buds.

PMID: 12455637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 15;62(22):6385-9.

Induction of medulloblastomas in mice by sonic hedgehog, independent of Gli1.

Weiner HL(1), Bakst R, Hurlbert MS, Ruggiero J, Ahn E, Lee WS, Stephen D, Zagzag 
D, Joyner AL, Turnbull DH.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway plays a critical role in normal
cerebellar development and has been implicated in medulloblastomas, common
malignant childhood tumors of the cerebellum. To test whether Shh mis-expression 
is sufficient for medulloblastoma formation, we used ultrasound
biomicroscopy-guided in utero injection of a Shh-expressing retrovirus into the
cerebellum of 13.5-day mouse embryos to show that direct activation of the Shh
pathway can lead to tumor formation. Significantly, medulloblastomas were
observed in 76% of the mice infected with Shh-expressing retrovirus. Furthermore,
contrary to recent suggestions that the Shh transcriptional target Gli1 plays a
critical role in Shh-induced tumorigenesis, we found that medulloblastomas form
in Gli1 null mutant mice. We have developed an efficient mouse model of
medulloblastoma and shown that Gli1 is not required for tumorigenesis when Shh
signaling is activated upstream in the pathway.

PMID: 12438220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 15;16(22):2843-8.

Ski is involved in transcriptional regulation by the repressor and full-length
forms of Gli3.

Dai P(1), Shinagawa T, Nomura T, Harada J, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R, Khan MM, Akimaru H,
Sasaki H, Colmenares C, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Ibaraki, Japan.

Transcription factor Glioblastoma-3 (Gli3) is cleaved in the anterior region of
the limb bud to generate its repressor form. In contrast, Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling from the posterior zone of polarizing activity blocks Gli3 processing
and then induces the expression of Gli3 target genes, including Gli1. Here we
report that the Ski corepressor binds to Gli3 and recruits the histone
deacetylase complex. The Gli3-mediated repression was impaired by anti-Ski
antibody and in Ski-deficient fibroblasts, and Shh-induced Gli1 gene
transcription mediated by full-length Gli3 was inhibited by Ski. Furthermore, a
Ski mutation enhanced the digit abnormalities caused by the Gli3 gene mutation.
Thus, Ski plays an important role in pattern formation.

PMCID: PMC187484
PMID: 12435627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):5116-22. Epub 2002 Nov 7.

Characterization of the physical interaction of Gli proteins with SUFU proteins.

Dunaeva M(1), Michelson P, Kogerman P, Toftgard R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nutrition and Toxicology, Department of Bioscience at NOVUM,
Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway is involved in both development and cancer
induction in a wide range of organisms. The end point of the Hedgehog
signal-transduction cascade is the Gli/Ci, zinc-finger transcription factors.
Proteins such as Fused, Suppressor of fused (SUFU), Costal-2, and protein kinase 
A are essential for regulation of Gli/Ci processing, activity, and localization. 
Coimmunoprecipitation and Far Western assays, coupled with truncation analysis
and mutagenesis have been used to define the region of interaction between Gli
proteins and SUFU. We identify a novel motif SYGH in Gli/Ci family proteins,
which is required for the interaction with SUFU. Mutational studies revealed that
Gly(122) and His(123) are crucial for binding to SUFU, suggesting the importance 
of hydrophobicity for the correct binding conformation. Functional analysis
revealed that the activity of GLI transcription factors with mutations in this
motif is no longer suppressed by co-expression of SUFU. Moreover, we have found
that a C-terminal 19-amino acid deletion in SUFU (delta465) is sufficient to
abrogate interaction with GLI1. Interestingly, this SUFU mutant localizes in the 
nucleus, most probably because it is not efficiently sequestered in the
cytoplasm. Taken together, we identified a novel motif in the Gli/Ci family of
proteins that is essential both for protein-protein interaction with SUFU and for
functional repression of GLI1 by SUFU.

PMID: 12426310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Neurosci. 2002 Nov 1;22(21):9244-54.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide and sonic hedgehog interact to
control cerebellar granule precursor cell proliferation.

Nicot A(1), Lelièvre V, Tam J, Waschek JA, DiCicco-Bloom E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey/Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New
Jersey 08854, USA. nicotar@umdnj.edu

Although positive and negative signals control neurogenesis in the embryo,
factors regulating postnatal proliferation are less well characterized. In the
vertebrate cerebellum, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is an efficacious mitogen for
cerebellar granule neuron precursors (GNPs), and mutations activating the Shh
pathway are linked to medulloblastoma, a tumor derived from GNPs. Although the
mitogenic effects of Shh can be blocked by increasing cAMP or protein kinase A
activity, the physiological factors antagonizing this stimulation are undefined. 
In the embryo, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)
receptor 1 (PAC1) signaling regulates neural precursor proliferation. We now show
that in the developing cerebellum, PAC1 mRNA colocalizes with gene transcripts
for Shh receptor Patched 1 and target gene Gli1 in the external germinal layer.
We consequently investigated the interactions of PACAP and Shh in proliferation
of purified GNPs in culture. Shh exhibited mitogenic activity in both rat and
mouse cultures, stimulating DNA synthesis approximately 10-fold after 48 hr of
exposure. PACAP markedly inhibited Shh-induced thymidine incorporation by 50 and 
85% in rat and mouse GNPs, respectively, but did not significantly affect the
stimulation induced by other mitogens. This selective effect was reproduced by
the specific PAC1 agonist maxadilan, as well as by the adenylate cyclase
activator forskolin, suggesting that PAC1 provides a potent inhibitory signal for
Shh-induced proliferation in developing cerebellum. In contrast, in the absence
of Shh, PACAP and maxadilan modestly stimulated DNA synthesis, an effect
reproduced by activating protein kinase C. These observations suggest that
G-protein-coupled receptors, such as PAC1, serve as sensors of environmental
cues, coordinating diverse neurogenetic signals.

PMID: 12417650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Development. 2002 Dec;129(23):5323-37.

Shh signaling within the dental epithelium is necessary for cell proliferation,
growth and polarization.

Gritli-Linde A(1), Bei M, Maas R, Zhang XM, Linde A, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University,
Sweden.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a member of the mammalian Hedgehog (Hh) family, plays a key
role during embryogenesis and organogenesis. Tooth development, odontogenesis, is
governed by sequential and reciprocal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.
Genetic removal of Shh activity from the dental epithelium, the sole source of
Shh during tooth development, alters tooth growth and cytological organization
within both the dental epithelium and mesenchyme of the tooth. In this model it
is not clear which aspects of the phenotype are the result of the direct action
of Shh on a target tissue and which are indirect effects due to deficiencies in
reciprocal signalings between the epithelial and mesenchymal components. To
distinguish between these two alternatives and extend our understanding of Shh's 
actions in odontogenesis, we have used the Cre-loxP system to remove Smoothened
(Smo) activity in the dental epithelium. Smo, a seven-pass membrane protein is
essential for the transduction of all Hh signals. Hence, removal of Smo activity 
from the dental epithelium should block Shh signaling within dental epithelial
derivatives while preserving normal mesenchymal signaling. Here we show that
Shh-dependent interactions occur within the dental epithelium itself. The dental 
mesenchyme develops normally up until birth. In contrast, dental epithelial
derivatives show altered proliferation, growth, differentiation and polarization.
Our approach uncovers roles for Shh in controlling epithelial cell size,
organelle development and polarization. Furthermore, we provide evidence that Shh
signaling between ameloblasts and the overlying stratum intermedium may involve
subcellular localization of Patched 2 and Gli1 mRNAs, both of which are targets
of Shh signaling in these cells.

PMID: 12403705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mech Dev. 2002 Nov;119(1):21-34.

A novel gene, GliH1, with homology to the Gli zinc finger domain not required for
mouse development.

Nakashima M(1), Tanese N, Ito M, Auerbach W, Bai C, Furukawa T, Toyono T, Akamine
A, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oral Molecular Biology, Division of Oral
Rehabilitation, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan. misako@dent.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-Gli signaling pathway regulates development of many
organs, including teeth. We cloned a novel gene encoding a transcription factor
that contains a zinc finger domain with highest homology to the Gli family of
proteins (61-64% amino acid sequence identity) from incisor pulp. Consistent with
this sequence conservation, gel mobility shift assays demonstrated that this new 
Gli homologous protein, GliH1, could bind previously characterized Gli DNA
binding sites. Furthermore, transfection assays in dental pulp cells showed that 
whereas Gli1 induces a nearly 50-fold increase in activity of a luciferase
reporter containing Gli DNA binding sites, coexpression of Gli1 with Gli3 and/or 
GliH1 results in inhibition of the Gli1-stimulated luciferase activity. In situ
hybridization analysis of mouse embryos demonstrated that GliH1 expression is
initiated later than the three Gli genes and has a more restricted expression
pattern. GliH1 is first detected diffusely in the limb buds at 10.0 days post
coitus and later is expressed in the branchial arches, craniofacial interface,
ventral part of the tail, whisker follicles and hair, intervertebral discs,
teeth, eyes and kidney. LacZ was inserted into the GliH1 allele in embryonic stem
cells to produce mice lacking GliH1 function. While this produced indicator mice 
for GliH1-expression, analysis of mutant mice revealed no discernible phenotype
or required function for GliH1. A search of the Celera Genomics and associated
databases identified possible gene sequences encoding a zinc finger domain with
approximately 90% homology to that of GliH1, indicating there is a family of GliH
genes and raising the possibility of overlapping functions during development.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12385751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4753-61.

Gli2, but not Gli1, is required for initial Shh signaling and ectopic activation 
of the Shh pathway.

Bai CB(1), Auerbach W, Lee JS, Stephen D, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The Shh signaling pathway is required in many mammalian tissues for embryonic
patterning, cell proliferation and differentiation. In addition, inappropriate
activation of the pathway has been implicated in many human tumors. Based on
transfection assays and gain-of-function studies in frog and mouse, the
transcription factor Gli1 has been proposed to be a major mediator of Shh
signaling. To address whether this is the case in mouse, we generated a Gli1 null
allele expressing lacZ. Strikingly, Gli1 is not required for mouse development or
viability. Of relevance, we show that all transcription of Gli1 in the nervous
system and limbs is dependent on Shh and, consequently, Gli1 protein is normally 
not present to transduce initial Shh signaling. To determine whether Gli1
contributes to the defects seen when the Shh pathway is inappropriately activated
and Gli1 transcription is induced, Gli1;Ptc double mutants were generated. We
show that Gli1 is not required for the ectopic activation of the Shh signaling
pathway or to the early embryonic lethal phenotype in Ptc null mutants. Of
significance, we found instead that Gli2 is required for mediating some of the
inappropriate Shh signaling in Ptc mutants. Our studies demonstrate that, in
mammals, Gli1 is not required for Shh signaling and that Gli2 mediates
inappropriate activation of the pathway due to loss of the negative regulator
Ptc.

PMID: 12361967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Neurooncol. 2002 Sep;59(2):107-15.

Patched and smoothened mRNA expression in human astrocytic tumors inversely
correlates with histological malignancy.

Katayam M(1), Yoshida K, Ishimori H, Katayama M, Kawase T, Motoyama J, Kamiguchi 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Brain Science Group, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako,
Saitama, Japan. mkatayama-nsu@umin.ac.jp

Patched (Ptc) is a transmembrane receptor for sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
functionally associated with another transmembrane protein, smoothened (Smo). Ptc
is a tumor suppressor gene whereas Smo serves as a proto-oncogene of
neuroectodermal tumors. Their downstream molecules, Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3, are
oncogenes of glioblastomas. We have analyzed mRNA expression of Ptc, Smo, and Gli
family members in human astrocytic tumors. The mRNA expression was quantified by 
real-time polymerase chain reactions in 40 tumors (diffuse astrocytomas; 6 cases:
anaplastic astrocytomas; 12 cases: glioblastomas; 22 cases) and four cell lines
derived from astrocytic tumors. The MIB-1 proliferating cell indices (PCIs) of
these tumors were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. In comparison with the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification, the amount of Ptc and Smo mRNAs
decreased in proportion to the progression of histological maliganancy, and
similar results were obtained with astrocytic tumor-derived cell lines. However, 
there was no remarkable correlation between the mRNA expression level of each
gene and the MIB-1 PCIs. The mRNA expression level of Gli1 was variable and
highly elevated in two cases. No remarkable features were found clinically or
histologically in these two cases. In summary, our results indicate that Ptc and 
Smo mRNA levels have an inverse correlation with histological malignancy and
suggest that these gene products are implicated in the suppression of astrocytic 
tumors. In contrast, there was no significant correlation between the mRNA levels
of the Gli family members and histological malignancy, suggesting that Gli
proteins are not associated with the progression of astrocytic tumors.

PMID: 12241103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 15;62(18):5308-16.

Dissecting the oncogenic potential of Gli2: deletion of an NH(2)-terminal
fragment alters skin tumor phenotype.

Sheng H(1), Goich S, Wang A, Grachtchouk M, Lowe L, Mo R, Lin K, de Sauvage FJ,
Sasaki H, Hui CC, Dlugosz AA.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Dermatology, University of
Michigan, 1500 E Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Development of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) in skin is associated with
uncontrolled Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, which operates primarily through the
Gli family of transcription factors. Gli2 is a mediator of physiological Shh
signaling in skin and is sufficient to produce BCCs when overexpressed by use of 
a Keratin 5 (K5) promoter. Analysis of Gli protein deletion mutants has
identified an NH(2)-terminal transcription repressor domain in Gli2 but not Gli1.
To assess the potential involvement of the Gli2 repressor domain in skin tumor
development, we overexpressed the Gli2DeltaN2 mutant in transgenic mice by use of
the K5 promoter. K5-Gli2DeltaN2 mice developed a variety of skin tumors
resembling human trichoblastomas, cylindromas, basaloid follicular hamartomas,
and rarely, BCCs. In striking contrast, K5-Gli2 mice overexpressing wild-type
Gli2 developed only BCCs. Other differences between tumors arising in these two
sets of transgenic mice included their gross appearance, growth rate, and
predilection for specific body sites. However, the expression levels of Shh
target genes, which reflect the magnitude of Shh pathway activation, were not
dramatically different. Tumors from K5-Gli2DeltaN2 mice, unlike human or mouse
BCCs, gave rise to cell lines that constitutively expressed Shh target genes in
vitro and were tumorigenic in nude mice. Interestingly, the phenotype of
K5-Gli2DeltaN2 mice was strikingly similar to that reported after K5
promoter-driven overexpression of GLI1, which lacks an NH(2)-terminal region
homologous to the Gli2 repressor domain. These results underscore the qualitative
difference in oncogenicity of GLI1 and Gli2 when overexpressed in skin, and
reveal a previously unanticipated role for the Gli2 NH(2) terminus in defining
tumor phenotype.

PMID: 12235001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 15;249(2):349-66.

Sonic hedgehog activates mesenchymal Gli1 expression during prostate ductal bud
formation.

Lamm ML(1), Catbagan WS, Laciak RJ, Barnett DH, Hebner CM, Gaffield W,
Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Ductal budding in the developing prostate is a testosterone-dependent event that 
involves signaling between the urogenital sinus epithelium (UGE) and urogenital
sinus mesenchyme (UGM). We show here that ductal bud formation is associated with
focused expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in the epithelium of nascent prostate 
buds and in the growing tips of elongating prostate ducts. This pattern of
localized Shh expression occurs in response to testosterone stimulation. The gene
for the Shh receptor, Ptc1, is expressed in the UGM, as are the members of the
Gli gene family of transcriptional regulators (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3). Expression 
of Ptc1, Gli1, and Gli2 is localized primarily to mesenchyme surrounding prostate
buds, whereas Gli3 is expressed diffusely throughout the UGM. A strong dependence
of Gli1 (and Ptc1) expression on Shh signaling is demonstrated by induction of
expression in both the intact urogenital sinus and the isolated UGM by exogenous 
SHH peptide. A similar dependence of Gli2 and Gli3 expression on Shh is not
observed. Nonetheless, the chemical inhibitor of Shh signaling, cyclopamine,
produced a graded inhibition of Gli gene expression (Gli1>Gli2>Gli3) in
urogenital sinus explants that was paralleled by a severe inhibition of ductal
budding.

PMID: 12221011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2002 Aug 30;137(2):159-70.

Altered whisker patterns induced by ectopic expression of Shh are topographically
represented by barrels.

Ohsaki K(1), Osumi N, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Cellular Biology, National Institute of
Neuroscience, NCNP, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi, Kodaira, 187-8502, Tokyo, Japan.

Barrels in the somatosensory cortex are segregated columns, which somatotopically
relate to facial whiskers. The barrel pattern is assumed to be determined by an
extrinsic mechanism (the domino theory). This theory is based on whisker lesion
experiments and developmental observations regarding the serial establishment of 
the somatotopic pattern in which pattern formations are relayed from the
periphery to the central nervous system. However, the barrel pattern is possibly 
determined by an intrinsic mechanism, especially in its primitive form. In order 
to investigate the definitive mechanism, we established an experimental system in
which the cortical barrel pattern can be altered, not by using a lesion paradigm,
but by epigenetically changing the whisker pattern. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays a 
pivotal role in whisker development. We transfected an adenovirus harboring
chicken Shh (Ad-cShh) to mouse embryos (E9.5-E11.5) using an in utero surgical
technique. When Ad-cShh was expressed in the epidermis, Bmp4, Ptch, Ptch2 and
Gli1 were induced ectopically in the interfollicular region. In contrast, the
expression of Bmp2 and Shh itself was unaltered. At a suitable dose of Ad-cShh,
some pups displayed supernumerary whiskers or a disordered whisker pattern. The
barrel patterns of these mice after the critical period were topographic
representations of the contralateral side of the new whisker patterns when
visualized by a cytochrome oxidase or Nissle staining method, supporting the
instructive role of the extrinsic mechanism.

PMID: 12220708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer Res. 2002 Aug 15;62(16):4773-80.

FOXM1 is a downstream target of Gli1 in basal cell carcinomas.

Teh MT(1), Wong ST, Neill GW, Ghali LR, Philpott MP, Quinn AG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Barts & The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London, London E1 2AT, United Kingdom.
m.t.teh@qmul.ac.uk

Forkhead box (FOX) proteins have been shown to play important roles in regulating
the expression of genes involved in cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, 
longevity, and transformation. The functional importance of this gene family in
normal human skin physiology and disease processes is not well understood.
Activation of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a key role in the development 
of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) of the skin in humans. Recent studies have
established that some FOX genes are downstream targets of Shh signaling. We have 
investigated the role of FOX proteins in transducing Shh effects in human skin by
using degenerate PCR to identify FOX genes differentially expressed in BCCs. All 
three known FOXM1 isoforms (a, b, and c) were detected in human skin and cultured
keratinocytes, and the transcriptionally active FOXM1b isoform was found to be
up-regulated in BCCs. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR showed that the increase in
FOXM1 mRNA levels was specific for BCCs and not a reflection of increased cell
proliferation in that no up-regulation was seen in squamous cell carcinomas or
proliferating primary human keratinocyte cultures. Immunostaining studies showed 
intense nuclear and cytoplasmic staining throughout BCC tumor islands and not
confined to the periphery regions of the tumor where proliferating
Ki-67-immunopositive cells are predominantly localized. Expression of the Shh
target glioma transcription factor-1 (Gli1) in primary keratinocytes and other
cell lines caused a significant elevation of FOXM1 mRNA level and transcriptional
activity, indicating that FOXM1 is a downstream target of Gli1. Our data provide 
the first evidence that activation of Shh signaling via Gli1 is an important
determinant of FOXM1 expression in mammalian cells. Given the role of FOXM1 in
cell proliferation, the up-regulation of FOXM1 in BCCs may be one of the
mechanisms whereby Shh signaling exerts its mitogenic effect on basal
keratinocytes, leading to the development of this common human cancer.

PMID: 12183437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Dev Growth Differ. 2002 Aug;44(4):257-71.

Conserved expression control and shared activity between cognate T-box genes Tbx2
and Tbx3 in connection with Sonic hedgehog signaling during Xenopus eye
development.

Takabatake Y(1), Takabatake T, Sasagawa S, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are considered to be cognate genes within a Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of
T-box genes and are expressed in closely overlapping areas in a variety of
tissues, including the eye. Herein, we show that misexpression of Tbx2 and Tbx3
in Xenopus embryos gave rise to defective eye morphogenesis, which was
reminiscent of the defect caused by attenuated Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling.
Indeed, Tbx2/3 misexpression suppressed Gli1, Gli2, Ptc2 and Pax2, mediators or
targets of Hedgehog (Hh) signals. From these data, Tbx2/3 may have a shared
function in inhibiting Gli-dependent Shh signaling during eye development.
Conversely, the expression of Tbx2/3 was severely affected by both Shh and a
putative dominant negative form of Hh, as well as by both transactivator and
transrepressor forms of Gli-fusion proteins, suggesting that the expression of
Tbx2/3 may be regulated by a Gli-dependent Hh signal transduction pathway.
Because the Shh signal has been considered to play crucial roles in the formation
of the proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral axes in the eyes, these findings about 
the mutual regulatory mechanism between Tbx2/3 and Gli-dependent Hh signaling
provide valuable insight into the cause of the localized expression of Tbx2/3 and
their role during the formation of these axes. In addition, our findings also
imply the conserved regulation and shared activity between the cognate genes of
Tbx2 and Tbx3.

PMID: 12175361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 15;21(36):5529-39.

Human GLI2 and GLI1 are part of a positive feedback mechanism in Basal Cell
Carcinoma.

Regl G(1), Neill GW, Eichberger T, Kasper M, Ikram MS, Koller J, Hintner H, Quinn
AG, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Salzburg, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

Transgenic mouse models have provided evidence that activation of the zinc-finger
transcription factor GLI1 by Hedgehog (Hh)-signalling is a key step in the
initiation of the tumorigenic programme leading to Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC).
However, the downstream events underlying Hh/GLI-induced BCC development are
still obscure. Using in vitro model systems to analyse the effect of
Hh/GLI-signalling in human keratinocytes, we identified a positive feedback
mechanism involving the zinc finger transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2.
Expression of GLI1 in human keratinocytes induced the transcriptional activator
isoforms GLI2alpha and GLI2beta. Both isoforms were also shown to be expressed at
elevated levels in 21 BCCs compared to normal skin. Detailed time course
experiments monitoring the transcriptional response of keratinocytes either to
GLI1 or to GLI2 suggest that GLI1 is a direct target of GLI2, while activation of
GLI2 by GLI1 is likely to be indirect. Furthermore, expression of either GLI2 or 
GLI1 led to an increase in DNA-synthesis in confluent human keratinocytes. Taken 
together, these results suggest an important role of the positive GLI1-GLI2
feedback loop in Hh-mediated epidermal cell proliferation.

PMID: 12165851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Immunol. 2002 Aug 15;169(4):1869-75.

Sonic hedgehog promotes cell cycle progression in activated peripheral CD4(+) T
lymphocytes.

Lowrey JA(1), Stewart GA, Lindey S, Hoyne GF, Dallman MJ, Howie SE, Lamb JR.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Group, Medical Research Council Center for Inflammation
Research, University of Edinburgh Medical School, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
J.A.Lowrey@ed.ac.uk

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is important in the growth and differentiation of 
many cell types and recently has been reported to play a role in T cell
development in the thymus. This prompted us to investigate whether or not Shh
contributes to the clonal expansion of peripheral CD4(+) T cells. In this study, 
we demonstrate that Shh and other components of the signaling pathway patched,
smoothened, and Gli1 (glioma-associated oncogene) are expressed in peripheral
CD4(+) T cells. The addition of the biologically active amino-terminal Shh
peptide had no effect on resting CD4(+) T cells, but significantly enhanced
proliferation of anti-CD3/28 Ab-activated CD4(+) T cells. This was not due to
antiapoptotic effects, but by promoting entry of T cells into the S-G(2)
proliferative phase of the cell cycle. Neutralizing anti-Shh Ab reduced T cell
proliferation by inhibiting cell transition into the S-G(2) phase, suggesting
that endogenously produced Shh plays a physiological role in the clonal expansion
of T cells. Furthermore, we have observed a significant up-regulation of Shh and 
Gli1 (glioma-associated oncogene) mRNA in activated CD4(+) T cells with or
without addition of exogenous Shh, which corresponds with maximal CD4(+) T cell
proliferation, whereas bcl-2 was only up-regulated in activated cells in the
presence of Shh. Our findings suggest that endogenously produced Shh may play a
role in sustaining normal CD4(+) T cell proliferation and exogenously added Shh
enhances this response.

PMID: 12165511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 1;248(1):143-56.

Twist plays an essential role in FGF and SHH signal transduction during mouse
limb development.

O'Rourke MP(1), Soo K, Behringer RR, Hui CC, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW
2145, Australia.

Loss of Twist gene function arrests the growth of the limb bud shortly after its 
formation. In the Twist(-/-) forelimb bud, Fgf10 expression is reduced, Fgf4 is
not expressed, and the domain of Fgf8 and Fgfr2 expression is altered. This is
accompanied by disruption of the expression of genes (Shh, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and 
Ptch) associated with SHH signalling in the limb bud mesenchyme, the
down-regulation of Bmp4 in the apical ectoderm, the absence of Alx3, Alx4, Pax1, 
and Pax3 activity in the mesenchyme, and a reduced potency of the limb bud
tissues to differentiate into osteogenic and myogenic tissues. Development of the
hindlimb buds in Twist(-/-) embryos is also retarded. The overall activity of
genes involved in SHH signalling is reduced.Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression is lost or
reduced in the apical ectoderm, but other genes (Fgf10, Fgfr2) involved with FGF 
signalling are expressed in normal patterns. Twist(+/-);Gli3(+/XtJ) mice display 
more severe polydactyly than that seen in either Twist(+/-) or Gli3(+/XtJ) mice, 
suggesting that there is genetic interaction between Twist and Gli3 activity.
Twist activity is therefore essential for the growth and differentiation of the
limb bud tissues as well as regulation of tissue patterning via the modulation of
SHH and FGF signal transduction.

PMID: 12142027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):35156-61. Epub 2002 Jul 22.

Regulation of Gli1 transcriptional activity in the nucleus by Dyrk1.

Mao J(1), Maye P, Kogerman P, Tejedor FJ, Toftgard R, Xie W, Wu G, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

To investigate the cellular role of dual specificity Yak1-related kinase (Dyrk)
1, a nuclear localized dual specificity protein kinase, we examined its effect on
transcriptional regulation using reporter gene assays. We found that Dyrk1 can
substantially enhance Gli1-dependent, but not LEF-1-, c-Jun-, or Elk-dependent,
gene transcription. In part, Dyrk1 does this through retaining Gli1 in the
nucleus. However, we also demonstrate that Dyrk1 can enhance the transcriptional 
activity of Gli1-AHA, a nuclear export mutant, suggesting that Dyrk1 may be more 
directly involved in regulating the transcriptional activity of Gli1. In
addition, Dyrk1 acted synergistically with Sonic hedgehog (Shh) to induce gene
transcription and differentiation in mouse C3H10T1/2 cells. The failure of Shh to
stimulate Dyrk1 kinase activity suggests that Dyrk1 may not be directly regulated
by the Shh signaling pathway but functionally interacts with it. Thus, Gli1
transcriptional activity may be subjected to further regulation in the cell
nucleus by a pathway distinct from Shh signaling, one mediated by Dyrk1.

PMID: 12138125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):33632-40. Epub 2002 Jun 18.

Several PATCHED1 missense mutations display activity in patched1-deficient
fibroblasts.

Bailey EC(1), Milenkovic L, Scott MP, Collawn JF, Johnson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294, USA.

Mutations in mouse and human patched1 (ptc1) genes are associated with birth
defects and cancer. Ptc1 is a receptor for Hedgehog (Hh) signaling proteins. Hh
proteins activate transcription of target genes, including ptc1, and Ptc1
represses those genes, both by regulating the activity of Gli transcription
factors. We have established mammalian cell lines with reduced Ptc1 function and 
a lacZ reporter to investigate Hh signal transduction. Embryonic fibroblasts were
derived from mice, heterozygous or homozygous for a ptc1 mutation that inserts
lacZ under the control of the ptc1 promoter (ptc1-lacZ). In heterozygous ptc1
cells, ptc1-lacZ was expressed at low levels but could be induced by Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh) and Gli-1. Homozygous ptc1 cells expressed high levels of
ptc1-lacZ without Hh stimulation. ptc1-lacZ expression was dependent on cell
density in ptc1 homozygotes and Hh-stimulated heterozygotes but was independent
of density when Gli1 was used to activate ptc1-lacZ. A wild-type ptc1 transgene
introduced into homozygous ptc1 cells greatly reduced ptc1-lacZ expression.
Expression of either half of Ptc1 alone resulted in improper maturation of the
protein and a failure to complement the ptc1(-/-) cells. When co-expressed, both 
Ptc1 halves matured and had an activity similar to that of the intact protein.
Three missense PTCH1 mutations exhibited significant functions in homozygous ptc1
cells. The missense mutants retained activity when expressed at about 10-fold
lower levels and appeared as stable as wild-type Ptc1. These studies suggest that
some tumors and disease phenotypes may arise from small reductions in PTCH1
activity.

PMID: 12072433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25697-702. Epub 2002 Apr 30.

Expression of the human poliovirus receptor/CD155 gene is activated by sonic
hedgehog.

Solecki DJ(1), Gromeier M, Mueller S, Bernhardt G, Wimmer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, State
University of New York at Stony Brook, 11794, USA. soleckd@mail.rockefeller.edu

The human poliovirus receptor/CD155 is a transmembrane glycoprotein belonging to 
the immunoglobulin superfamily. The ectodomain of CD155 mediates cell attachment 
to the extracellular matrix molecule vitronectin, while its intracellular domain 
interacts with the dynein light chain Tctex-1. CD155 is a primate-restricted gene
that is expressed during development in mesenchymal tissues and ventrally derived
structures within the CNS. Its function in adults is as yet unknown, but
significantly, CD155 is aberrantly expressed in neuroectodermal tumors. We show
that the expression of CD155 mRNA is up-regulated when human Ntera2 cells are
treated with purified Sonic hedgehog (Shh) protein. Reporter gene expression
driven by the CD155 core promoter is activated by Shh in transient
co-transfection assays. Analysis of the CD155 core promoter indicates that an
intact GLI binding site is required for Shh activation. In addition,
overexpression of Gli1 or Gli3 potently activates reporter gene expression driven
by the CD155 core promoter. These data identify the CD155 gene as a
transcriptional target of Shh, a finding that has significance for the normal
function of CD155 during development and the expression of CD155 in
neuroectodermal tumors.

PMID: 11983699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Dev Biol. 2002 May 15;245(2):280-90.

Indian hedgehog as a progesterone-responsive factor mediating
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the mouse uterus.

Matsumoto H(1), Zhao X, Das SK, Hogan BL, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7336, USA.

Genes encoding components of the hedgehog signaling pathway are dynamically
expressed in the mouse uterus preparing for implantation. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), 
patched (Ptc), and Gli3 are expressed at low levels in the endometrial epithelium
on day 1 of pregnancy. Transcription of Ihh increases dramatically in the luminal
epithelium and glands from day 3, reaching very high levels on day 4. Over the
same period, Ptc, Gli1, Gli2, and noggin are strongly upregulated in the
underlying mesenchymal stroma. Transcription of Ihh in ovariectomized mice is
induced by progesterone but not by estrogen. Lower induction of Ihh, Ptc, and
Hoxa10 is seen in response to progesterone in the uteri of Pgr(-/-) mutant mice
lacking progesterone nuclear steroid receptor. This finding suggests that the
hormone may regulate Ihh through both nuclear receptor-dependent and -independent
pathways. We describe a method for culturing uterine explants in the absence of
epithelium. Under these conditions, recombinant N-SHH protein promotes the
proliferation of mesenchyme cells and the expression of noggin. We propose that
IHH made by the epithelium normally functions as a paracrine growth factor for
stromal cells during the early stages of pregnancy.

PMID: 11977981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Genesis. 2002 Apr;32(4):247-58.

Cooperative E-box regulation of human GLI1 by TWIST and USF.

Villavicencio EH(1), Yoon JW, Frank DJ, Füchtbauer EM, Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Institute for Education and Research, Northwestern
University Medical School, 2300 Children's Plaza, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Sonic hedgehog signaling plays a critical role in vertebrate patterning, and
signaling defects are associated with severe birth defects and cancer in man.
GLI1 encodes a critical transcription activator in this pathway. GLI1 is
expressed in human basal cell carcinomas and sarcomas. Despite the significance
of the GLI1 gene in human disease, few immediate upstream regulators of GLI1
expression are known. We previously demonstrated that a 5' region, including 5'
flanking sequence, an untranslated exon, and 425 bp of the first intron,
regulates the human GLI1 gene. Here we show that inactivating mutations in E-box,
GC box, AP-2, GATA, GSG, PuF, and Zeste sites identified three critical
regulatory elements, including a GC box that binds Sp1 and two intronic E-boxes
that bind USF proteins or Twist. Expression of Twist but not a frame shift
mutation of Twist activates the wild-type human GLI1 regulatory sequences but not
with inactivating mutations of the E-boxes. Twist activates GLI1 reporter
expression through E-box +482 but requires binding of USF proteins to E-box +157.
Twist mutations cause human birth defects and Twist is overexpressed in many
rhabdomyosarcomas, suggesting that one of Twist's primary roles is the regulation
of GLI1.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11948912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Invest Dermatol. 2001 Dec;117(6):1666-70.

No evidence of deregulated patched-hedgehog signaling pathway in trichoblastomas 
and other tumors arising within nevus sebaceous.

Takata M(1), Tojo M, Hatta N, Ohara K, Yamada M, Takehara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, Kanazawa,
Japan. takata@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Nevus sebaceous is a congenital malformation of the skin within which a number of
neoplasms showing adnexal differentiation may arise. Recently, deletions in the
patched gene region were reported in nevus sebaceous and constitutive activation 
of the patched-hedgehog signaling pathway was implicated in the development of
tumors arising within nevus sebaceous. To substantiate further a role of the
patched-hedgehog signaling pathway in secondary tumors arising within nevus
sebaceous, we examined 11 nevus sebaceous associated with secondary tumors for
loss of heterozygosity of the patched gene region by microsatellite polymerase
chain reaction and patched mRNA expression by in situ hybridization.
Unexpectedly, however, none of the tumors (including eight trichoblastomas) and
nevus sebaceous lesions showed loss of heterozygosity at any polymorphic loci
close to the patched gene. Further more, none of the nevus sebaceous lesions and 
secondary tumors gave detectable signals for patched mRNA. In contrast, four of
11 sporadic basal cell carcinomas, that were examined for comparison, showed loss
of heterozygosity at the patched gene locus (p <0.05), and moderate to strong
signals for patched mRNA was observed in all seven basal cell carcinoma tumors
examined (p <0.0001). Additional investigation by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction in four basal cell carcinomas and two
nevus sebaceous tumors also showed the expression of Gli-1, another target gene
in the patched-hedgehog signaling pathway, in all the basal cell carcinomas
samples but not in any of the nevus sebaceous tumors examined. The findings in
this study do not support the view that the deregulation of the patched-hedgehog 
signaling pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of nevus sebaceous and
associated tumors, and show that, although morphologically similar,
trichoblastomas and basal cell carcinomas have a different molecular
pathogenesis.

PMID: 11886539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Development. 2002 Mar;129(6):1327-38.

Pax6 regulates specification of ventral neurone subtypes in the hindbrain by
establishing progenitor domains.

Takahashi M(1), Osumi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that generation of different kinds of neurones is
controlled by combinatorial actions of homeodomain (HD) proteins expressed in the
neuronal progenitors. Pax6 is a HD protein that has previously been shown to be
involved in the differentiation of the hindbrain somatic (SM) motoneurones and V1
interneurones in the hindbrain and/or spinal cord. To investigate in greater
depth the role of Pax6 in generation of the ventral neurones, we first examined
the expression patterns of HD protein genes and subtype-specific neuronal markers
in the hindbrain of the Pax6 homozygous mutant rat. We found that Islet2 (SM
neurone marker) and En1 (V1 interneurone marker) were transiently expressed in a 
small number of cells, indicating that Pax6 is not directly required for
specification of these neurones. We also observed that domains of all other HD
protein genes (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Irx3, Dbx2 and Dbx1) were shifted and their
boundaries became blurred. Thus, Pax6 is required for establishment of the
progenitor domains of the ventral neurones. Next, we performed Pax6
overexpression experiments by electroporating rat embryos in whole embryo
culture. Pax6 overexpression in the wild type decreased expression of Nkx2.2, but
ectopically increased expression of Irx3, Dbx1 and Dbx2. Moreover,
electroporation of Pax6 into the Pax6 mutant hindbrain rescued the development of
Islet2-positive and En1-positive neurones. To know reasons for perturbed
progenitor domain formation in Pax6 mutant, we examined expression patterns of
Shh signalling molecules and states of cell death and cell proliferation. Shh was
similarly expressed in the floor plate of the mutant hindbrain, while the
expressions of Ptc1, Gli1 and Gli2 were altered only in the progenitor domains
for the motoneurones. The position and number of TUNEL-positive cells were
unchanged in the Pax6 mutant. Although the proportion of cells that were
BrdU-positive slightly increased in the mutant, there was no relationship with
specific progenitor domains. Taken together, we conclude that Pax6 regulates
specification of the ventral neurone subtypes by establishing the correct
progenitor domains.

PMID: 11880342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Dev Biol. 2001 Oct 1;238(1):133-44.

The Gli2 transcription factor is required for normal mouse mammary gland
development.

Lewis MT(1), Ross S, Strickland PA, Sugnet CW, Jimenez E, Hui C, Daniel CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Sinsheimer Laboratories, University of California,
Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA. mike.lewis@uchsc.edu

The hedgehog signal transduction network performs critical roles in mediating
cell-cell interactions during embryogenesis and organogenesis. Loss-of-function
or misexpression mutation of hedgehog network components can cause birth defects,
skin cancer, and other tumors. The Gli gene family (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) encodes
zinc finger transcription factors that act as mediators of hedgehog signal
transduction. In this study, we investigate the role of Gli2 in mammary gland
development. Mammary expression of Gli2 is developmentally regulated in a tissue 
compartment-specific manner. Expression is exclusively stromal during virgin
stages of development but becomes both epithelial and stromal during pregnancy
and lactation. The null phenotype with respect to both ductal and alveolar
development was examined by transplantation rescue of embryonic mammary glands
into physiologically normal host females. Glands derived from both wild type and 
null embryo donors showed ductal outgrowths that developed to equivalent extents 
in virgin hosts. However, in null transplants, ducts were frequently distended or
irregularly shaped and showed a range of histological alterations similar to
micropapillary ductal hyperplasias in the human breast. Alveolar development
during pregnancy was not overtly affected by loss of Gli2 function. Ductal
defects were not observed when homozygous null epithelium was transplanted into a
wild type stromal background, indicating that Gli2 function is required primarily
in the stroma for proper ductal development. DeltaGli2 heterozygotes also
demonstrated an elevated frequency and severity of focal ductal dysplasia
relative to that of wild type littermate- and age-matched control animals.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11783999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Physiol Paris. 2002 Jan-Mar;96(1-2):9-16.

Sonic Hedgehog signalling in the developing and adult brain.

Charytoniuk D(1), Porcel B, Rodríguez Gomez J, Faure H, Ruat M, Traiffort E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) belongs to a family of secreted polypeptides implicated in
embryonic development. Shh displays inductive, proliferative, neurotrophic and
neuroprotective activities on various neural cells and signals through a receptor
complex associating Patched (Ptc) and Smoothened (Smo). Shh binding to Ptc leads 
to downstream activation of target genes, such as transcription factors of the
Gli family. We have investigated the distribution of Shh signalling genes in the 
rat embryo and in the adult, as well as pharmacological properties of Shh
peptides. In the ventral neural tube, the distribution of Shh, Ptc and Smo is in 
agreement with this functional model. In the postnatal cerebellum, Shh expressed 
by Purkinje cells may act on its target receptor complex localized in the
external germinative layer to activate Gli1. Myristoylated ShhN (myrShhN) is more
potent than ShhN in stimulating proliferation of rat cerebellar granule cell
neuroblasts in culture, as evaluated by [3H]thymidine incorporation, suggesting
that amino terminal lipid modification of the molecule plays a crucial role in
ShhN biological activity. In the adult brain, Ptc and Smo transcripts are
colocalized in a few areas such as the hippocampal granule cells. However, Ptc
transcripts are also observed without any detectable Smo expression, such as in
the superior colliculus. These observations suggest that in the adult brain, Shh 
signals through its receptor complex Ptc/Smo, or through Ptc alone. Ptc protein
presents a sterol sensing domain which has been identified in several proteins,
including TRC8, recently implicated in hereditary renal carcinoma and which is
also expressed as a 2.5-kb transcript in several rat brain areas. Altogether,
these results suggest other roles for Shh signalling in postnatal and adult brain
than those initially established during early embryonic development.

PMID: 11755778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5201-12.

The Sonic Hedgehog-Gli pathway regulates dorsal brain growth and tumorigenesis.

Dahmane N(1), Sánchez P, Gitton Y, Palma V, Sun T, Beyna M, Weiner H, Ruiz i
Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Developmental Genetics Program
and Department of Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New
York, NY 10016, USA.

The mechanisms that regulate the growth of the brain remain unclear. We show that
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in a layer-specific manner in the perinatal
mouse neocortex and tectum, whereas the Gli genes, which are targets and
mediators of SHH signaling, are expressed in proliferative zones. In vitro and in
vivo assays show that SHH is a mitogen for neocortical and tectal precursors and 
that it modulates cell proliferation in the dorsal brain. Together with its role 
in the cerebellum, our findings indicate that SHH signaling unexpectedly controls
the development of the three major dorsal brain structures. We also show that a
variety of primary human brain tumors and tumor lines consistently express the
GLI genes and that cyclopamine, a SHH signaling inhibitor, inhibits the
proliferation of tumor cells. Using the in vivo tadpole assay system, we further 
show that misexpression of GLI1 induces CNS hyperproliferation that depends on
the activation of endogenous Gli1 function. SHH-GLI signaling thus modulates
normal dorsal brain growth by controlling precursor proliferation, an
evolutionarily important and plastic process that is deregulated in brain tumors.

PMID: 11748155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5161-72.

Gli1 can rescue the in vivo function of Gli2.

Bai CB(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In mice, three Gli genes are thought to mediate sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
collectively. Mis-expression studies and analysis of null mutants for each gene
have indicated that the Gli proteins have different functions. In particular,
Gli1 appears to be a constitutive activator, and Gli2 and Gli3 have repressor
functions. To determine the precise functional differences between Gli1 and Gli2,
we have expressed Gli1 in place of Gli2 from the endogenous Gli2 locus in mice.
Strikingly, a low level of Gli1 can rescue all the Shh signaling defects in Gli2 
mutants; however, only in the presence of a wild-type Shh gene. These studies
demonstrate that only the activator function of Gli2 is actually required, and
indicates that in specific situations, Shh can modulate the ability of Gli1 to
activate target genes. Furthermore, expression of both copies of Gli1 in place of
Gli2 does not disrupt spinal cord patterning, but does result in new
gain-of-function defects that lead to lethality. We show that the defects are
enhanced when Gli3 function is reduced, demonstrating that an important
difference between Gli1 and Gli2 is the ability of Gli1 to antagonize Gli3
function.

PMID: 11748151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 15;277(7):5548-55. Epub 2001 Nov 21.

Gene expression profiling leads to identification of GLI1-binding elements in
target genes and a role for multiple downstream pathways in GLI1-induced cell
transformation.

Yoon JW(1), Kita Y, Frank DJ, Majewski RR, Konicek BA, Nobrega MA, Jacob H,
Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Medical School and Children's Memorial Institute for
Education and Research, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GLI1, which mediates Sonic hedgehog
signaling during development, is expressed in several human cancers, including
basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma, and sarcomas. We identified 147 genes
whose levels of expression were significantly altered in RNA obtained from cells 
demonstrating a transformed phenotype with stable GLI1 expression or stable
Ha-ras expression. Comparison of expression profiles from GLI1- and
Ha-ras-expressing cells established a set of genes unique to GLI1-induced cell
transformation. Thirty genes were altered by stable GLI1 expression, and 124
genes were changed by stable Ha-ras expression. Seven genes had altered
expression levels in both GLI1- and Ha-ras-expressing cells. Genes whose
expression was altered by GLI1 included cell cycle genes, cell adhesion genes,
signal transduction genes, and genes regulating apoptosis. GLI1 consensus
DNA-binding sequences were identified in the 5' regions of cyclin D2, IGFBP-6,
osteopontin, and plakoglobin, suggesting that these genes represent immediate
downstream targets. Gel shift analysis confirmed the ability of the GLI1 protein 
to bind these sequences. Up-regulation of cyclin D2 and down-regulation of
plakoglobin were demonstrated in GLI1-amplified compared with non-amplified human
rhabdomyosarcoma cells. Many of the GLI1 targets with known function identified
in this study increase cell proliferation, indicating that GLI1-induced cell
transformation occurs through multiple downstream pathways.

PMID: 11719506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Biol Reprod. 2001 Dec;65(6):1663-71.

GLI1 localization in the germinal epithelial cells alternates between cytoplasm
and nucleus: upregulation in transgenic mice blocks spermatogenesis in pachytene.

Kroft TL(1), Patterson J, Won Yoon J, Doglio L, Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone PM,
Goldberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GLI1 is the mediator of signaling by members
of the Hedgehog (Hh) family. Male mice in which Desert hedgehog (Dhh), an Hh
homologue expressed in Sertoli cells of the testis, was knocked out are sterile, 
suggesting that the Dhh/GLI1 pathway plays a role in spermatogenesis. Using an
antiserum raised against human GLI1, we found that during the first round of
spermatogenesis, GLI1 expression is initially cytoplasmic, then shifts to the
nuclei of Sertoli and germ cells, and finally shifts back to the cytoplasm. In
the adult mouse testis, GLI1 expression localized to the nuclei of germ cells,
beginning with pachytene cells and persisting through round spermatids.
Localization of GLI1 in elongating spermatids shifted from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm and became associated with microtubules. We also examined a line of
transgenic mice that overexpressed human GLI1. Male mice in this line were
sterile. Spermatogenesis was blocked at the pachytene stage, and a subset of the 
morphologically indistinguishable pachytene cells underwent apoptosis. Patched-2,
which is a Dhh receptor, and Fused, another component of the signal transduction 
pathway, are expressed in Leydig cells and in primary and secondary
spermatocytes. Expression of GLI1 in the same cell types as Patched-2 and Fused
and the disruption of spermatogenesis by GLI1 overexpression suggest that GLI1 is
the mediator of the Dhh signal in the testis, and that it may be a regulator of
spermatogenesis.

PMID: 11717126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. FEBS Lett. 2001 Sep 7;505(1):13-7.

Genomic organization and embryonic expression of Suppressor of Fused, a candidate
gene for the split-hand/split-foot malformation type 3.

Grimm T(1), Teglund S, Tackels D, Sangiorgi E, Gurrieri F, Schwartz C, Toftgård
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences at NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.

The genes for human and mouse Suppressor of Fused (SU(FU)/Su(Fu)) in the Hedgehog
signaling pathway were characterized and found to contain 12 exons. Human SU(FU) 
localized on chromosome 10q24-25 between the markers D10S192 and AFM183XB12. We
detected three additional SU(FU) isoforms, two of which have lost their ability
to interact with the transcription factor GLI1. Expression analysis using whole
mount in situ hybridization revealed strong expression of Su(Fu) in various mouse
embryonic tissues. SU(FU) was considered a candidate gene for the
split-hand/split-foot malformation type 3 (SHFM3). However, no alterations in the
SU(FU) gene were found in SHFM3 patients.

PMID: 11557033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Pathol. 2001 Aug;194(4):473-7.

Expression of the Sonic Hedgehog receptor "PATCHED" in basal cell carcinomas and 
odontogenic keratocysts.

Zedan W(1), Robinson PA, Markham AF, High AS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Leeds, Clinical Sciences Building, St
James's University Hospital, Leeds, LS9 7TF, UK.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is a common invasive skin lesion in Caucasians.
Odontogenic keratocysts (OKs) are developmental, non-inflammatory oral cysts.
They can be sporadic and/or multiple and are locally destructive. Basal cell
naevus syndrome (BCNS) comprises both multiple BCCs and multiple OKs, in addition
to several other systemic manifestations. The genetic defect underlying this
autosomal dominant syndrome is a germ line mutation in the Sonic Hedgehog
receptor PATCHED (PTCH) gene. For this study, a rabbit anti-peptide PTCH
antiserum was produced. Immunohistochemistry procedures were performed using PTCH
antibody and commercially produced GLI-1 antibody (downstream member in the
hedgehog pathway) to stain 11 BCNS-OKs, eight sporadic OKs, two BCNS-BCCs, and
six sporadic BCCs. Most of these lesions had been previously screened for PTCH
mutation. Most BCCs (n=7) demonstrated moderate staining, with the heaviest
staining in the outer palisading cell layer, except a BCNS-BCC which had mutation
proximal to the sequence used for production of immunogenic peptide; this
demonstrated only weak staining. Although moderate to heavy staining with PTCH
antibody was demonstrated in the epithelium of both types of OK (n=19), a quite
different pattern of staining of the basal cell layer was observed in the two
patient groups. In BCNS, OK staining was heaviest in basal epithelial layers. In 
contrast, staining in non-BCNS odontogenic keratocysts was exclusively located in
the superficial epithelial layers. Up-regulation of PTCH and GLI-1 protein was
demonstrated in both BCCs and OKs. The pattern of PTCH expression matched the
PTCH transcript pattern previously reported in BCCs and appeared sufficiently
characteristic in OKs to allow differentiation between syndromic and
non-syndromic cysts.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11523056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 31;98(16):9255-9.

A role of PDGFRalpha in basal cell carcinoma proliferation.

Xie J(1), Aszterbaum M, Zhang X, Bonifas JM, Zachary C, Epstein E, McCormick F.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, and Department of Dermatology, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA. jinxie@utmb.edu

Activation of the hedgehog pathway, through the loss of patched (PTC) or the
activation of smoothened (SMO), occurs frequently in basal cell carcinoma (BCC), 
the most common human cancer. However, the molecular basis of this neoplastic
effect is not understood. The downstream molecule Gli1 is known to mediate the
biological effect of the pathway and is itself up-regulated in all BCCs. Gli1 can
drive the production of BCCs in the mouse when overexpressed in the epidermis.
Here we show that Gli1 can activate platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha
(PDGFRalpha) in C3H10T(1/2) cells. Functional up-regulation of PDGFRalpha by Gli1
is accompanied by activation of the ras-ERK pathway, a pathway associated with
cell proliferation. The relevance of this mechanism in vivo is supported by a
high level expression of PDGFRalpha in BCCs of mice and humans. In the murine BCC
cell line ASZ001, in which both copies of the PTC gene are inactivated, DNA
synthesis and cell proliferation can be slowed by re-expression of PTC, which
down-regulates PDGFRalpha expression, or by downstream inhibition of PDGFRalpha
with neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, we conclude that increased expression of
PDGFRalpha may be an important mechanism by which mutations in the hedgehog
pathway cause BCCs.

PMCID: PMC55407
PMID: 11481486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Bone. 2001 Jul;29(1):54-61.

Characterization of human bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 and -7 gene
promoters: activation of BMP promoters by Gli, a sonic hedgehog mediator.

Kawai S(1), Sugiura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Bone Research, Discovery Research Laboratories, Hoechst Marion 
Roussel, Ltd., Kawagoe, Saitama, Japan.

Among the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family, which plays a crucial role not
only in bone formation but also in development, BMP-2, -4, and -7 participate
predominantly in various aspects. To undertake complex tasks, their expression is
strictly controlled. In this study we isolated and analyzed the 5'-flanking
regions of the human BMP-4 and -7 genes to elucidate the mechanism of their
temporally and spatially specific expression. As for BMP-4 expression, a reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay with specially designed
sets of primers demonstrated that osteoblastic SaOS-2 and Hos cells expressed two
types of transcripts comprising one of the 5'-untranslated first exons, whereas
MG63 cells displayed only the transcript with the BMP-4 proximal first exon.
Likewise, RT-PCR revealed that Hos and MG63 cells expressed BMP-7. Subsequent
5'-RACE confirmed an alternative usage of the BMP-4 first exons with clustered
multiple transcription start sites in the distal exon and the sole start site in 
the proximal exon. The transcription start site of the BMP-7 gene was found to be
far upstream (764 bp) of the initiation ATG codon. We constructed a series of
deletion mutants of fusions between these BMP promoters and the luciferase gene
and examined their activity by transient transfection into osteoblastic Hos and
renal COS-7 cells. The degree of distal and proximal BMP-4 promoter activity was 
in accordance with the expression level of the corresponding transcripts. Both
distal and proximal BMP-4 promoters possessed suppressor elements that are
operative only in Hos cells. The positive and negative elements identified in the
BMP-7 promoter were more remarkably effective in Hos cells. The activities of the
respective BMP-4 promoters and BMP-7 promoter were all stimulated upon the
cotransfection of a potential sonic hedgehog (SHH) mediator, Gli1 or Gli3 into
COS-7 cells, providing direct evidence that the Gli proteins are capable of
inducing the BMP expression. Our systems are helpful for assessment of the
complicated interactions of molecules involved in the skeletogenesis and
developmental processes.

PMID: 11472891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):159-62.

Expression pattern of Irx1 and Irx2 during mouse digit development.

Zülch A(1), Becker MB, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.

Irx1 and Irx2 are members of the murine Iroquois homeobox (Irx) gene family. In
this study, we describe the dynamic expression pattern of these genes during limb
development with a focus on digit formation. We further present a comparative
expression analysis with Gli genes (Gli1, Gli2, Gli3). Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 were 
suggested for candidate regulators of the Irx genes. The expression was studied
between E11.5 and E14.5 when the digits are being formed. Irx1 and Irx2 reproduce
the developmental program of the digits in time and space and the Irx1 provides
an early and excellent marker for this process. Our analysis also indicates that 
the expression of Irx1, Gli1 and Irx2, Gli2 are relative to each other. In
contrast, Gli3 exhibits a different expression pattern.

PMID: 11472848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):155-8.

Irx1 and Irx2 expression in early lung development.

Becker MB(1), Zülch A, Bosse A, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

We describe a comparative lung expression analysis of the murine Irx1 and Irx2
genes. At embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5), the Irx1 and Irx2 expression starts in the
foregut region, where the laryngo-tracheal groove will form. The expression is
prominent in the lung epithelium during glandular development. It declines at the
end of the canalicular phase. We further compare the Irx1 and Irx2 expression
domains to Gli1, 2, 3 and Mash1. Their homologues in Drosophila melanogaster are 
known as regulative partners of the iroquois complex. The Irx and Gli genes are
coexpressed in the developing lungs at the same time. Their transcripts are not
localised in the same cells but adjacent to each other in either mesenchymal or
epithelial structures. It is thought that the lung development is regulated by
the mesenchymal/epithelial interactions.

PMID: 11472847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Curr Biol. 2001 May 15;11(10):769-73.

Wnt signals are targets and mediators of Gli function.

Mullor JL(1), Dahmane N, Sun T, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

There is growing evidence that Gli proteins participate in the mediation of
Hedgehog and FGF signaling in neural and mesodermal development. However, little 
is known about which genes act downstream of Gli proteins. Here we show the
regulation of members of the Wnt family by Gli proteins in different contexts.
Our findings indicate that Gli2 regulates Wnt8 expression in the ventral marginal
zone of the early frog embryo: activating Gli2 constructs induce ectopic Wnt8
expression in animal cap explants, whereas repressor forms inhibit its endogenous
expression in the marginal zone. Using truncated Frizzled and dominant-negative
Wnt constructs, we then show the requirement of at least two Wnt proteins, Wnt8
and Wnt11, for Gli2/3-induced posterior mesodermal development. Blocking Wnt
signals, however, inhibits Gli2/3-induced morphogenesis, but not mesodermal
specification. Gli2/3 may therefore normally coordinate the action of these two
Wnt proteins, which regulate distinct downstream pathways. In addition, the
finding that Gli1 consistently induces a distinct set of Wnt genes in animal cap 
explants and in skin tumors suggests that Wnt regulation by Gli proteins is
general. Such a mechanism may link signals that induce Gli activity, such as FGFs
and Hedgehogs, with Wnt function.

PMID: 11378387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Invest Dermatol. 2001 May;116(5):739-42.

Activation of expression of hedgehog target genes in basal cell carcinomas.

Bonifas JM(1), Pennypacker S, Chuang PT, McMahon AP, Williams M, Rosenthal A, De 
Sauvage FJ, Epstein EH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, San Francisco General Hospital, California, USA.

Mutations in hedgehog signaling pathway genes, especially PTC1 and SMO, are
pivotal to the development of basal cell carcinomas. The study of basal cell
carcinoma gene expression not only may elucidate mechanisms by which hedgehog
signaling abnormalities produce aberrant tumor cell behavior but also can provide
data on in vivo hedgehog target gene control in humans. We have found, in
comparison with normal skin, that basal cell carcinomas have increased levels of 
mRNA for PTC1, GLI1, HIP, WNT2B, and WNT5a; decreased levels of mRNA for c-MYC,
c-FOS, and WNT4; and unchanged levels of mRNA for PTC2, GLI2, WNT7B, and BMP2 and
4. These findings suggest that mutations in hedgehog signaling pathway genes may 
exert both cell autonomous and indirect effects and indicate that basal cell
carcinoma tumor cells have a phenotype that at least in some aspects resembles
that of epidermal stem cells.

PMID: 11348463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Development. 2001 May;128(10):1717-30.

Indian hedgehog activates hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis and can respecify
prospective neurectodermal cell fate in the mouse embryo.

Dyer MA(1), Farrington SM, Mohn D, Munday JR, Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029,
USA.

During gastrulation in the mouse, mesoderm is induced and patterned by secreted
signaling molecules, giving rise first to primitive erythroblasts and vascular
endothelial cells. We have demonstrated previously that development of these
lineages requires a signal(s) secreted from the adjacent primitive endoderm. We
now show that Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is a primitive endoderm-secreted signal that 
alone is sufficient to induce formation of hematopoietic and endothelial cells.
Strikingly, as seen with primitive endoderm, Ihh can respecify prospective neural
ectoderm (anterior epiblast) along hematopoietic and endothelial (posterior)
lineages. Downstream targets of the hedgehog signaling pathway (the genes
encoding patched, smoothened and Gli1) are upregulated in anterior epiblasts
cultured in the presence of Ihh protein, as is Bmp4, which may mediate the
effects of Ihh. Blocking Ihh function in primitive endoderm inhibits activation
of hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis in the adjacent epiblast, suggesting that Ihh
is an endogenous signal that plays a key role in the development of the earliest 
hemato-vascular system. To our knowledge, these are the earliest functions for a 
hedgehog protein in post-implantation development in the mouse embryo.

PMID: 11311154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2000 Nov;57(12):1720-31.

Hedgehog signalling in cancer.

Toftgård R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Biosciences and Center for Nutrition and 
Toxicology, Huddinge, Sweden. rune.toftgard@cnt.ki.se

Hedgehog signalling is a key regulator of embryonic development controlling
proliferation and/or cell fate determination. With identification of the Hedgehog
receptor PTCH1 as a tumour suppressor gene that underlies the human nevoid basal 
cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), the Hedgehog signalling pathway was firmly
linked to cancer. It now appears that constitutive activation of Hedgehog
signalling, by inactivating mutations in PTCH1 or activating mutations in the
coreceptor SMOH, is required and possibly sufficient for basal cell carcinoma
development and also contributes to the formation of a variety of other tumour
types, including medulloblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma. Several lines of evidence,
including transgenic mice experiments, suggest that the critical cellular effect 
is stimulation of proliferation mediated by the transcriptional effector GLI1.
Additional components of the signal transduction machinery as well as essential
target genes remain to be identified, and involvement of the Hedgehog signalling 
pathway in other tumour types and/or hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes
is to be expected.

PMID: 11130178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Development. 2001 Jan;128(2):263-73.

Xrel3 is required for head development in Xenopus laevis.

Lake BB(1), Ford R, Kao KR.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St John's, Newfoundland A1B 3V6, Canada.

The Rel/NF-kappa B gene family encodes a large group of transcriptional
activators involved in myriad differentiation events, including embryonic
development. We have shown previously that Xrel3, a Xenopus Rel/NF-kappa
B-related gene, is expressed in the forebrain, dorsal aspect of the mid- and
hindbrain, the otocysts and notochord of neurula and larval stage embryos.
Overexpression of Xrel3 causes formation of embryonic tumours. We now show that
Xrel3-induced tumours and animal caps from embryos injected with Xrel3 RNA
express Otx2, Shh and Gli1. Heterodimerisation of a C-terminally deleted mutant
of Xrel3 with wild-type Xrel3 inhibits in vitro binding of wild-type Xrel3 to
Rel/NF-kappa B consensus DNA sequences. This dominant interference mutant
disrupts Shh, Gli1 and Otx2 mRNA patterning and inhibits anterior development
when expressed in the dorsal side of zygotes, which is rescued by co-injecting
wild-type Xrel3 mRNA. In chick development, Rel activates Shh signalling, which
is required for normal limb formation; Shh, Gli1 and Otx2 encode important neural
patterning elements in vertebrates. The activation of these genes in tumours by
Xrel3 overexpression and the inhibition of their expression and head development 
by a dominant interference mutant of Xrel3 indicates that Rel/NF-kappa B is
required for activation of these genes and for anterior neural patterning in
Xenopus.

PMID: 11124121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Pediatrics. 2000 Nov;106(5):1103-4.

Is there more to lung development than steroids and surfactant?

Rajagopal J(1), Kinane TB.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

PMID: 11061782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):2180-8. Epub 2000 Oct 26.

Molecular properties of Zic proteins as transcriptional regulators and their
relationship to GLI proteins.

Mizugishi K(1), Aruga J, Nakata K, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic family genes encode zinc finger proteins, which play important roles in
vertebrate development. The zinc finger domains are highly conserved between Zic 
proteins and show a notable homology to those of Gli family proteins. In this
study, we investigated the functional properties of Zic proteins and their
relationship to the GLI proteins. We first established an optimal binding
sequence for Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 proteins by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay-based target selection and mutational analysis. The selected sequence was
almost identical to the GLI binding sequence. However, the binding affinity was
lower than that of GLI. Consistent results were obtained in reporter assays, in
which transcriptional activation by Zic proteins was less dependent on the GLI
binding sequence than GLI1. Moreover, Zic proteins activated a wide range of
promoters irrespective of the presence of a GLI binding sequence. When Zic and
GLI proteins were cotransfected into cultured cells, Zic proteins enhanced or
suppressed sequence-dependent, GLI-mediated transactivation depending on cell
type. Taken together, these results suggest that Zic proteins may act as
transcriptional coactivators and that their function may be modulated by the GLI 
proteins and possibly by other cell type-specific cofactors.

PMID: 11053430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):1311-6.

Post-transcriptional regulation of the gli1 oncogene by the expression of
alternative 5' untranslated regions.

Wang XQ(1), Rothnagel JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.

The oncogene GLI1 is involved in the formation of basal cell carcinoma and other 
tumor types as a result of the aberrant signaling of the Sonic hedgehog-Patched
pathway. In this study, we have identified alternative GLI1 transcripts that
differ in their 5' untranslated regions (UTRs) and are generated by exon
skipping. These are denoted alpha-UTR, beta-UTR, and gamma-UTR according to the
number of noncoding exons possessed (three, two, and one, respectively). The
alpha- and beta-UTR forms represent the major Gli1 transcripts expressed in mouse
tissues, whereas the gamma-UTR is present at relatively low levels but is
markedly induced in mouse skin treated with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate.
Transcripts corresponding to the murine beta and gamma forms were identified in
human tissues, but significantly, only the gamma-UTR form was present in basal
cell carcinomas and in proliferating cultures of a keratinocyte cell line. Flow
cytometry analysis determined that the gamma-UTR variant expresses a heterologous
reporter gene 14-23-fold higher than the alpha-UTR and 5-13-fold higher than the 
beta-UTR in a variety of cell types. Because expression of the gamma-UTR variant 
correlates with proliferation, consistent with a role for GLI1 in growth
promotion, up-regulation of GLI1 expression through skipping of 5' noncoding
exons may be an important tumorigenic mechanism.

PMID: 11032829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4395-405.

Gli2 functions in FGF signaling during antero-posterior patterning.

Brewster R(1), Mullor JL, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Patterning along the anteroposterior (A-P) axis involves the interplay of
secreted and transcription factors that specify cell fates in the mesoderm and
neuroectoderm. While FGF and homeodomain proteins have been shown to play
different roles in posterior specification, the network coordinating their
effects remains elusive. Here we have analyzed the function of Gli zinc-finger
proteins in mesodermal A-P patterning. We find that Gli2 is sufficient to induce 
ventroposterior development, functioning in the FGF-brachyury regulatory loop.
Gli2 directly induces brachyury, a gene required and sufficient for mesodermal
development, and Gli2 is in turn induced by FGF signaling. Moreover, the homeobox
gene Xhox3, a critical determinant of posterior development, is also directly
regulated by Gli2. Gli3, but not Gli1, has an activity similar to that of Gli2
and is expressed in ventroposterior mesoderm after Gli2. These findings uncover a
novel function of Gli proteins, previously only known to mediate hedgehog
signals, in the maintenance and patterning of the embryonic mesoderm. More
generally, our results suggest a molecular basis for an integration of FGF and
hedgehog inputs in Gli-expressing cells that respond to these signals.

PMID: 11003839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Biol Chem. 2000 Jul;381(7):545-51.

Transcriptional activity of GLI1 is negatively regulated by protein kinase A.

Kaesler S(1), Lüscher B, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

The transcription factor GLI1 is one of three vertebrate members of the GLI
family, which is characterized by a highly conserved DNA-binding domain of five
zinc fingers. We have analyzed whether human GLI1 is a target of PKA regulation. 
It was found that PKA inhibits GLI1 transcriptional activity. However, no
evidence for proteolytic processing or for alteration in the subcellular
distribution of GLI1 was obtained. The responsive PKA site (aa333-336) was
localized to the second zinc finger of GLI1. Mutation of Ser336 revealed that PKA
could also stimulate GLI1 transcriptional activity. Thus, our data demonstrate
both negative and positive regulation of human GLI1 by PKA.

PMID: 10987360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Development. 2000 Oct;127(19):4293-301.

Expression of the vertebrate Gli proteins in Drosophila reveals a distribution of
activator and repressor activities.

Aza-Blanc P(1), Lin HY, Ruiz i Altaba A, Kornberg TB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The Cubitus interruptus (Ci) and Gli proteins are transcription factors that
mediate responses to Hedgehog proteins (Hh) in flies and vertebrates,
respectively. During development of the Drosophila wing, Ci transduces the Hh
signal and regulates transcription of different target genes at different
locations. In vertebrates, the three Gli proteins are expressed in overlapping
domains and are partially redundant. To assess how the vertebrate Glis correlate 
with Drosophila Ci, we expressed each in Drosophila and monitored their behaviors
and activities. We found that each Gli has distinct activities that are
equivalent to portions of the regulatory arsenal of Ci. Gli2 and Gli1 have
activator functions that depend on Hh. Gli2 and Gli3 are proteolyzed to produce a
repressor form able to inhibit hh expression. However, while Gli3 repressor
activity is regulated by Hh, Gli2 repressor activity is not. These observations
suggest that the separate activator and repressor functions of Ci are unevenly
partitioned among the three Glis, yielding proteins with related yet distinct
properties.

PMID: 10976059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Aug;115(2):328-9.

Letters to the editor: identification of polymorphic variants of the GLI1
oncogene.

Wang XQ, Chan N, Rothnagel JA.

PMID: 10951255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Jun;28(2):220-6.

A novel and consistent amplicon at 13q31 associated with alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma.

Gordon AT(1), Brinkschmidt C, Anderson J, Coleman N, Dockhorn-Dworniczak B,
Pritchard-Jones K, Shipley J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cytogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
Surrey, UK. tonyg@icr.ac.uk

Rhabdomyosarcomas are the most common soft-tissue sarcoma found in children. The 
alveolar subtype is clinically more aggressive than the embryonal subtype. In
addition to the presence of specific chromosome translocations and associated
fusion gene products in a high proportion of the alveolar subtype, we previously 
showed that tumors with this histology frequently show evidence of genomic
amplification. Here, we substantially extended the number of alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma samples examined by comparative genomic hybridization analysis. 
Regions of loss were noted, including the smallest overlapping regions
corresponding to 16q, 17/17p, and 9q32-34, in 16%, 10%, and 10% of cases,
respectively (44 primary samples/6 cell lines). Amplification or gain at 12q13-15
in the region of the MDM2/GLI1/SAS/CDK4 loci and 2p24 at the MYCN locus was found
in 28% and 32% of cases, respectively. Single amplicons were found at locations
that in other samples showed consistent gain, including the regions 5q15-23,
7q21-31, 11p11-14, 17q23-24, and 20q13, and amplification was found in two cases 
at 15q24-26. However, most striking was a novel region of amplification or gain
at 13q31 in 19% of cases (51 primary samples/6 cell lines). This indicates that a
gene or genes at 13q31 are significant in the development or progression of
alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

PMID: 10825007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Development. 2000 May;127(10):2075-87.

Shh and Wnt signaling pathways converge to control Gli gene activation in avian
somites.

Borycki A(1), Brown AM, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, BRBII/III, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

The regulation of the Gli genes during somite formation has been investigated in 
quail embryos. The Gli genes are a family encoding three related zinc finger
transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, which are effectors of Shh signaling 
in responding cells. A quail Gli3 cDNA has been cloned and its expression
compared with Gli1 and Gli2. These studies show that Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 are
co-activated at the time of somite formation, thus providing a mechanism for
regulating the initiation of Shh signaling in somites. Embryo surgery and
paraxial mesoderm explant experiments show that each of the Gli genes is
regulated by distinct signaling mechanisms. Gli1 is activated in response to Shh 
produced by the notochord, which also controls the dorsalization of Gli2 and Gli3
following their activation by Wnt signaling from the surface ectoderm and neural 
tube. This surface ectoderm/neural tube Wnt signaling has both negative and
positive functions in Gli2 and Gli3 regulation: these signals repress Gli3 in
segmental plate mesoderm prior to somite formation and then promote somite
formation and the somite-specific activation of Gli2 and Gli3. These studies,
therefore, establish a role for Wnt signaling in the control of Shh signal
transduction through the regulation of Gli2 and Gli3, and provide a mechanistic
basis for the known synergistic actions of surface ectoderm/neural tube and
notochord signaling in somite cell specification.

PMID: 10769232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 May;28(1):77-81.

Evidence that haploinsufficiency of Ptch leads to medulloblastoma in mice.

Zurawel RH(1), Allen C, Wechsler-Reya R, Scott MP, Raffel C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.

The PTCH gene encodes a putative tumor suppressor protein; germline alterations
in PTCH have been found in patients with the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome
(NBCCS). Medulloblastoma, a brain tumor, develops in about 3% of NBCCS patients, 
and mutations in PTCH have also been described in a subset of sporadic
medulloblastomas. The search for the causes of medulloblastoma has been hindered 
by the lack of an appropriate model system for this tumor type. Recently, a
transgenic mouse hemizygous for the Ptch gene was generated by homologous
recombination. Medulloblastomas were found in about 19% of these mice within the 
first 25 weeks after birth. The status of the wild-type PTCH allele in these
tumors has not been investigated. For clearer definition of the role of PTCH as a
tumor suppressor in medulloblastoma, 13 cerebellar tumors from transgenic
Ptch(+/-) mice were examined for alterations in the remaining Ptch allele. A
single mutation was found in one tumor, a C-to-A substitution changing a tyrosine
to a stop codon; all other tumors exhibited a wild-type sequence. Two tumors with
normal Ptch cDNA were examined by in situ hybridization. Ptch cDNA was found in
tumor cells but not in associated tumor stroma. We also examined the mRNA
expression levels for the remaining Ptch allele, as well as for Gli1, a gene
known to be transcriptionally activated by Ptch inactivation. Blot analysis of
RNA from the 13 tumors shows that Ptch mRNA of appropriate size is expressed in
all tumors at varying levels. Expression of Gli1 was increased in tumors compared
to normal cerebellum. These results suggest that deletion of one copy of Ptch may
be sufficient to promote medulloblastoma development in mice.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10738305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 28;97(7):3438-43.

Induction of basal cell carcinomas and trichoepitheliomas in mice overexpressing 
GLI-1.

Nilsson M(1), Undèn AB, Krause D, Malmqwist U, Raza K, Zaphiropoulos PG, Toftgård
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences at Novum, Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 57,
Huddinge, Sweden.

Basal cell carcinoma is the most prevalent cancer in the western world, showing a
rapid increase in incidence. Activation of the Sonic hedgehog/Patched (PTCH)
signaling pathway because of PTCH1 inactivation is a key event in sporadic and
familial basal cell carcinoma development in humans and is associated with
transcriptional activation of specific target genes, including PTCH1 itself.
These changes are analogous to the situation in Drosophila where hedgehog
activates the zinc-finger transcription factor Cubitus interruptus, leading to
increased transcription of target genes. In the present study, we show that mice 
ectopically expressing the human Cubitus interruptus homolog GLI-1 in the skin
develop tumors closely resembling human BCCs as well as other hair
follicle-derived neoplasias, such as trichoepitheliomas, cylindromas, and
trichoblastomas. Furthermore, examination of the tumors revealed wild-type p53
and Ha ras genes. These findings firmly establish that increased GLI-1 expression
is central and probably sufficient for tumor development and suggest that
GLI-1-induced tumor development does not depend on additional p53 or Ha ras
mutations.

PMCID: PMC16258
PMID: 10725363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Development. 2000 Apr;127(8):1593-605.

Mouse Gli1 mutants are viable but have defects in SHH signaling in combination
with a Gli2 mutation.

Park HL(1), Bai C, Platt KA, Matise MP, Beeghly A, Hui CC, Nakashima M, Joyner
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and
Neuroscience, New York University Medical School, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The secreted factor Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is both required for and sufficient to
induce multiple developmental processes, including ventralization of the CNS,
branching morphogenesis of the lungs and anteroposterior patterning of the limbs.
Based on analogy to the Drosophila Hh pathway, the multiple GLI transcription
factors in vertebrates are likely to both transduce SHH signaling and repress Shh
transcription. In order to discriminate between overlapping versus unique
requirements for the three Gli genes in mice, we have produced a Gli1 mutant and 
analyzed the phenotypes of Gli1/Gli2 and Gli1/3 double mutants. Gli3(xt) mutants 
have polydactyly and dorsal CNS defects associated with ectopic Shh expression,
indicating GLI3 plays a role in repressing Shh. In contrast, Gli2 mutants have
five digits, but lack a floorplate, indicating that it is required to transduce
SHH signaling in some tissues. Remarkably, mice homozygous for a Gli1(zfd
)mutation that deletes the exons encoding the DNA-binding domain are viable and
appear normal. Transgenic mice expressing a GLI1 protein lacking the zinc fingers
can not induce SHH targets in the dorsal brain, indicating that the Gli1(zfd
)allele contains a hypomorphic or null mutation. Interestingly,
Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+), but not Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli3(zfd/+) double mutants have 
a severe phenotype; most Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+) mice die soon after birth and 
all have multiple defects including a variable loss of ventral spinal cord cells 
and smaller lungs that are similar to, but less extreme than, Gli2(zfd/zfd)
mutants. Gli1/Gli2 double homozygous mutants have more extreme CNS and lung
defects than Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+) mutants, however, in contrast to Shh
mutants, ventrolateral neurons develop in the CNS and the limbs have 5 digits
with an extra postaxial nubbin. These studies demonstrate that the zinc-finger
DNA-binding domain of GLI1 protein is not required for SHH signaling in mouse.
Furthermore, Gli1 and Gli2, but not Gli1 and Gli3, have extensive overlapping
functions that are likely downstream of SHH signaling.

PMID: 10725236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 Dec 10;74(1-2):1-14.

4.5 kb of the rat tyrosine hydroxylase 5' flanking sequence directs tissue
specific expression during development and contains consensus sites for multiple 
transcription factors.

Schimmel JJ(1), Crews L, Roffler-Tarlov S, Chikaraishi DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

To delineate DNA sequences responsible for developmentally correct expression of 
the rat tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene, we analyzed a line of transgenic mice
expressing high levels of human placental alkaline phosphatase (AP) under control
of 4.5 kb of 5' flanking DNA from the rat TH gene in embryos and adults. Several 
regions, such as the accessory olfactory bulb, which were not thought to
synthesize TH protein or do so only transiently, were shown to express TH protein
using an improved method of antigen retrieval for TH immunohistochemistry. Many
of these regions had been shown to express TH-driven reporter genes in transgenic
mice. In the central nervous system, AP was detected in essentially all
TH-expressing cell groups throughout development and in adults. In the peripheral
nervous system, transgene expression paralleled endogenous TH expression in the
developing adrenal medulla and sympathetic ganglia but not in transiently
TH-positive cells in dorsal root ganglia. Peripheral expression in the adult
adrenal medulla was very weak and absent in sympathetic ganglia. The specificity 
with which the 4.5 kb region directs transgene expression in embryos is
comparable to that observed with longer 5' flanking promoter regions, implying
that this region contains the control elements for appropriate expression during 
development. Sequence analysis of the region demonstrates a GT dinucleotide
repeat, an element that resembles the neural restrictive silencer element (NRSE),
which restricts transcription of neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells, and
consensus sites for three families of transcription factors, Ptx1/3, Nurr1 and
Gli1/2, which are required for the early differentiation of mesencephalic
neurons.

PMID: 10640671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Curr Biol. 1999 Nov 18;9(22):1319-22.

Distinct and regulated activities of human Gli proteins in Drosophila.

von Mering C(1), Basler K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Universität Zürich, Zürich, 8057, Switzerland.

In both vertebrates and Drosophila, limb development is organized by a
posteriorly located source of the signalling protein Hedgehog (Hh) [1] [2] [3]
[4]. In Drosophila, the expression of Hh target genes is controlled by two
opposing activities of the transcriptional regulator Cubitus interruptus (Ci),
which activates target genes in response to Hh signalling but is converted into a
repressor form in the absence of Hh [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]. Three homologs of
Ci (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) have been implicated in mediating responses to Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) in vertebrates [11] [12]. Much attention has been devoted to the
expression pattern of GLI genes; GLI1 is induced by Shh, whereas GLI3
transcription appears to be repressed by Shh signalling [13] [14] [15]. The
regulation of GLI gene expression is therefore one important mechanism by which
GLI genes organize pattern. It is not well understood, however, whether Shh
signalling also controls the activities of Gli proteins post-translationally and 
whether these activities have activating or repressing effects on target genes in
vivo. Here, we have subjected the human proteins Gli1 and Gli3 to the precise and
well-defined Hh signalling assay of Drosophila wing development and established
that Gli1 functions as an activator and Gli3 as a repressor of Hh target genes;
that the activating transcriptional activity of Gli1 and the repressing activity 
of Gli3 are both subject to Hh regulation in vivo; and that the combined
activities of Gli1 and Gli3 can substitute for Ci in controlling Hh target gene
expression during embryonic and larval development.

PMID: 10574767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Curr Biol. 1999 Oct 7;9(19):1119-22.

Mouse suppressor of fused is a negative regulator of sonic hedgehog signaling and
alters the subcellular distribution of Gli1.

Ding Q(1), Fukami Si, Meng X, Nishizaki Y, Zhang X, Sasaki H, Dlugosz A, Nakafuku
M, Hui Cc.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology The Hospital for Sick Children Department of 
Molecular and Medical Genetics University of Toronto 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has critical functions during embryogenesis
of both invertebrate and vertebrate species [1]; defects in this pathway in
humans can cause developmental disorders as well as neoplasia [2]. Although the
Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 zinc finger proteins are known to be effectors of Hh
signaling in vertebrates, the mechanisms regulating activity of these
transcription factors remain poorly understood [3] [4]. In Drosophila, activity
of the Gli homolog Cubitus interruptus (Ci) is likely to be modulated by its
interaction with a cytoplasmic complex containing several other proteins [5] [6],
including Costal2, Fused (Fu), and Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)), the last of
which has been shown to interact directly with Ci [7]. We have cloned mouse
Suppressor of fused (mSu(fu)) and detected its 4.5 kb transcript throughout
embryogenesis and in several adult tissues. In cultured cells, mSu(fu)
overexpression inhibited transcriptional activation mediated by Sonic hedgehog
(Shh), Gli1 and Gli2. Co-immunoprecipitation of epitope-tagged proteins indicated
that mSu(fu) interacts with Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3, and that the inhibitory effects
of mSu(fu) on Gli1's transcriptional activity were mediated through interactions 
with both amino- and carboxy-terminal regions of Gli1. Gli1 was localized
primarily to the nucleus of both HeLa cells and the Shh-responsive cell line
MNS-70; co-expression with mSu(fu) resulted in a striking increase in cytoplasmic
Gli1 immunostaining. Our findings indicate that mSu(fu) can function as a
negative regulator of Shh signaling and suggest that this effect is mediated by
interaction with Gli transcription factors.

PMID: 10531011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Clin Invest. 1999 Oct;104(7):855-64.

Induction of the hair growth phase in postnatal mice by localized transient
expression of Sonic hedgehog.

Sato N(1), Leopold PL, Crystal RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University-New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 1999 Oct;104(7):851-3.

Hair follicles form in prenatal skin and mature in the postnatal period,
establishing a growth cycle in 3 phases: telogen (resting), anagen (growth), and 
catagen (regression). Based on the knowledge that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression
is necessary for the embryonic development of hair follicles, and that anagen in 
the postnatal cycling follicle has morphologic similarities to the epithelial
invagination process in embryonic skin, we hypothesized that localized, but
transient, enhanced expression of the Shh gene in postnatal skin would accelerate
initiation of anagen in the hair follicle cycle, with concomitant accelerated
hair growth. To assess this concept, an E1(-) adenovirus vector, AdShh, was used 
to transfer the murine Shh cDNA to skin of postnatal day 19 C57BL/6 mice. The
treated skin showed increased mRNA expression of Shh, Patched (the Shh receptor),
and Gli1 (a transcription factor in the Shh pathway). In mice receiving AdShh,
but not in controls, acceleration into anagen was evident, since hair follicle
size and melanogenesis increased and the hair-specific keratin ghHb-1 and the
melanin synthesis-related tyrosinase mRNAs accumulated. Finally, C57BL/6 mice
showed marked acceleration of the onset of new hair growth in the region of AdShh
administration to skin 2 weeks after treatment, but not in control vector-treated
or untreated areas. After 6 months, AdShh-treated skin showed normal hair and
normal skin morphology. Together, these observations are consistent with the
concept that upregulation of Shh activity in postnatal skin functions as a
biologic switch that induces resting hair follicles to enter anagen with
consequent hair growth.

PMCID: PMC408560
PMID: 10510326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Eur J Neurosci. 1999 Sep;11(9):3199-214.

Discrete localizations of hedgehog signalling components in the developing and
adult rat nervous system.

Traiffort E(1), Charytoniuk D, Watroba L, Faure H, Sales N, Ruat M.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9040 CNRS, Junior Group ATIPE, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a morphogen molecule implicated in embryonic tissue
patterning, displays inductive, proliferative, neurotrophic and neuroprotective
activities on various neural cells. Shh might exert its biological functions
through binding to patched (Ptc) associated with smoothened (Smo), leading to
downstream activation of target genes such as the transcription factor Gli1. We
have performed a detailed localization of cells expressing transcripts of Shh,
Ptc, Smo and Gli1 in brain and spinal cord of the adult rat as well as in the
developing cerebellum. In the adult, Shh-positive cells were mainly observed in
forebrain structures, in the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum and in motor
neurons. Ptc-positive cells were frequently observed in brain areas devoid of any
Shh transcripts, except in the median eminence or the facial nucleus, suggesting 
local Shh signalling. Interestingly, Smo transcripts were predominantly present
within circumventricular organs, in granular cells of the dentate gyrus and in
neurons of the reticular thalamic nucleus. The presence of Shh, Ptc and Smo
transcripts in hypothalamic areas may indicate a role of Shh signalling in the
modulation of neuroendocrine functions. The expression pattern of these three
genes as well as of Gli1, and their developmental regulation in the cerebellum,
suggest a possible role for Hedgehog signalling in the control of various cell
populations within the cerebellum, particularly in granule cell proliferation
and/or differentiation that might be impaired in proliferative states such as
medulloblastomas.

PMID: 10510184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Invest Dermatol. 1999 Oct;113(4):595-9.

Gli1 protein is expressed in basal cell carcinomas, outer root sheath
keratinocytes and a subpopulation of mesenchymal cells in normal human skin.

Ghali L(1), Wong ST, Green J, Tidman N, Quinn AG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cutaneous Research, St Batholomew's & The Royal London Hospital
School of Medicine & Dentistry, Whitechapel, UK.

Genetic studies of patients with the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome have
led to the recognition of the importance of the hedgehog signaling pathway in the
development of basal cell carcinomas of the skin. Although hedgehog signaling is 
known to be important in hair follicle development, the function of this pathway 
in adult skin and the mechanism by which activation of this pathway leads to
basal cell carcinoma development remain to be established. The Gli1 family of
transcription factors mediates hedgehog signaling in mammalian cells and we have 
shown in previous studies that Gli1 mRNA is differentially expressed in basal
cell carcinomas. Using antibodies to epitopes on the N and C terminal regions of 
Gli1 we show now that Gli1 protein is present in basal cell carcinomas and that
the protein is mainly localized to the cytoplasmic compartment. Focal nuclear
staining was seen in a small number of basal cell carcinomas with the C terminal 
antibody which suggest that nuclear localization is not dependent on loss of the 
C terminus of Gli1 due to proteolysis. Strong Gli1 immunostaining was seen in the
outer root sheath keratinocytes of some hair follicles, a subpopulation of
mesenchymal cells in the vicinity of the bulge region of adult hair follicles and
the dermal sheath cells of developing hair follicles. Quantitation of Gli1 mRNA
in basal cell carcinomas using northern blot analysis indicates that Gli1 is
highly expressed in basal cell carcinomas. This suggests that the lower intensity
of Gli1 immunostaining in basal cell carcinoma islands relative to outer root
sheath keratinocytes is not simply a reflection of differences in gene
expression. The continued expression of Gli1 in adult hair follicles and in the
mesenchyme of adult human skin suggest that Hh signaling may play a part in hair 
cycling and in epidermal mesenchymal interactions important in normal skin
maintenance.

PMID: 10504446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mech Dev. 1999 Sep;87(1-2):57-66.

Does adult fracture repair recapitulate embryonic skeletal formation?

Ferguson C(1), Alpern E, Miclau T, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California at San Francisco, 
533 Parnassus Ave., San Francisco, USA.

Bone formation is a continuous process that begins during fetal development and
persists throughout life as a remodeling process. In the event of injury, bones
heal by generating new bone rather than scar tissue; thus, it can accurately be
described as a regenerative process. To elucidate the extent to which fetal
skeletal development and skeletal regeneration are similar, we performed a series
of detailed expression analyses using a number of genes that regulate key stages 
of endochondral ossification. They included genes in the indian hedgehog (ihh)
and core binding factor 1 (cbfa1) pathways, and genes associated with
extracellular matrix remodeling and vascular invasion including vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and matrix metalloproteinase 13 (mmp13). Our
analyses suggested that even at the earliest stages of mesenchymal cell
condensation, chondrocyte (ihh, cbfa1 and collagen type II-positive) and
perichondrial (gli1 and osteocalcin-positive) cell populations were already
specified. As chondrocytes matured, they continued to express cbfa1 and ihh
whereas cbfa1, osteocalcin and gli1 persisted in presumptive periosteal cells.
Later, VEGF and mmp13 transcripts were abundant in chondrocytes as they underwent
hypertrophy and terminal differentiation. Based on these expression patterns and 
available genetic data, we propose a model where Ihh and Cbfa1, together with
Gli1 and Osteocalcin participate in establishing reciprocal signal site of
injury. The persistence of cbfa1 and ihh, and their targets osteocalcin and gli1,
in the callus suggests comparable processes of chondrocyte maturation and
specification of a neo-perichondrium occur following injury. VEGF and mmp13 are
expressed during the later stages of healing, coincident with the onset of
vascularization of the callus and subsequent ossification. Taken together, these 
data suggest the genetic mechanisms regulating fetal skeletogenesis also regulate
adult skeletal regeneration, and point to important regulators of angiogenesis
and ossification in bone regeneration.

PMID: 10495271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Mol Med (Berl). 1999 Jun;77(6):459-68.

The patched signaling pathway in tumorigenesis and development: lessons from
animal models.

Hahn H(1), Wojnowski L, Miller G, Zimmer A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, GSF Research Center of Environment and Health,
Neuherberg, Germany. heidi.hahn@gsf.de

The identification of mutations in the human homolog of the Drosophila segment
polarity gene Patched in basal cell carcinoma has sparked intense interest in the
role of this gene in human disorders. The transmembrane protein Patched is a
receptor for the morphogene Sonic Hedgehog. Sonic Hedgehog/Patched signaling
involves another transmembrane protein, Smoothened, and its intracellular
effectors, including the proto-oncogene GLI1. During the past 2 years it has
become evident that mutations in Patched or in one of the components of its
signaling pathway contribute to the formation of several common human tumors. It 
is now well established that Patched is a tumor suppressor gene. The Sonic
Hedgehog/Patched/Smoothened signaling pathway is thus rapidly emerging as one of 
the most important regulators of oncogenic transformation. This pathway also
plays an important role during mammalian embryonic development. This dual role is
especially visible in humans with inherited Patched mutations. Such patients
suffer from Gorlin, or nevoid basal cell carcinoma, syndrome and exhibit a
variety of developmental defects accompanied by a predisposition to tumor
formation. Activating mutations in Sonic Hedgehog and Smoothened lead to similar 
phenotypes as do loss-of function mutations in Patched. By means of transgenic
and gene targeting technologies the respective mutations have been expressed in
the mouse. Such mutant mouse strains exhibit many symptoms observed in humans.
These strains are useful models to study the pathogenesis of several common human
tumors and developmental defects. Furthermore they provide important tools to
study the Sonic Hedgehog/Patched/Smoothened signaling at the molecular and
biochemical level.

PMID: 10475061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 15;212(2):323-36.

Vertebrate homologs of Drosophila suppressor of fused interact with the gli
family of transcriptional regulators.

Pearse RV 2nd(1), Collier LS, Scott MP, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02115, USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is crucial for pattern formation during
metazoan development. Although originially characterized in Drosophila,
vertebrate homologs have been identified for several, but not all, genes in the
pathway. Analysis of mutants in Drosophila demonstrates that Suppressor of fused 
[Su(fu)] interacts genetically with genes encoding proteins in the Hh signal
transduction pathway, and its protein product physically interacts with two of
the proteins in the Hh pathway. We report here the molecular cloning and
characterization of chicken and mouse homologs of Su(fu). The chick and mouse
proteins are 27% identical and 53% similar at the amino acid level to the
Drosophila melanogaster and Drosophila virilis proteins. Vertebrate Su(fu) is
widely expressed in the developing embryo with higher levels in tissues that are 
known to be patterned by Hh signaling. The chick Su(fu) protein can physically
interact with factors known to function in Hh signal transduction including the
Drosophila serine/threonine kinase, Fused, and the vertebrate transcriptional
regulators Gli1 and Gli3. This interaction may be significant for transcriptional
regulation, as recombinant Su(fu) enhances the ability of Gli proteins to bind
DNA in electrophoretic mobility shift assays.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMCID: PMC4530617
PMID: 10433824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3915-24.

Regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 activities by an amino-terminal repression domain:
implication of Gli2 and Gli3 as primary mediators of Shh signaling.

Sasaki H(1), Nishizaki Y, Hui C, Nakafuku M, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
hsasaki@imcb.osaka-u.ac.jp

Gli family zinc finger proteins are mediators of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
in vertebrates. The question remains unanswered, however, as to how these Gli
proteins participate in the Shh signaling pathway. In this study, regulatory
activities associated with the Gli2 protein were investigated in relation to the 
Shh signaling. Although Gli2 acts as a weak transcriptional activator, it is in
fact a composite of positive and negative regulatory domains. In cultured cells, 
truncation of the activation domain in the C-terminal half results in a protein
with repressor activity, while removal of the repression domain at the N terminus
converts Gli2 into a strong activator. In transgenic mouse embryos, N-terminally 
truncated Gli2, unlike the full length protein, activates a Shh target gene,
HNF3beta, in the dorsal neural tube, thus mimicking the effect of Shh signal.
This suggests that unmasking of the strong activation potential of Gli2 through
modulation of the N-terminal repression domain is one of the key mechanisms of
the Shh signaling. A similar regulatory mechanism involving the N-terminal region
was also found for Gli3, but not for Gli1. When the Shh signal derived from the
notochord is received by the neural plate, the widely expressed Gli2 and Gli3
proteins are presumably converted to their active forms in the ventral cells,
leading to activation of transcription of their target genes, including Gli1.

PMID: 10433919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 1;212(1):137-49.

Constitutive activation of sonic hedgehog signaling in the chicken mutant
talpid(2): Shh-independent outgrowth and polarizing activity.

Caruccio NC(1), Martinez-Lopez A, Harris M, Dvorak L, Bitgood J, Simandl BK,
Fallon JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, Wisconsin,
53706, USA.

We have examined the developmental properties of the polydactylous chicken
mutant, talpid(2). Ptc, Gli1, Bmp2, Hoxd13, and Fgf4 are expressed throughout the
anteroposterior axis of the mutant limb bud, despite normal Shh expression. The
expression of Gli3, Ihh, and Dhh appears to be normal, suggesting that the Shh
signaling pathway is constitutively active in talpid(2) mutants. We show that
preaxial talpid(2) limb bud mesoderm has polarizing activity in the absence of
detectable Shh mRNA. When the postaxial talpid(2) limb bud (including all
Shh-expressing cells) is removed, the preaxial cells reform a normal-shaped
talpid(2) limb bud (regulate). However, a Shh-expressing region (zone of
polarizing activity) does not reform; nevertheless Fgf4 expression in the apical 
ectodermal ridge is maintained. Such reformed talpid(2) limb buds develop
complete talpid(2) limbs. After similar treatment, normal limb buds downregulate 
Fgf4, the preaxial cells do not regulate, and a truncated anteroposterior
deficient limb forms. In talpid(2) limbs, distal outgrowth is independent of Shh 
and correlates with Fgf4, but not Fgf8, expression by the apical ectodermal
ridge. We propose a model for talpid(2) in which leaky activation of the Shh
signaling pathway occurs in the absence of Shh ligand.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10419691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Dev Biol. 1999 Jul 15;211(2):323-34.

Overexpression of ptc1 inhibits induction of Shh target genes and prevents normal
patterning in the neural tube.

Goodrich LV(1), Jung D, Higgins KM, Scott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, 94305-5427, USA.

Patched (Ptc) is a human tumor suppressor protein and a candidate receptor for
Hedgehog (Hh) proteins, which regulate growth and patterning in embryos. Ptc
represses expression of Hh target genes such as Gli1 and ptc1 itself. Localized
secretion of Hh appears to induce transcription of target genes in specific
patterns by binding to Ptc and preventing it from functioning in recipient cells.
People who are heterozygous for PTC1 exhibit a range of developmental defects,
suggesting that some genes are inappropriately expressed when there is not enough
Ptc protein. To test the idea that a balance between Hh and Ptc activities is
essential for normal development, we overexpressed Ptc in the neural tube. We
find that excess Ptc is sufficient to inhibit expression of Gli1 and ptc1,
suggesting that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) cannot signal effectively. This leads to
partial dorsalization of the neural tube and a wide spectrum of neural defects,
ranging from embryonic lethality to hydrocephaly.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10395791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3205-16.

Gli proteins encode context-dependent positive and negative functions:
implications for development and disease.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Several lines of evidence implicate zinc finger proteins of the Gli family in the
final steps of Hedgehog signaling in normal development and disease. C-terminally
truncated mutant GLI3 proteins are also associated with human syndromes, but it
is not clear whether these C-terminally truncated Gli proteins fulfil the same
function as full-length ones. Here, structure-function analyses of Gli proteins
have been performed using floor plate and neuronal induction assays in frog
embryos, as well as induction of alkaline phosphatase (AP) in SHH-responsive
mouse C3H10T1/2 (10T1/2) cells. These assays show that C-terminal sequences are
required for positive inducing activity and cytoplasmic localization, whereas
N-terminal sequences determine dominant negative function and nuclear
localization. Analyses of nuclear targeted Gli1 and Gli2 proteins suggest that
both activator and dominant negative proteins are modified forms. In embryos and 
COS cells, tagged Gli cDNAs yield C-terminally deleted forms similar to that of
Ci. These results thus provide a molecular basis for the human Polydactyly type A
and Pallister-Hall Syndrome phenotypes, derived from the deregulated production
of C-terminally truncated GLI3 proteins. Analyses of full-length Gli function in 
10T1/2 cells suggest that nuclear localization of activating forms is a regulated
event and show that only Gli1 mimics SHH in inducing AP activity. Moreover,
full-length Gli3 and all C-terminally truncated forms act antagonistically
whereas Gli2 is inactive in this assay. In 10T1/2 cells, protein kinase A (PKA), 
a known inhibitor of Hh signaling, promotes Gli3 repressor formation and inhibits
Gli1 function. Together, these findings suggest a context-dependent functional
divergence of Gli protein function, in which a cell represses Gli3 and activates 
Gli1/2 prevents the formation of repressor Gli forms to respond to Shh.
Interpretation of Hh signals by Gli proteins therefore appears to involve a fine 
balance of divergent functions within each and among different Gli proteins, the 
misregulation of which has profound biological consequences.

PMID: 10375510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Dev Dyn. 1999 May;215(1):45-53.

Msx1 is required for the induction of Patched by Sonic hedgehog in the mammalian 
tooth germ.

Zhang Y(1), Zhao X, Hu Y, St Amand T, Zhang M, Ramamurthy R, Qiu M, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70118, USA.

We have used the mouse developing tooth germ as a model system to explore the
transmission of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal in the induction of Patched (Ptc). In
the early developing molar tooth germ, Shh is expressed in the dental epithelium,
and the transcripts of Shh downstream target genes Ptc and Gli1 are expressed in 
dental epithelium as well as adjacent mesenchymal tissue. The homeobox gene Msx1 
is also expressed in the dental mesenchyme of the molar tooth germ at this time. 
We show here that the expression of Ptc, but not Gli1, was downregulated in the
dental mesenchyme of Msx1 mutants. In wild-type E11.0 molar tooth mesenchyme
SHH-soaked beads induced the expression of Ptc and Gli1. However, in Msx1 mutant 
dental mesenchyme SHH-soaked beads were able to induce Gli1 but failed to induce 
Ptc expression, indicating a requirement for Msx1 in the induction of Ptc by SHH.
Moreover, we show that another signaling molecule, BMP4, was able to induce Ptc
expression in wild-type dental mesenchyme, but induced a distinct expression
pattern of Ptc in the Msx1 mutant molar mesenchyme. We conclude that in the
context of the tooth germ Msx1 is a component of the Shh signaling pathway that
leads to Ptc induction. Our results also suggest that the precise pattern of Ptc 
expression in the prospective tooth-forming region is controlled and coordinated 
by at least two inductive signaling pathways.

PMID: 10340755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Curr Biol. 1999 Apr 22;9(8):445-8.

Purkinje-cell-derived Sonic hedgehog regulates granule neuron precursor cell
proliferation in the developing mouse cerebellum.

Wallace VA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa General Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa Eye
Institute, 501 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada. vwallace@ogh.on.ca

Purkinje cells (PCs) are the projection neurons of the cerebellar cortex. They
receive two major types of synaptic input - that from the inferior olive via
climbing fibres and that from the granule neurons via parallel fibres. The
precursors of granule neurons proliferate at the surface of the developing
cerebellumin the external granule layer (EGL), which persists until postnatal day
14 in the mouse [1]. PCs are thought to provide trophic support for granule
neurons [2][3] and to stimulate the proliferation of cells in the EGL [4], but
the signalling molecules that mediate these cell-cell interactions have not been 
identified. I show here that PCs in the developing mouse cerebellum express the
gene encoding the morphogen Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and that dividing cells in the
EGL express Patched (Ptc) and Gli1, two target genes of which expression is
upregulated in response to Hedgehog signalling (see [5] and references therein). 
Treatment of developing mice with hybridoma cells that secrete neutralizing
anti-Shh antibodies [6] disrupted cerebellar development and reduced
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation in the EGL of neonatal mice, whereas
treatment of dissociated granule neuron cultures with recombinant Shh stimulated 
BrdU incorporation. These results suggest that PC-derived Shh normally promotes
the proliferation of granule neuron precursors in the EGL.

PMID: 10226030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Development. 1999 Jun;126(11):2397-407.

Expression of ptc and gli genes in talpid3 suggests bifurcation in Shh pathway.

Lewis KE(1), Drossopoulou G, Paton IR, Morrice DR, Robertson KE, Burt DW, Ingham 
PW, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Programme, Krebs Institute, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.

talpid3 is an embryonic-lethal chicken mutation in a molecularly un-characterised
autosomal gene. The recessive, pleiotropic phenotype includes polydactylous limbs
with morphologically similar digits. Previous analysis established that hox-D and
bmp genes, that are normally expressed posteriorly in the limb bud in response to
a localised, posterior source of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) are expressed symmetrically
across the entire anteroposterior axis in talpid3 limb buds. In contrast, Shh
expression itself is unaffected. Here we examine expression of patched (ptc),
which encodes a component of the Shh receptor, and is probably itself a direct
target of Shh signalling, to establish whether talpid3 acts in the Shh pathway.
We find that ptc expression is significantly reduced in talpid3 embryos. We also 
demonstrate that talpid3 function is not required for Shh signal production but
is required for normal response to Shh signals, implicating talpid3 in
transduction of Shh signals in responding cells. Our analysis of expression of
putative components of the Shh pathway, gli1, gli3 and coupTFII shows that genes 
regulated by Shh are either ectopically expressed or no longer responsive to Shh 
signals in talpid3 limbs, suggesting possible bifurcation in the Shh pathway. We 
also describe genetic mapping of gli1, ptc, shh and smoothened in chickens and
confirm by co-segregation analysis that none of these genes correspond to
talpid3.

PMID: 10225999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Comp Neurol. 1999 Apr 5;406(2):143-55.

Expression of sonic hedgehog, patched, and Gli1 in developing taste papillae of
the mouse.

Hall JM(1), Hooper JE, Finger TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA. halljosh@york.uchsc.edu

Lingual taste buds form within taste papillae, which are specialized structures
that develop in a characteristic spatial and temporal pattern. To investigate the
signaling events responsible for patterning and morphogenesis of taste papillae, 
the authors examined the time course and distribution of expression of several
related developmental signaling genes as well as the time course of innervation
of taste papillae in mouse embryos from embryonic day 12 (E12) to E18. Lingual
expression of the signaling molecule Sonic hedgehog (Shh), its receptor Patched
(Ptc), and the Shh-activated transcription factor Gli1 were assayed by using in
situ hybridization. Shh is expressed broadly in the lingual epithelium at E12 but
becomes progressively restricted to developing circumvallate and fungiform
papillary epithelia. Shh is expressed specifically within the central cells of
the papillary epithelium starting at E13.5 and persisting through E18. Ptc and
Gli1 expression follow a pattern similar to that of Shh. Compared with Shh, Ptc
is expressed in larger regions surrounding the central papillary cells and also
in the mesenchyme underlying Shh-expressing epithelium. Innervation of taste
papillae was examined by using the panneuronal antibody to ubiquitin carboxyl
terminal hydrolase (protein gene product 9.5). Nerves reach the basal lamina of
developing taste papillae at E14 to densely innervate the papillary epithelium by
E16. Thus, the pattern of Shh expression within developing taste papillae is
established prior to innervation, ruling out neuronal induction of papillae. The 
results suggest that the Shh signaling pathway may be involved in: 1)
establishing papillary boundaries in taste papilla morphogenesis, 2) papillary
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, and/or 3) specifying the location or
development of taste buds within taste papillae.

PMID: 10096602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):8143-52.

Sonic Hedgehog-induced activation of the Gli1 promoter is mediated by GLI3.

Dai P(1), Akimaru H, Tanaka Y, Maekawa T, Nakafuku M, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN, 3-1-1
Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Drosophila transcription factor cubitus interruptus (Ci) and its co-activator CRE
(cAMP response element)-binding protein (CBP) activate a group of target genes on
the anterior-posterior border in response to hedgehog protein (Hh) signaling. In 
the anterior region, in contrast, the carboxyl-truncated form of Ci generated by 
protein processing represses Hh expression. In vertebrates, three Ci-related
transcription factors (glioblastoma gene products (GLIs) 1, 2, and 3) were
identified, but their functional difference in Hh signal transduction is unknown.
Here, we report distinct roles for GLI1 and GLI3 in Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling. GLI3 containing both repression and activation domains acts both as an
activator and a repressor, as does Ci, whereas GLI1 contains only the activation 
domain. Consistent with this, GLI3, but not GLI1, is processed to generate the
repressor form. Transcriptional co-activator CBP binds to GLI3, but not to GLI1. 
The trans-activating capacity of GLI3 is positively and negatively regulated by
Shh and cAMP-dependent protein kinase, respectively, through a specific region of
GLI3, which contains the CBP-binding domain and the phosphorylation sites of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. GLI3 directly binds to the Gli1 promoter and
induces Gli1 transcription in response to Shh. Thus, GLI3 may act as a mediator
of Shh signaling in the activation of the target gene Gli1.

PMID: 10075717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Dev Biol. 1999 Jan 1;205(1):1-9.

Essential role for Sonic hedgehog during hair follicle morphogenesis.

Chiang C(1), Swan RZ, Grachtchouk M, Bolinger M, Litingtung Y, Robertson EK,
Cooper MK, Gaffield W, Westphal H, Beachy PA, Dlugosz AA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

The hair follicle is a source of epithelial stem cells and site of origin for
several types of skin tumors. Although it is clear that follicles arise by way of
a series of inductive tissue interactions, identification of the signaling
molecules driving this process remains a major challenge in skin biology. In this
study we report an obligatory role for the secreted morphogen Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) during hair follicle development. Hair germs comprising epidermal placodes 
and associated dermal condensates were detected in both control and Shh -/-
embryos, but progression through subsequent stages of follicle development was
blocked in mutant skin. The expression of Gli1 and Ptc1 was reduced in Shh -/-
dermal condensates and they failed to evolve into hair follicle papillae,
suggesting that the adjacent mesenchyme is a critical target for placode-derived 
Shh. Despite the profound inhibition of hair follicle morphogenesis, late-stage
follicle differentiation markers were detected in Shh -/- skin grafts, as well as
cultured vibrissa explants treated with cyclopamine to block Shh signaling. Our
findings reveal an essential role for Shh during hair follicle morphogenesis,
where it is required for normal advancement beyond the hair germ stage of
development.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):54-7.

Essential function of Gli2 and Gli3 in the formation of lung, trachea and
oesophagus.

Motoyama J(1), Liu J, Mo R, Ding Q, Post M, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):7-8.

Foregut malformations (oesophageal atresia, tracheo-oesophageal fistula, lung
anomalies and congenital stenosis of the oesophagus and trachea) are relatively
common anomalies occurring in 1 in 2,000-5,000 live births, although their
aetiology is poorly understood. The secreted glycoprotein Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
has been suggested to act as an endodermal signal that controls hindgut
patterning and lung growth. In mice, three zinc-finger transcription factors,
Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, have been implicated in the transduction of Shh signal. We
report here that mutant mice lacking Gli2 function exhibit foregut defects,
including stenosis of the oesophagus and trachea, as well as hypoplasia and
lobulation defects of the lung. A reduction of 50% in the gene dosage of Gli3 in 
a Gli2-/- background resulted in oesophageal atresia with tracheo-oesophageal
fistula and a severe lung phenotype. Mutant mice lacking both Gli2 and Gli3
function did not form oesophagus, trachea and lung. These results indicate that
Gli2 and Gli3 possess specific and overlapping functions in Shh signalling during
foregut development, and suggest that mutations in GLI genes may be involved in
human foregut malformations.

PMID: 9731531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3123-32.

Evidence that preaxial polydactyly in the Doublefoot mutant is due to ectopic
Indian Hedgehog signaling.

Yang Y(1), Guillot P, Boyd Y, Lyon MF, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Patterning of the vertebrate limb along the anterior-posterior axis is controlled
by the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) located at the posterior limb margin.
One of the vertebrate Hh family members, Shh, has been shown to be able to
mediate the function of the ZPA. Several naturally occurring mouse mutations with
the phenotype of preaxial polydactyly exhibit ectopic Shh expression at the
anterior limb margin. In this study, we report the molecular characterization of 
a spontaneous mouse mutation, Doublefoot (Dbf). Dbf is a dominant mutation which 
maps to chromosome 1. Heterozygous and homozygous embryos display a severe
polydactyly with 6 to 8 digits on each limb. We show here that Shh is expressed
normally in Dbf mutants. In contrast, a second Hh family member, Indian hedgehog 
(Ihh) which maps close to Dbf, is ectopically expressed in the distal limb bud.
Ectopic Ihh expression in the distal and anterior limb bud results in the ectopic
activation of several genes associated with anterior-posterior and
proximal-distal patterning (Fgf4, Hoxd13, Bmp2). In addition, specific components
in the Hedgehog pathway are either ectopically activated (Ptc, Ptc-2, Gli1) or
repressed (Gli2). We propose that misexpression of Ihh, and not a novel
Smoothened ligand as recently suggested (Hayes et al., 1998), is responsible for 
the Dbf phenotype. We consider that Ihh has a similar activity to Shh when
expressed in the early Shh-responsive limb bud. To determine whether Dbf maps to 
the Ihh locus, which is also on chromosome 1, we performed an interspecific
backcross. These results demonstrate that Dbf and Ihh are genetically separated
by approximately 1.3 centimorgans, suggesting that Dbf mutation may cause an
exceptionally long-range disruption of Ihh regulation. Although this leads to
ectopic activation of Ihh, normal expression of Ihh in the cartilaginous elements
is retained.

PMID: 9671585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Development. 1998 Aug;125(15):2803-11.

The Shh signalling pathway in tooth development: defects in Gli2 and Gli3
mutants.

Hardcastle Z(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, UMDS, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge,
London SE1 9RT, UK.

The expression of genes involved in the Sonic Hedgehog signalling pathway,
including Shh, Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, were found to be expressed in
temporal and spatial patterns during early murine tooth development, suggestive
of a role in early tooth germ initiation and subsequent epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions. Of these Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 were expressed in epithelium
and mesenchyme whereas Shh was only detected in epithelium. This suggests that
Shh is involved in both lateral (epithelial-mesenchymal) and planar
(epithelial-epithelial) signalling in early tooth development. Ectopic
application of Shh protein to mandibular mesenchyme induced the expression of Ptc
and Gli1. Addition of exogenous Shh protein directly into early tooth germs and
adjacent to tooth germs, resulted in abnormal epithelial invagination, indicative
of a role for Shh in epithelial cell proliferation. In order to assess the
possible role of this pathway, tooth development in Gli2 and Gli3 mutant embryos 
was investigated. Gli2 mutants were found to have abnormal development of
maxillary incisors, probably resulting from a mild holoprosencephaly, whereas
Gli3 mutants had no major tooth abnormalities. Gli2/Gli3 double homozygous
mutants did not develop any normal teeth and did not survive beyond embryonic day
14.5; however, Gli2(-/-); Gli3(+/-) did survive until birth and had small molars 
and mandibular incisors whereas maxillary incisor development was arrested as a
rudimentary epithelial thickening. These results show an essential role for Shh
signalling in tooth development that involves functional redundancy of downstream
Gli genes.

PMID: 9655803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Development. 1998 Aug;125(15):2759-70.

Gli2 is required for induction of floor plate and adjacent cells, but not most
ventral neurons in the mouse central nervous system.

Matise MP(1), Epstein DJ, Park HL, Platt KA, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Medical Center,
New York, NY 10016, USA.

Induction of the floor plate at the ventral midline of the neural tube is one of 
the earliest events in the establishment of dorsoventral (d/v) polarity in the
vertebrate central nervous system (CNS). The secreted molecule, Sonic hedgehog,
has been shown to be both necessary and sufficient for this induction. In
vertebrates, several downstream components of this signalling pathway have been
identified, including members of the Gli transcription factor family. In this
study, we have examined d/v patterning of the CNS in Gli2 mouse mutants. We have 
found that the floor plate throughout the midbrain, hindbrain and spinal cord
does not form in Gli2 homozygotes. Despite this, motoneurons and ventral
interneurons form in their normal d/v positions at 9.5 to 12.5 days postcoitum
(dpc). However, cells that are generated in the region flanking the floor plate, 
including dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons, were greatly reduced in number
or absent in Gli2 homozygous embryos. These results suggest that early signals
derived from the notochord can be sufficient for establishing the basic d/v
domains of cell differentiation in the ventral spinal cord and hindbrain.
Interestingly, the notochord in Gli2 mutants does not regress ventrally after
10.5 dpc, as in normal embryos. Finally, the spinal cord of Gli1/Gli2
zinc-finger-deletion double homozygous mutants appeared similar to Gli2
homozygotes, indicating that neither gene is required downstream of Shh for the
early development of ventral cell fates outside the ventral midline.

PMID: 9655799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2533-43.

Diminished Sonic hedgehog signaling and lack of floor plate differentiation in
Gli2 mutant mice.

Ding Q(1), Motoyama J, Gasca S, Mo R, Sasaki H, Rossant J, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology and Division of Endocrinology, Research
Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Floor plate cells at the midline of the neural tube are specified by high-level
activity of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) secreted by notochord, whereas motor neurons are
thought to be specified by a lower level activity of Shh secreted in turn by
floor plate cells. In Drosophila, the Gli zinc finger protein Cubitus interruptus
functions as a transcription factor activating Hedgehog-responsive genes. We
report that the expression of known Shh-responsive genes such as Ptc and Gli1 is 
downregulated in mutant mice lacking Gli2 function. Gli2 mutants fail to develop 
a floor plate yet still develop motor neurons, which occupy the ventral midline
of the neural tube. Our results imply that Gli2 is required to mediate high level
but not low level Shh activity and show that the development of motor neurons can
occur in the absence of floor plate induction.

PMID: 9636069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Nat Med. 1998 May;4(5):619-22.

Rhabdomyosarcomas and radiation hypersensitivity in a mouse model of Gorlin
syndrome.

Hahn H(1), Wojnowski L, Zimmer AM, Hall J, Miller G, Zimmer A.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Genetics, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 1998 May;4(5):559-60.

Gorlin (or nevoid basal cell carcinoma) syndrome is characterized by a variety of
clinical problems including generalized overgrowth of the body, cysts,
developmental abnormalities of the skeleton and a predisposition to benign and
malignant tumors. The syndrome results from germline mutations of the human
homolog of the drosophila segment polarity gene patched (ptc). Here we report
that mice heterozygous for ptc develop many of the features characteristic of
Gorlin syndrome and that they exhibit a high incidence of rhabdomyosarcomas
(RMS), the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in children. The downstream signalling
partner of ptc, gli1, was overexpressed in all RMSs analyzed, indicating that
abnormal signalling of the ptc-gli1 pathway may be common for the various tumors 
associated with the syndrome. igf2, implicated in the formation of RMSs, was also
overexpressed, suggesting cross-talk between the ptc and igf2 pathways in
tumorigenesis. Developmental defects in Gorlin syndrome resemble those induced by
ionizing radiation. We show that ptc heterozygous mice exhibit increased
incidence of radiation-induced teratogenesis. This suggests a role for ptc in the
response to ionizing radiation and provides a model for both the systemic
(developmental) and stochastic (cancer) abnormalities observed in Gorlin
syndrome.

PMID: 9585239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Development. 1998 Jun;125(12):2203-12.

Combinatorial Gli gene function in floor plate and neuronal inductions by Sonic
hedgehog.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Within the developing vertebrate nervous system, it is not known how progenitor
cells interpret the positional information provided by inducing signals or how
the domains in which distinct groups of neural cells differentiate are defined.
Gli proteins may be involved in these processes. In the frog neural plate, we
have previously shown that the zinc finger transcription factor Gli1 is expressed
in midline cells and mediates the effects of Shh inducing floor plate
differentiation. In contrast, Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed throughout the neural
plate except for the midline. Here, it is shown that Gli3 and Shh repress each
other whereas Gli2, like Gli1, is a target of Shh signaling. However, only Gli1
can induce the differentiation of floor plate cells. In addition, Gli2 and Gli3
repress the ectopic induction of floor plate cells by Gli1 in co-injection assays
and inhibit endogenous floor plate differentiation. The definition of the floor
plate domain, therefore, appears to be defined by the antagonizing activities of 
Gli2 and Gli3 on Gli1 function. Because both Gli1 and Gli2 are induced by Shh,
these results establish a regulatory feedback loop triggered by Shh that
restricts floor plate cells to the midline. We have also previously shown that
the Gli genes induce neuronal differentiation and here it is shown that there is 
specificity to the types of neurons the Gli proteins induce. Only Gli1 induces
Nkx2.1/TTF-1(+) ventral forebrain neurons. Moreover, Gli2 and Gli3 inhibit their 
differentiation. In contrast, the differentiation of spinal motor neurons can be 
induced by the two ventrally expressed Gli genes, Gli1 and Gli2, suggesting that 
Gli2 directly mediates induction of motor neurons by Shh. In addition, Gli3
inhibits motor neuron differentiation by Gli2. Thus, combinatorial Gli function
may pattern the neural tube, integrating positional information and cell type
differentiation.

PMID: 9584120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Cell Res. 1998 Mar;8(1):15-21.

The role of the hedgehog/patched signaling pathway in epithelial stem cell
proliferation: from fly to human.

Parisi MJ(1), Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Medical Center Durham, N.C.
27710, USA. m.parisi@cellbio.duke.edu

The hedgehog-patched (hh-ptc) intercellular signaling pathway has recently been
shown to control the proliferation of epithelial stem cells in both Drosophila
and vertebrates. Mutant and ectopic expression analyses in Drosophila suggest
that the HH protein diffuses from the signaling cells to promote the
proliferation of nearby ovarian somatic stem cells by antagonizing the
suppression of its receptor PTC towards the CI transcription factor in the stem
cells. Consequently, the transcription of CI-dependent genes leads to stem cell
proliferation. This regulatory pathway appears to function also in vertebrates,
where defects in ptc cause basal cell carcinoma, tumors of epidermal stem cell
origin. Basal cell carcinoma can also be induced by ectopic expression of Sonic
hedgehog (shh) or Gli1, the vertebrate homolog of ci. These studies suggest the
conservation of the hh signaling pathway in controlling epithelial stem cell
divisions among different organisms.

PMID: 9570013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nature. 1997 Oct 23;389(6653):876-81.

Activation of the transcription factor Gli1 and the Sonic hedgehog signalling
pathway in skin tumours.

Dahmane N(1), Lee J, Robins P, Heller P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Department of Cell Biology, New York University
Medical Center, New York 10016, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 1997 Dec 4;390(6659):536.

Sporadic basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common type of malignant cancer
in fair-skinned adults. Familial BCCs and a fraction of sporadic BCCs have lost
the function of Patched (Ptc), a Sonic hedgehog (Shh) receptor that acts
negatively on this signalling pathway. Overexpression of Shh can induce BCCs in
mice. Here we show that ectopic expression of the zinc-finger transcription
factor Gli1 in the embryonic frog epidermis results in the development of tumours
that express endogenous Gli1. We also show that Shh and the Gli genes are
normally expressed in hair follicles, and that human sporadic BCCs consistently
express Gli1 but not Shh or Gli3. Because Gli1, but not Gli3, acts as a target
and mediator of Shh signalling, our results suggest that expression of Gli1 in
basal cells induces BCC formation. Moreover, loss of Ptc or overexpression of Shh
cannot be the sole causes of Gli1 induction and sporadic BCC formation, as they
do not occur consistently. Thus any mutations leading to the expression of Gli1
in basal cells are predicted to induce BCC formation.

PMID: 9349822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jan;211(1):88-96.

Expression profile of Gli family members and Shh in normal and mutant mouse limb 
development.

Büscher D(1), Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

Gli genes represent a small family, encoding zinc-finger proteins of the
Krüppel-type. The family consists of Gli(1), Gli2, and Gli3, all of which are
expressed in the developing mouse limb bud. To assess the role of the Gli family 
and Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in mouse limb development, we compared the expression
domains of all three Gli genes and of Shh. Although each Gli gene has its own
distinct expression pattern in limb buds, at 10.5-11.5 dpc all three genes were
found not to be expressed in the posterior region, the presumptive Shh expression
domain. This transient mutually exclusive expression suggested a potential
interaction between Gli genes and Shh. To address this matter, we analysed the
expression of Gli genes and Shh in two polydactyly mouse mutants, Extra toes (Xt)
and Hemimelic-extra toes (Hx) which express Shh ectopically in the anterior
region of the limb field. Since Xt mice lack Gli3 expression, the ectopic Shh
expression is genetically linked to the absence of Gli3. In Hx mice we found a
down-regulation of Gli3 in the anterior region of the limb bud. In both mutants
Gli2 expression pattern was not altered, whereas Gli1 expression was anteriorly
up-regulated adjacent to the ectopic Shh domain. These results strongly suggest a
positive regulation of Gli1 by Shh and a negative interaction between Shh and
Gli3.

PMID: 9438426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Development. 1997 Jul;124(13):2537-52.

Gli1 is a target of Sonic hedgehog that induces ventral neural tube development.

Lee J(1), Platt KA, Censullo P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The vertebrate zinc finger genes of the Gli family are homologs of the Drosophila
gene cubitus interruptus. In frog embryos, Gli1 is expressed transiently in the
prospective floor plate during gastrulation and in cells lateral to the midline
during late gastrula and neurula stages. In contrast, Gli2 and Gli3 are absent
from the neural plate midline with Gli2 expressed widely and Gli3 in a graded
fashion with highest levels in lateral regions. In mouse embryos, the three Gli
genes show a similar pattern of expression in the neural tube but are coexpressed
throughout the early neural plate. Because Gli1 is the only Gli gene expressed in
prospective floor plate cells of frog embryos, we have investigated a possible
involvement of this gene in ventral neural tube development. Here we show that
Shh signaling activates Gli1 transcription and that widespread expression of
endogenous frog or human glioma Gli1, but not Gli3, in developing frog embryos
results in the ectopic differentiation of floor plate cells and ventral neurons
within the neural tube. Floor-plate-inducing ability is retained when cytoplasmic
Gli1 proteins are forced into the nucleus or are fused to the VP16
transactivating domain. Thus, our results identify Gli1 as a midline target of
Shh and suggest that it mediates the induction of floor plate cells and ventral
neurons by Shh acting as a transcriptional regulator.

PMID: 9216996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Z Rechtsmed. 1977 Jan 21;79(1):13-5.

Population genetics of glyoxalase I (E.C.4.4.1.5) in human erythrocytes.

Berg K, Rodewald A, Schwarzfischer F, Wischerath H.

1025 individuals from Southern Germany were examined. The gene frequencies for
GLI1 are 0.4235 and for GLI2 0.5765. These frequencies are compared with those of
other authors.

PMID: 848131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


