
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8441. [Epub ahead of print]

Aberrantly activated Gli2-KIF20A axis is crucial for growth of hepatocellular
carcinoma and predicts poor prognosis.

Shi C(1), Huang D(1), Lu N(2), Chen D(1), Zhang M(1), Yan Y(3), Deng L(4), Lu
Q(5), Lu H(6), Luo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (4)Institute of Translational Medicine,
Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (5)Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi,
China. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Tulane Cancer
Center, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Glioma-associated oncogene 2 (Gli2), a primary transcriptional regulator of
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, is essential for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) growth
and survival. However, the underlying molecular mechanism and crucial downstream 
targets of Gli2 in human HCC are not fully understood. Here, we report the
identification of kinesin family member 20A (KIF20A) as a novel downstream target
of Gli2, which is important for HCC proliferation and tumor growth. Inhibition of
Hh signaling leads to a remarkable decrease of KIF20A expression in HCC cells,
whereas overexpression of Gli2 elevates KIF20A expression by activating Forkhead 
Box M1 (FoxM1)-MMB complex-mediated transcription of this kinesin gene.
Gli2-induced HCC cell growth requires enhanced expression of KIF20A, and
knockdown of Gli2 or KIF20A represses the proliferation of HCC cells in vitro and
in vivo. Correlated with these results, analyses of clinical HCC samples show
that Gli2, FoxM1 and KIF20A are highly elevated in primary HCC samples and
represent significant risk factors for HCC recurrence and survival.CONCLUSION:
KIF20A is an important downstream target gene of Hh signaling. And, the
Gli2-KIF20A axis is essential for the proliferation and growth of human HCC
cells. Our study also suggests Gli2-KIF20A axis as a potential target for future 
therapeutic intervention and as an independent prognostic biomarker for HCC.

PMID: 27036048  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 24;11(3):e0151521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151521.
eCollection 2016.

Methylation Microarray Studies Highlight PDGFA Expression as a Factor in Biliary 
Atresia.

Cofer ZC(1), Cui S(1), EauClaire SF(1), Kim C(2), Tobias JW(3), Hakonarson
H(2,)(4), Loomes KM(1,)(4), Matthews RP(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (2)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (3)Penn
Center for Biomedical Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

Biliary atresia (BA) is a progressive fibro-inflammatory disorder that is the
leading indication for liver transplantation in children. Although there is
evidence implicating genetic, infectious, environmental, and inflammatory causes,
the etiology of BA remains unknown. We have recently reported that cholangiocytes
from BA patients showed decreased DNA methylation relative to disease- and
non-disease controls, supporting a potential role for DNA hypomethylation in BA
etiopathogenesis. In the current study, we examined the methylation status of
specific genes in human BA livers using methylation microarray technology. We
found global DNA hypomethylation in BA samples as compared to disease- and
non-disease controls at specific genetic loci. Hedgehog pathway members, SHH and 
GLI2, known to be upregulated in BA, were both hypomethylated, validating this
approach as an investigative tool. Another region near the PDGFA locus was the
most significantly hypomethylated in BA, suggesting potential aberrant
expression. Validation assays confirmed increased transcriptional and protein
expression of PDGFA in BA livers. We also show that PDGF-A protein is
specifically localized to cholangiocytes in human liver samples. Injection of
PDGF-AA protein dimer into zebrafish larvae caused biliary developmental and
functional defects. In addition, activation of the Hedgehog pathway caused
increased expression of PDGF-A in zebrafish larvae, providing a previously
unrecognized link between PDGF and the Hedgehog pathway. Our findings implicate
DNA hypomethylation as a specific factor in mediating overexpression of genes
associated with BA and identify PDGF as a new candidate in BA pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4806872
PMID: 27010479  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 21. pii: jbc.M116.720698. [Epub ahead of print]

A positive feed-forward loop associating EGR1 and PDGFA promotes proliferation
and self-renewal in glioblastoma stem cells.

Sakakini N(1), Turchi L(1), Bergon A(1), Holota H(1), Rekima S(1), Lopez F(1),
Paquis P(2), Almairac F(2), Fontaine D(2), Baeza-Kallee N(1), Van
Obberghen-Schilling E(1), Junier MP(1), Chneiweiss H(3), Figarella-Branger D(4), 
Burel-Vandenbos F(2), Imbert J(1), Virolle T(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, France; (2)CHU de NICE, France; (3)CNRS, France; (4)CHU TIMONE,
France. (5)INSERM, France; virolle@unice.fr.

Glioblastomas are the most common primary brain tumors, highly vascularized,
infiltrating and resistant to current therapies. This cancer leads to a fatal
outcome in less than 18 months. The aggressive behavior of glioblastomas,
including resistance to current treatments and tumor recurrence, has been
attributed to glioma stem-like/progenitor cells. The transcription factor Early
Growth Response 1 (EGR1), a member of a zinc-finger transcription factor family, 
has been described as tumor suppressor in gliomas when ectopically overexpressed.
Although EGR1 expression in human glioblastomas has been associated with patient 
survival, its precise location in tumor territories as well as its contribution
to GBM progression remain elusive. In the present study, we show that EGR1
expressing cells are more frequent in high-grade gliomas where the nuclear
expression of EGR1 is restricted to proliferating/progenitor cells. We show in
primary cultures of glioma stem-like cells that EGR1 contributes to stemness
marker expression and proliferation by orchestrating a PDGFA-dependent growth
stimulatory loop. In addition, we demonstrate that EGR1 acts as a positive
regulator of several important genes including SHH, GLI1, GLI2, PDGFA, previously
linked to the maintenance and proliferation of glioma stem-like cells.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 27002148  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Oral Pathol Med. 2016 Mar;45(3):173-9. doi: 10.1111/jop.12346. Epub 2015 Aug
26.

Immunohistochemical evaluation of hedgehog signalling in epithelial/mesenchymal
interactions in squamous cell carcinoma transformation: a pilot study.

Gonzalez AC(1), Ferreira M(2), Ariel T(1), Reis SR(2), Andrade Z(1), Peixoto
Medrado A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Salvador,
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Basic Science, Bahiana Schoool of Medicine and Public Health,
Salvador, Bahia, Brazil.

Precancerous lesions have been studied because of their carcinogenic potential
and their association with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has been reported. In
the tumour microenvironment, the processes of angiogenesis and tissue remodelling
are regulated by a family of proteins (Hedgehog) described as being able to
modulate epithelial/mesenchymal interactions. The objective of this study was to 
perform a comparative study of precancerous lesions and SCCs by
immunohistochemistry for the presence of Sonic, Gli2, SMO and Patched proteins,
members of the Hedgehog pathway. Sixteen cases diagnosed as actinic cheilitis
associated with SCC were compared to normal oral mucosa. The sections were
subjected to immunohistochemistry and the positively stained cells were counted
by morphometric analysis. There was a significant progressive increase in
expression of all proteins of the Hedgehog pathway, both in the epithelium and in
the connective tissue, when sections of normal mucosa, dysplasia and carcinoma
were compared (P < 0.05). Thus, one may suggest that the Hedgehog pathway in
tumour transformation influences SCC, and more studies should be conducted to
expand the understanding of the role of these proteins in neoplastic
transformation.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26947270  [PubMed - in process]


5. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7701. [Epub ahead of print]

FGFR1 promotes the stem cell-like phenotype of FGFR1-amplified non-small cell
lung cancer cells through the Hedgehog pathway.

Ji W(1,)(2), Yu Y(1), Li Z(1), Wang G(3), Li F(2), Xia W(2), Lu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Lung Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and
Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital,
School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030,
China. (3)Genomics Center, WuXiAppTec Co., Ltd., Waigaoqiao Free Trade Zone,
Shanghai 200131, China.

Cancer stem cell-like phenotype is critical for tumor formation and treatment
resistance. FGFR1 is found to be amplified in non-small cell lung cancer,
particularly in the lung squamous cell cancer (LSCC). Whether FGFR1 contributes
to the maintenance of stem cell-like phenotype of FGFR1-amplified lung cancer
cells remains elusive. In this study, treatment with FGFR1 inhibitor AZD4547
suppressed the growth of tumor spheres and reduced ALDH positive proportion in
FGFR1-amplified lung cancer cells in vitro, as well as inhibited the growth of
oncospheres and parental cells in xenograft models. Knockdown of FGFR1 recaptured
the similar effect as AZD4547 in vitro. Furthermore, activation of FGFR1 and
subsequently its downstream ERK signaling enhanced the expression and
transcriptional activity of GLI2, which could be blocked by FGFR1
inhibitor/silencing or ERK inhibitor. Knockdown of GLI2 directly inhibited the
stem-like phenotype of FGFR1-amilified cells, whereas overexpression of GLI2
sufficiently rescued the phenotype caused by FGFR1 knockdown. Notably we also
identified a correlation between FGFR1 and GLI2 expressions from clinical data,
as well as an inverse relationship with progression free survival (PFS). Together
our study suggests that the FGFR1/GLI2 axis promotes the lung cancer stem
cell-like phenotype. These results support a rational strategy of combination of 
FGFR1 and GLI inhibitors for treatment of FGFR1-amplified lung cancers,
especially LSCC.

PMID: 26936993  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. BMC Dev Biol. 2016 Feb 24;16(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s12861-016-0106-0.

Computational prediction and experimental validation of novel Hedgehog-responsive
enhancers linked to genes of the Hedgehog pathway.

Gurdziel K(1,)(2), Vogt KR(1), Schneider G(1), Richards N(1), Gumucio DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (2)Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (3)Department 
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, 
USA. dgumucio@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, acting through three homologous 
transcription factors (GLI1, GLI2, GLI3) in vertebrates, plays multiple roles in 
embryonic organ development and adult tissue homeostasis. At the level of the
genome, GLI factors bind to specific motifs in enhancers, some of which are
hundreds of kilobases removed from the gene promoter. These enhancers integrate
the Hh signal in a context-specific manner to control the spatiotemporal pattern 
of target gene expression. Importantly, a number of genes that encode Hh pathway 
molecules are themselves targets of Hh signaling, allowing pathway regulation by 
an intricate balance of feed-back activation and inhibition. However,
surprisingly few of the critical enhancer elements that control these pathway
target genes have been identified despite the fact that such elements are central
determinants of Hh signaling activity. Recently, ChIP studies have been carried
out in multiple tissue contexts using mouse models carrying FLAG-tagged GLI
proteins (GLI(FLAG)). Using these datasets, we tested whether a meta-analysis of 
GLI binding sites, coupled with a machine learning approach, could reveal genomic
features that could be used to empirically identify Hh-regulated enhancers linked
to loci of the Hh signaling pathway.
RESULTS: A meta-analysis of four existing GLI(FLAG) datasets revealed a library
of GLI binding motifs that was substantially more restricted than the potential
sites predicted by previous in vitro binding studies. A machine learning method
(kmer-SVM) was then applied to these datasets and enriched k-mers were identified
that, when applied to the mouse genome, predicted as many as 37,000 potential Hh 
enhancers. For functional analysis, we selected nine regions which were annotated
to putative Hh pathway molecules and found that seven exhibited GLI-dependent
activity, indicating that they are directly regulated by Hh signaling (78 %
success rate).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that Hh enhancer regions share common sequence
features. The kmer-SVM machine learning approach identifies those features and
can successfully predict functional Hh regulatory regions in genomic DNA
surrounding Hh pathway molecules and likely, other Hh targets. Additionally, the 
library of enriched GLI binding motifs that we have identified may allow improved
identification of functional GLI binding sites.

PMCID: PMC4765071
PMID: 26912062  [PubMed - in process]


7. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Mar 18;471(4):466-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.02.052. Epub 2016 Feb 16.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 stabilizes transcription factor Gli2 and enhances the 
activity of Hedgehog signaling in hepatocellular cancer.

Yan Z(1), Xu L(1), Zhang J(1), Lu Q(2), Luo S(1), Xu L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, China. (2)Department of Epidemiology &
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi
330006, China. (3)Center for Experimental Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital
of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, China. Electronic address:
xulinlin2005@126.com.

The Gli transcription factors are primary transcriptional regulators that mediate
the activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. Recent studies have revealed that Gli 
proteins are also regulated transcriptionally and post-translationally through
noncanonical mechanisms, independent of Hh signaling. However, the precise
mechanisms involved in the regulation of Gli proteins remain unclear. Using a
differential mass-spectrometry approach, we found that aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1
(ALDH1A1) is associated with transcription factor Gli2. Overexpression of ALDH1A1
increased Gli2 protein levels; in contrast, ALDH1A1 depletion facilitated Gli2
degradation. In addition, Gli2 mRNA expression was not affected by ectopic
expression of ALDH1A1, indicating the role of ALDH1A1 in the stabilization of
Gli2. Further investigation showed that ALDH1A1 prolonged the stability of Gli2
protein in a catalytic-independent manner. Finally, we showed that overexpression
of ALDH1A1 activated the Hh signaling pathway and promoted cell growth, migration
and invasion in hepatocellular cancer cells. Together, these results illustrate
regulatory roles of ALDH1A1 in the activation of the Hh signaling pathway and
highlight a novel mechanism for the aberrant activation of the Hh signaling
pathway in hepatocellular cancer cells.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26896768  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7182. [Epub ahead of print]

Invasive mouse gastric adenocarcinomas arising from Lgr5+ stem cells are
dependent on crosstalk between the Hedgehog/GLI2 and mTOR pathways.

Syu LJ(1), Zhao X(1), Zhang Y(2), Grachtchouk M(1), Demitrack E(3), Ermilov A(1),
Wilbert DM(1), Zheng X(1), Kaatz A(1), Greenson JK(4), Gumucio DL(5), Merchant
JL(3,)(6), di Magliano MP(2), Samuelson LC(3,)(6), Dlugosz AA(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. (5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Gastric adenocarcinoma is the third most common cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Here we report a novel, highly-penetrant mouse model of invasive
gastric cancer arising from deregulated Hedgehog/Gli2 signaling targeted to
Lgr5-expressing stem cells in adult stomach. Tumor development progressed
rapidly: three weeks after inducing the Hh pathway oncogene GLI2A, 65% of mice
harbored in situ gastric cancer, and an additional 23% of mice had locally
invasive tumors. Advanced mouse gastric tumors had multiple features in common
with human gastric adenocarcinomas, including characteristic histological
changes, expression of RNA and protein markers, and the presence of major
inflammatory and stromal cell populations. A subset of tumor cells underwent
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, likely mediated by focal activation of
canonical Wnt signaling and Snail1 induction. Strikingly, mTOR pathway
activation, based on pS6 expression, was robustly activated in mouse gastric
adenocarcinomas from the earliest stages of tumor development, and treatment with
rapamycin impaired tumor growth. GLI2A-expressing epithelial cells were detected 
transiently in intestine, which also contains Lgr5+ stem cells, but they did not 
give rise to epithelial tumors in this organ. These findings establish that
deregulated activation of Hedgehog/Gli2 signaling in Lgr5-expressing stem cells
is sufficient to drive gastric adenocarcinoma development in mice, identify a
critical requirement for mTOR signaling in the pathogenesis of these tumors, and 
underscore the importance of tissue context in defining stem cell responsiveness 
to oncogenic stimuli.

PMID: 26859571  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Cancer Biomark. 2016 Jan 18;16(1):71-9. doi: 10.3233/CBM-150542.

Prognostic value of hedgehog signaling pathway in digestive system cancers: A
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Wang Y(1), Peng Q(2), Jia H(1), Du X(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has recently been reported to be 
associated with the prognosis of digestive system cancers. However, the results
are inconsistent.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the association between Hh pathway
components and survival outcomes in patients with digestive system cancers.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive retrieval in PubMed, EMBASE and Cochrane
library for relevant literatures until May 1st, 2015. The pooled hazard ratios
(HRs) for overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) with 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to clarify the prognostic value of Hh 
pathway components, including Shh, Gli1, Gli2, Smo and Ptch1.
RESULTS: A total of 16 eligible articles with 3222 patients were included in the 
meta-analysis. Pooled HR suggested that over-expression of Shh and Gli1 were both
associated with poor OS (HR = 1.87, 95% CI: 1.14-3.07 and HR = 1.96, 95% CI:
1.66-2.32, respectively) and DFS (HR = 2.37, 95% CI: 1.19-4.72 and HR = 2.18, 95%
CI: 1.61-2.96, respectively). In addition, over-expression of Smo was associated 
with poor DFS (HR = 1.38, 95% CI: 1.08-1.75).
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that over-expressed Hh pathway components,
including Shh, Gli1 and Smo, are associated with poor prognosis in digestive
system cancer patients. Hh signaling pathway may become a potential therapeutic
target in digestive system cancers.

PMID: 26835707  [PubMed - in process]


10. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):14574-9. eCollection 2015.

Suppression of hedgehog signaling regulates hepatic stellate cell activation and 
collagen secretion.

Li T(1), Leng XS(1), Zhu JY(1), Wang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Peking University People's Hospital
Xizhimen South Street, West District, Beijing 100044, P. R. China.

Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) play an important role in liver fibrosis. This
study investigates the expression of hedgehog in HSC and the role of hedgehog
signaling on activation and collagen secretion of HSC. Liver ex vivo perfusion
with collagenase IV and density gradient centrifugation were used to isolate HSC.
Expression of hedgehog signaling components Ihh, Smo, Ptc, Gli2 and Gli3 in HSC
were detected by RT-PCR. Hedgehog siRNA vectors targeting Ihh, Smo and Gli2 were 
constructed and transfected into HSC respectively. Suppression of hedgehog
signaling were detected by SYBR Green fluorescence quantitative RT-PCR. Effects
of hedgehog signaling inhibition on HSC activation and collagen I secretion were 
analyzed. Hedgehog signaling components Ihh, Smo, Ptc, Gli2 and Gli3 were
expressed in HSC. siRNA vectors targeting Ihh, Smo and Gli2 were successfully
constructed and decreased target gene expression. Suppression of hedgehog
signaling significantly decreased the expression of a-SMA in HSC (P<0.01).
Collagen type I secretion of HSC were also significantly decreased (P<0.01). In
summary, HSC activation and collagen secretion can be regulated by hedgehog
signaling. Hedgehog may play a role in the pathogenesis of liver fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4713566
PMID: 26823780  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jan 21;17(1). pii: E138. doi: 10.3390/ijms17010138.

The TEAD Family and Its Oncogenic Role in Promoting Tumorigenesis.

Zhou Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Huang T(5,)(6,)(7,)(8), Cheng AS(9,)(10,)(11), Yu
J(12,)(13,)(14), Kang W(15,)(16,)(17,)(18), To KF(19,)(20,)(21,)(22).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, State Key Laboratory of
Oncology in South China, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. zyhjoe@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Digestive Disease,
Partner State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. zyhjoe@gmail.com. (3)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health
Science, Sir Y.K. Pao Cancer Center, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. zyhjoe@gmail.com. (4)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518000, China. zyhjoe@gmail.com. (5)Department 
of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. huangtingting0531@gmail.com. (6)Institute of Digestive Disease, Partner
State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China. huangtingting0531@gmail.com. (7)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health
Science, Sir Y.K. Pao Cancer Center, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. huangtingting0531@gmail.com. (8)Shenzhen Research Institute, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518000, China.
huangtingting0531@gmail.com. (9)Institute of Digestive Disease, Partner State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk. (10)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518000, China. alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk.
(11)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk. (12)Institute of Digestive Disease, Partner
State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China. junyu@cuhk.edu.hk. (13)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518000, China. junyu@cuhk.edu.hk.
(14)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China. junyu@cuhk.edu.hk. (15)Department of Anatomical and Cellular
Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Prince of Wales
Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
weikang@cuhk.edu.hk. (16)Institute of Digestive Disease, Partner State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. weikang@cuhk.edu.hk. (17)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Science, Sir Y.K.
Pao Cancer Center, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
weikang@cuhk.edu.hk. (18)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518000, China. weikang@cuhk.edu.hk. (19)Department of
Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. kfto@cuhk.edu.hk. (20)Institute of Digestive Disease, Partner State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. kfto@cuhk.edu.hk. (21)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Science, Sir Y.K.
Pao Cancer Center, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
kfto@cuhk.edu.hk. (22)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen 518000, China. kfto@cuhk.edu.hk.

The TEAD family of transcription factors is necessary for developmental
processes. The family members contain a TEA domain for the binding with DNA
elements and a transactivation domain for the interaction with transcription
coactivators. TEAD proteins are required for the participation of coactivators to
transmit the signal of pathways for the downstream signaling processes. TEADs
also play an important role in tumor initiation and facilitate cancer progression
via activating a series of progression-inducing genes, such as CTGF, Cyr61, Myc
and Gli2. Recent studies have highlighted that TEADs, together with their
coactivators, promote or even act as the crucial parts in the development of
various malignancies, such as liver, ovarian, breast and prostate cancers.
Furthermore, TEADs are proposed to be useful prognostic biomarkers due to the
ideal correlation between high expression and clinicopathological parameters in
gastric, breast, ovarian and prostate cancers. In this review, we summarize the
functional role of TEAD proteins in tumorigenesis and discuss the key role of
TEAD transcription factors in the linking of signal cascade transductions.
Improved knowledge of the TEAD proteins will be helpful for deep understanding of
the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis and identifying ideal predictive or
prognostic biomarkers, even providing clinical translation for anticancer therapy
in human cancers.

PMCID: PMC4730377
PMID: 26805820  [PubMed - in process]


12. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 1;411(1):85-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.006. Epub 2016
Feb 2.

A Notch-Gli2 axis sustains Hedgehog responsiveness of neural progenitors and
Müller glia.

Ringuette R(1), Atkins M(2), Lagali PS(2), Bassett EA(2), Campbell C(1),
Mazerolle C(2), Mears AJ(2), Picketts DJ(3), Wallace VA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5. (2)Regenerative Medicine
Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.
(3)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology,
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H
8M5. (4)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada K1H 8M5; Vision Research Division, Krembil Research Institute, University 
Health Network and Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: vwallace@uhnresearch.ca.

Neurogenesis is regulated by the dynamic and coordinated activity of several
extracellular signalling pathways, but the basis for crosstalk between these
pathways remains poorly understood. Here we investigated regulatory interactions 
between two pathways that are each required for neural progenitor cell
maintenance in the postnatal retina; Hedgehog (Hh) and Notch signalling. Both
pathways are activated in progenitor cells in the postnatal retina based on the
co-expression of fluorescent pathway reporter transgenes at the single cell
level. Disrupting Notch signalling, genetically or pharmacologically, induces a
rapid downregulation of all three Gli proteins and inhibits Hh-induced
proliferation. Ectopic Notch activation, while not sufficient to promote Hh
signalling or proliferation, increases Gli2 protein. We show that Notch
regulation of Gli2 in Müller glia renders these cells competent to proliferate in
response to Hh. These data suggest that Notch signalling converges on Gli2 to
prime postnatal retinal progenitor cells and Müller glia to proliferate in
response to Hh.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26795056  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Jan 14. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4785. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of candidate target genes of pituitary adenomas based on the DNA
microarray.

Zhou W(1), Ma CX(1), Xing YZ(1), Yan ZY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou,
Henan 450003, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to explore molecular mechanisms involved in pituitary
adenomas (PAs) and to discover target genes for their treatment. The gene
expression profile GSE4488 was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus
database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using the Limma
package and analyzed by two-dimensional hierarchical clustering. Gene ontology
(GO) and pathway enrichment analyses were performed in order to investigate the
functions of DEGs. Subsequently, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network
was constructed using Cytoscape software. DEGs were then mapped to the
connectivity map database to identify molecular agents associated with the
underlying mechanisms of PAs. A total of 340 upregulated and 49 downregulated
DEGs in PA samples compared with those in normal controls were identified.
Hierarchical clustering analysis showed that DEGs were highly differentially
expressed, indicating their aptness for distinguishing PA samples from normal
controls. Significant gene ontology terms were positive regulation of immune
system-associated processes for downregulated DEGs and skeletal system
development for upregulated DEGs. Pathways significantly enriched by DEGs
included extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor interaction, the Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. The PPI network
was constructed with 117 nodes, 123 edges and CD44 and Gli2 as hub nodes.
Furthermore, depudecin, a small molecule drug, was identified to be
mechanistically associated with PA. The genes CD44 and Gli2 have important roles 
in the progression of PAs via ECM-receptor interaction and the Hh signaling
pathway and are therefore potential target genes of PA. In addition, depudecin
may be a candidate drug for the treatment of PAs.

PMID: 26782791  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Mar;77(3):495-505. doi:
10.1007/s00280-016-2962-5. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Targeting hedgehog signaling pathway in pediatric tumors: in vitro evaluation of 
SMO and GLI inhibitors.

Arnhold V(1), Boos J(2), Lanvers-Kaminsky C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology/BMT, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin, Germany. viktor.arnhold@charite.de.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

PURPOSE: The successful use of SMO inhibitors in tumors with activating mutations
in hedgehog signaling raised interests in their exploitation against other
malignancies. The role of hedgehog signaling in pediatric malignancies remains
unclear.
METHODS: We investigated the hedgehog signaling and its inhibition in a panel of 
18 tumor cell lines derived from six of the most common and highly aggressive
pediatric tumor types. None of the cell lines was known to stem from tumors with 
activating hedgehog mutations. Tetrazolium-based assays (MTT and MTS) and BrdU
assays were used to analyze cell viability and proliferation after exposure to
SANT1 and GANT61. Expression analysis of hedgehog signaling members and cyclins
was performed by quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot.
RESULTS: Key members of hedgehog signaling (SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2 and SUFU)
were expressed in all cell lines. In 50 % of the cell lines viability was
significantly increased by SHH exposure. Stimulation was not restricted to
distinct tumor types, but related to cell lines with higher mRNA levels of PTCH1,
SMO, GLI1 and GLI2. SMO inhibition by SANT1 moderately decreased cell viability
with GI50s between 28 and 93 µmol/l. Sensitivity to SANT1 was not related to
distinct tumor types. The GLI inhibitor GANT61 inhibited cell viability and
proliferation more effectively than SANT1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preclinical data provide evidence that hedgehog signaling is
active and can be stimulated by PTCH1 ligands in various pediatric tumors. We
suggest further evaluation of GLI inhibitors as inhibitors of hedgehog signaling 
for the treatment of the investigated tumor types.

PMID: 26781311  [PubMed - in process]


15. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Jan 14;7:e2048. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.389.

Survivin, a novel target of the Hedgehog/GLI signaling pathway in human tumor
cells.

Vlcková K(1), Ondruová L(1), Vachtenheim J(1), Réda J(1), Dundr P(2), Zadinová
M(3), áková P(1), Poucková P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcription and Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical
Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Charles University in Prague, 1st
Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Institute of Pathology, Charles
University in Prague, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital in 
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (3)Institute of Biophysics and Informatics,
Charles University in Prague, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.

Survivin, an important antiapoptotic protein, is expressed in tumors, whereas in 
normal tissues the expression of this protein is extremely low, defining a role
for survivin as a cancer gene. Survivin exhibits multifunctional activity in
tumor cells. However, why survivin expression is sharply and invariably
restricted to tumor tissue remains unclear. Here, we identified 11 putative
consensus binding sites for GLI transcription factors in the survivin promoter
and characterized the promoter activity. Inhibitors of the Hedgehog/GLI pathway, 
cyclopamine and GANT61, decreased the promoter activity in reporter assays.
<U+0394>NGLI2 (which lacks the repressor domain) was the most potent vector in
activating the survivin promoter-reporter. Moreover, GANT61, a GLI1/2 inhibitor, 
repressed endogenous survivin protein and mRNA expression in most cells across a 
large panel of tumor cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed GLI2
binding to the survivin promoter. The ectopic GLI2-evoked expression of
endogenous survivin was observed in normal human fibroblasts. GANT61 decreased
survivin level in nude mice tumors, mimicking the activity of GANT61 in cultured 
cells. The immunohistochemistry and double immunofluorescence of human tumors
revealed a correlation between the tissue regions showing high GLI2 and survivin 
positivity. Thus, these results demonstrated that survivin is a classical
transcriptional target of GLI2, a Hedgehog pathway signaling effector. This
potentially reflects the high expression of survivin in human tumor cells. As the
Hedgehog pathway is upregulated in virtually all types of cancer cells, these
findings substantially contribute to the explanation of uniform survivin
expression in tumors as a potential target for the development of a more
effective treatment of cancers through the inhibition of GLI2 to restrain
survivin activity.

PMID: 26775700  [PubMed - in process]


16. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 5;423:30-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.01.005. Epub
2016 Jan 7.

Sonic hedgehog improves ischemia-induced neovascularization by enhancing
endothelial progenitor cell function in type 1 diabetes.

Qin Y(1), He YH(1), Hou N(2), Zhang GS(2), Cai Y(1), Zhang GP(2), Xiao Q(2), He
LS(2), Li SJ(2), Yi Q(2), Luo JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Venoms, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510182,
China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou
510182, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou 510182, China. Electronic address: jiandongluo@hotmail.com.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is downregulated in type 1 diabetes, and it has 
been reported that augmentation of this pathway may alleviate diabetic
complications. However, the cellular mechanisms underlying these protective
effects are poorly understood. Recent studies indicate that impaired function of 
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) may contribute to cardiovascular problems in 
diabetes. We hypothesized that impaired Shh signaling contribute to endothelial
progenitor cell dysfunction and that activating the Shh signaling pathway may
rescue EPC function and promote diabetic neovascularization. Adult male C57/B6
mice and streptozotocin (STZ)-induced type 1 diabetic mice were used. Gli1 and
Ptc1 protein levels were reduced in EPCs from diabetic mice, indicating
inhibition of the Shh signaling pathway. EPC migration, tube formation ability,
and mobilization were impaired in diabetic mice compared with non-diabetic
controls (p < 0.05 vs control), and all were improved by in vivo administration
of the Shh pathway receptor agonist SAG (p < 0.05 vs diabetes). SAG significantly
increased capillary density and blood perfusion in the ischemic hindlimbs of
diabetic mice (p < 0.05 vs diabetes). The AKT activity was lower in EPCs from
diabetic mice than those from non-diabetic controls (p < 0.05 vs control). This
decreased AKT activity led to an increased GSK-3ß activity and degradation of the
Shh pathway transcription factor Gli1/Gli2. SAG significantly increased the
activity of AKT in EPCs. Our data clearly demonstrate that an impaired Shh
pathway mediated by the AKT/GSK-3ß pathway can contribute to EPC dysfunction in
diabetes and thus activating the Shh signaling pathway can restore both the
number and function of EPCs and increase neovascularization in type 1 diabetic
mice.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26773732  [PubMed - in process]


17. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17321-32. eCollection 2015.

Analysis of differentially expressed genes based on microarray data of glioma.

Jiang CM(1), Wang XH(1), Shu J(1), Yang WX(2), Fu P(3), Zhuang LL(1), Zhou GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, 
Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University Nantong, Jiangsu Province 226001,
China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Affiliated 
Hangzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province
310003, China.

Glioma represents one of the main causes of cancer-related death worldwide.
Unfortunately, its exact molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood, which
limits the prognosis and therapy. This study aimed to identify the critical
genes, transcription factors and the possible biochemical pathways that may
affect glioma progression at transcription level. After downloading micro-array
data from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) between glioma and normal samples were screened. We predicted novel
glioma-related genes and carried on online software DAVID to conduct GO
enrichment and transcription factor analysis of these selected genes. String
software was applied to construct a PPI protein interaction network, as well as
to find the key genes and transcription factors in the regulation of glioma. A
total of 97 DEGs were identified associated with cancer, the GO enrichment
analysis indicated these DEGs were mainly relevant to immune responses as well as
regulation of cell growth. In addition, the transcription factor analysis showed 
these DEGs were regulated by the binding sites of transcription factors GLI2,
SP1, SMAD7, SMAD3, RELA, STAT5B, CTNNB1, STAT5A, TFAP2A and SP3. PPI protein
interaction network analysis demonstrated the hub nodes in the interaction
network were EGFR, TGFB1, FN1 and MYC. The hub DEGs may be the most critical in
glioma and could be considered as drug targets for glioma therapy after further
exploration. Besides, with the identification of regulating transcription
factors, the pathogenesis of glioma at transcription level might be brought to
light.

PMCID: PMC4694224
PMID: 26770324  [PubMed]


18. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 11;291(11):5611-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.700336. Epub 2016
Jan 14.

Glioma-associated Oncogene 2 Is Essential for Trophoblastic Fusion by Forming a
Transcriptional Complex with Glial Cell Missing-a.

Tang C(1), Tang L(2), Wu X(3), Xiong W(2), Ruan H(3), Hussain M(3), Wu J(4), Zou 
C(5), Wu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou 310058, China, the Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 1130033, Japan, and. (2)the Children's Hospital and.
(3)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou 310058, China. (4)First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310006, China. (5)the Children's Hospital and
zcc14@zju.edu.cn. (6)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China, xiwu@zju.edu.cn.

Cell-cell fusion of human villous trophoblasts, referred to as a process of
syncytialization, acts as a prerequisite for the proper development and
functional maintenance of the human placenta. Given the fact that the main
components of the Hedgehog signaling pathway are expressed predominantly in the
syncytial layer of human placental villi, in this study, we investigated the
potential roles and underlying mechanisms of Hedgehog signaling in trophoblastic 
fusion. Activation of Hedgehog signaling by a variety of approaches robustly
induced cell fusion and the expression of syncytial markers, whereas suppression 
of Hedgehog signaling significantly attenuated cell fusion and the expression of 
syncytial markers in both human primary cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like
BeWo cells. Moreover, among glioma-associated oncogene (GLI) family
transcriptional factors in Hedgehog signaling, knockdown of GLI2 but not GLI1 and
GLI3 significantly attenuated Hedgehog-induced cell fusion, whereas
overexpression of the GLI2 activator alone was sufficient to induce cell fusion. 
Finally, GLI2 not only stabilized glial cell missing-a, a pivotal transcriptional
factor for trophoblastic syncytialization, but also formed a transcriptional
heterodimer with glial cell missing-a to transactivate syncytin-1, a
trophoblastic fusogen, and promote trophoblastic syncytialization. Taken
together, this study uncovered a so far uncharacterized role of Hedgehog/GLI2
signaling in trophoblastic fusion, implicating that Hedgehog signaling, through
GLI2, could be required for human placental development and pregnancy
maintenance.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4786702 [Available on 2017-03-11]
PMID: 26769961  [PubMed - in process]


19. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015 Dec 17. pii: S1525-7304(15)00301-0. doi:
10.1016/j.cllc.2015.12.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Sonic Hedgehog Pathway Activation Is Associated With Resistance to Platinum-Based
Chemotherapy in Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Carcinoma.

Giroux Leprieur E(1), Vieira T(2), Antoine M(3), Rozensztajn N(4), Rabbe N(2),
Ruppert AM(2), Lavole A(4), Cadranel J(2), Wislez M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Theranoscan, UPMC University of Paris VI, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France;
Service de Pneumologie et Oncologie Thoracique, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, EA 4340 Biomarqueurs en Cancérologie et
Onco-Hématologie, Université Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. (2)Theranoscan, UPMC University of Paris VI,
Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France; Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. (3)Theranoscan, UPMC
University of Paris VI, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France; Service d'Anatomie
Pathologique, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,
France. (4)Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Paris, France. (5)Theranoscan, UPMC University of Paris VI, Sorbonne
Universités, Paris, France; Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Tenon, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. Electronic address:
marie.wislez@tnn.aphp.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Chemoresistance is a major challenge in the treatment of advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Because the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is
reactivated in NSCLC, we investigated an association between chemoresistance and 
Shh activation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From a cohort of 178 patients with advanced NSCLC treated
with platinum-based chemotherapy as first-line treatment, we selected all
surgical tumor samples at diagnosis (n = 36). Shh activation was evaluated
through Gli1 and Gli2 expression using immunohistochemistry (quantitative score).
In vitro treatment studies with cisplatin or vismodegib (Shh pathway inhibitor), 
or both, were performed on NSCLC cell lines (H322 and A549) and primary cultures 
from patients with sarcomatoid carcinoma (n = 4).
RESULTS: Of the 36 patients, 12 had NSCLC refractory to chemotherapy (R-patients,
33.3%) and 24 had controlled disease (C-patients). Gli1 expression did not differ
between the R- and C-patients (P = .35). Gli2 expression was more often positive 
in the R-patients (41.7% vs. 8.3%; P = .02). Progression-free survival (PFS) and 
overall survival (OS) in patients with a Gli2-positive score was 2.1 and 8.0
months, respectively, compared with 6.7 and 18.0 months for patients with a
Gli2-negative score (P = .03 and P = .002, respectively). On multivariate
analysis, the Gli2 score correlated independently with PFS (hazard ratio [HR],
2.64; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.05-6.63; P = .04) and OS (HR, 4.36; 95% CI,
1.67-11.36; P = .003). The sarcomatoid carcinoma cell lines were more resistant
to cisplatin than were the H838 and A549 cell lines. The cisplatin-vismodegib
combination displayed a synergistic cytotoxic effect in the most chemoresistant
cells in vitro.
CONCLUSION: The Shh pathway is associated with resistance to platinum-based
chemotherapy in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26762562  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):12464-72. eCollection 2015.

Activation of SHH signaling pathway promotes vasculogenesis in post-myocardial
ischemic-reperfusion injury.

Guo W(1), Yi X(2), Ren F(3), Liu L(4), Wu S(4), Yang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Qingdao University Qingdao 266000, Shandong Province, China ; Department of
Geratology, Jining NO. 1 People's Hospital Jining 272011, Shandong Province,
China. (2)Department of Laboratory, Jining NO. 1 People's Hospital Jining 272011,
Shandong Province, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Yantai
Yuhuangding Hospital, Medical College of Qingdao University Yantai 264000,
Shandong Province, China. (4)Department of Geratology, Jining NO. 1 People's
Hospital Jining 272011, Shandong Province, China.

This study aimed to investigate the potential roles of sonic Hedgehog (SHH)
expression in vasculogenesis in post-myocardial ischemic-reperfusion injury
(MIRI) and its underlying mechanism. Cardiac microvascular endothelial cells
(CMECs) isolated from the SD rat hearts tissues were used to construct the MIRI
model. mRNA level of SHH in control cells and MIRI cells was detected using
RT-PCR analysis. Furthermore, effects of SHH expression on CMECs viability and
apoptosis were analyzed using MTT assay and Annexin-V-FITC kit respectively.
Moreover, effects of SHH expression on the pathway signal proteins expression was
analyzed using ELISA and western blotting. mRNA level of SHH was significantly
decreased compared to the controls (P<0.05). Besides, CMECs viability was
significantly increased while cell apoptosis was decreased by SHH application
compared with the controls (P<0.05). Vasculogenesis-related factors including
VEGF, FGF and Ang were significantly increased by SHH application, as well as the
SHH signal proteins including Patch-1, Gli1, Gli2 and SMO (P<0.05). However,
these effects of SHH application on biological factors levels were reversed by
the SHH inhibitor application. This study suggested that SHH over expression may 
play a pivotal contribute role in vasculogenesis through activating the SHH
signals in post-MIRI.

PMCID: PMC4680378
PMID: 26722433  [PubMed - in process]


21. Oncol Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):912-22. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4434. Epub 2015 Nov 17.

Salinomycin induces selective cytotoxicity to MCF-7 mammosphere cells through
targeting the Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Fu YZ(1), Yan YY(1), He M(1), Xiao QH(1), Yao WF(1), Zhao L(1), Wu HZ(1), Yu
ZJ(1), Zhou MY(1), Lv MT(1), Zhang SS(1), Chen JJ(2), Wei MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) are believed to be responsible for tumor
chemoresistance, recurrence, and metastasis formation. Salinomycin (SAL), a
carboxylic polyether ionophore, has been reported to act as a selective breast
CSC inhibitor. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying SAL-induced
cytotoxicity on BCSCs remain unclear. The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays
an important role in CSC maintenance and carcinogenesis. Here, we investigated
whether SAL induces cytotoxicity on BCSCs through targeting Hh pathway. In the
present study, we cultured breast cancer MCF-7 cells in suspension in serum-free 
medium to obtain breast CSC-enriched MCF-7 mammospheres (MCF-7 MS). MCF-7 MS
cells possessed typical BCSC properties, such as CD44+CD24-/low phenotype, high
expression of OCT4 (a stem cell marker), increased colony-forming ability, strong
migration and invasion capabilities, differentiation potential, and strong
tumorigenicity in xenografted mice. SAL exhibited selective cytotoxicity to
MCF-7 MS cells relative to MCF-7 cells. The Hh pathway was highly activated in
BCSC-enriched MCF-7 MS cells and SAL inhibited Hh signaling activation by
downregulating the expression of critical components of the Hh pathway such as
PTCH, SMO, Gli1, and Gli2, and subsequently repressing the expression of their
essential downstream targets including C-myc, Bcl-2, and Snail (but not
cyclin D1). Conversely, Shh-induced Hh signaling activation could largely reverse
SAL-mediated inhibitory effects. These findings suggest that SAL-induced
selective cytotoxicity against MCF-7 MS cells is associated with the inhibition
of Hh signaling activation and the expression of downstream targets and the Hh
pathway is an important player and a possible drug target in the pathogenesis of 
BCSCs.

PMID: 26718029  [PubMed - in process]


22. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;31(12):1602-5.

[Up-regulating effect of leptin on Hedgehog signaling pathway in the process of
adipocyte differentiation and maturity].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Y(1), Meng H(2), Chi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xijing Hospital, Xi' an 710032, China. (2)PLA Clinic Center, Xijing
Hospital, Xi' an 710032, China. (3)Department of Physiology, College of Basic
Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xijing Hospital, Xi' an 710032,
China. *Corresponding author, E-mail: chxinli@fmmu.edu.cn.

To study the regulating effect of leptin on Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway.
Methods 3T3-L1 cells were used to induce adipocyte differentiation. Real-time
quantitative PCR and Western blotting were performed to detect the mRNA and
protein levels of Gli, the key molecule in Hh signaling pathway, and investigate 
the effect of leptin on the levels in the process of adipocyte differentiation.
Results At 0, 4, 7, 10 days of adipose differentiation, mRNA and protein
expressions of Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 in Hh signaling pathway were gradually
restrained and the down-regulation of Gli1 mRNA was the most significant.
However, 100 ng/mL leptin promoted the mRNA and protein expressions of Gli1, Gli2
and Gli3 during adipose differentiation. Conclusion In the process of adipocyte
differentiation and maturity, there is an interaction between leptin and Hh
signaling pathway. Leptin can upregulate the expression of Gli in Hh pathway, and
leptin may play a role in the inhibition of adipogenesis through activating Hh
signaling pathway.

PMID: 26648290  [PubMed - in process]


23. Cancers (Basel). 2015 Nov 27;7(4):2330-51. doi: 10.3390/cancers7040894.

Aberrant GLI1 Activation in DNA Damage Response, Carcinogenesis and
Chemoresistance.

Palle K(1), Mani C(2), Tripathi K(3), Athar M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of
South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.
kpalle@health.southalabama.edu. (2)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell
Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue, Mobile, AL
36604, USA. cmani@health.southalabama.edu. (3)Department of Oncologic Sciences,
Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue,
Mobile, AL 36604, USA. ktripathi@health.southalabama.edu. (4)Department of
Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1530 3rd Avenue South,
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. mathar@uab.edu.

The canonical hedgehog (HH) pathway is a multicomponent signaling cascade (HH,
protein patched homolog 1 (PTCH1), smoothened (SMO)) that plays a pivotal role
during embryonic development through activation of downstream effector molecules,
namely glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), GLI2 and GLI3. Activation of 
GLIs must be tightly regulated as they modulate target genes which control tissue
patterning, stem cell maintenance, and differentiation during development.
However, dysregulation or mutations in HH signaling leads to genomic instability 
(GI) and various cancers, for example, germline mutation in PTCH1 lead to Gorlin 
syndrome, a condition where patients develop numerous basal cell carcinomas and
rarely rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Activating mutations in SMO have also been
recognized in sporadic cases of medulloblastoma and SMO is overexpressed in many 
other cancers. Recently, studies in several human cancers have shown that GLI1
expression is independent from HH ligand and canonical intracellular signaling
through PTCH and SMO. In fact, this aberrantly regulated GLI1 has been linked to 
several non-canonical oncogenic growth signals such as Kirsten rat sarcoma viral 
oncogene homolog (KRAS), avian myelocytomatosis virus oncogene cellular homolog
(C-MYC), transforming growth factor ß (TGFß), wingless-type MMTV integration site
family (WNT) and ß-catenin. Recent studies from our lab and other independent
studies demonstrate that aberrantly expressed GLI1 influences the integrity of
several DNA damage response and repair signals, and if altered, these networks
can contribute to GI and impact tumor response to chemo- and radiation therapies.
Furthermore, the ineffectiveness of SMO inhibitors in clinical studies argues for
the development of GLI1-specific inhibitors in order to develop effective
therapeutic modalities to treat these tumors. In this review, we focus on
summarizing current understanding of the molecular, biochemical and cellular
basis for aberrant GLI1 expression and discuss GLI1-mediated HH signaling on DNA 
damage responses, carcinogenesis and chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4695894
PMID: 26633513  [PubMed]


24. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 20;10(11):e0143591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143591.
eCollection 2015.

SOX18 Is a Novel Target Gene of Hedgehog Signaling in Cervical Carcinoma Cell
Lines.

Petrovic I(1), Milivojevic M(1), Popovic J(1), Schwirtlich M(1), Rankovic B(1),
Stevanovic M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Genetics and
Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, P.O.BOX 23, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

Although there is much evidence showing functional relationship between Hedgehog 
pathway, in particular Sonic hedgehog, and SOX transcription factors during
embryonic development, scarce data are available regarding their crosstalk in
cancer cells. SOX18 protein plays an important role in promoting tumor
angiogenesis and therefore emerged as a promising potential target in
antiangiogenic tumor therapy. Recently it became evident that expression of SOX18
gene in tumors is not restricted to endothelium of accompanying blood and
lymphatic vessels, but in tumor cells as well.In this paper we have identified
human SOX18 gene as a novel target gene of Hedgehog signaling in cervical
carcinoma cell lines. We have presented data showing that expression of SOX18
gene is regulated by GLI1 and GLI2 transcription factors, final effectors of
Hedgehog signaling, and that modulation of Hedgehog signaling activity in
considerably influence SOX18 expression. We consider important that Hedgehog
pathway inhibitors reduced SOX18 expression, thus showing, for the first time,
possibility for manipulationwith SOX18 gene expression. In addition, we analyzed 
the role of SOX18 in malignant potential of cervical carcinoma cell line, and
showed that its overexpression has no influence on cells proliferation and
viability, but substantially promotes migration and invasion of cells in vitro.
Pro-migratory effect of SOX18 suggests its role in promoting malignant spreading,
possibly in response to Hedgehog activation.

PMCID: PMC4654472
PMID: 26588701  [PubMed - in process]


25. Cancer Lett. 2016 Jan 28;370(2):313-23. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.11.006. Epub
2015 Nov 11.

Non-canonical GLI1/2 activation by PI3K/AKT signaling in renal cell carcinoma: A 
novel potential therapeutic target.

Zhou J(1), Zhu G(1), Huang J(1), Li L(1), Du Y(1), Gao Y(1), Wu D(1), Wang X(1), 
Hsieh JT(2), He D(3), Wu K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an 710061, China. (2)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (3)Department of Urology, First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. Electronic address:
dalinhe@yahoo.com. (4)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. Electronic address: kaijie_wu@163.com.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most lethal urologic malignancy; however, the
molecular events supporting RCC carcinogenesis and progression remain poorly
understood. In this study, based on the analysis of gene expression profile data 
from human clear cell RCC (ccRCC) and the corresponding normal tissues, we
discovered that Hedgehog (HH) pathway component genes GLI1 and GLI2 were
significantly elevated in ccRCC. Survival analysis of a large cohort of ccRCC
samples demonstrated that the expression of GLI1 and GLI2 was negatively
correlated with patient overall survival. Clinical sample-based VHL mutation and 
cell model-based VHL manipulation studies all indicated that the activation of
GLI1 and GLI2 was not affected by VHL status. Further signaling pathway
dissections demonstrated that GLI1 and GLI2 were activated by the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway, but not mediated by the canonical
HH/SMO/GLI signaling. Up-regulation of GLI1 and GLI2 promoted RCC proliferation
and clonogenic ability, whereas, a combination of GLIs inhibitor Gant61 and AKT
inhibitor Perifosine synergistically suppressed RCC growth and induced apoptosis 
in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, this study identifies that GLI1 and GLI2 are
critical for RCC carcinogenesis, and also provides an alternative therapeutic
strategy for RCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26577809  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cell Rep. 2015 Nov 3;13(5):1046-58. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.063.

FOXC1 Activates Smoothened-Independent Hedgehog Signaling in Basal-like Breast
Cancer.

Han B(1), Qu Y(1), Jin Y(1), Yu Y(1), Deng N(2), Wawrowsky K(3), Zhang X(2), Li
N(4), Bose S(5), Wang Q(6), Sakkiah S(7), Abrol R(7), Jensen TW(8), Berman BP(6),
Tanaka H(1), Johnson J(1), Gao B(1), Hao J(9), Liu Z(2), Buttyan R(10), Ray
PS(8), Hung MC(11), Giuliano AE(1), Cui X(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (2)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Research 
Center, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA 90048, USA. (3)Department of BioMedical Sciences, Samuel Oschin Cancer
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (4)Vancouver 
Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3Z6, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Samuel Oschin
Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(7)Department of BioMedical Sciences, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Department of Medicine, 
Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA
90048, USA. (8)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois College of Medicine 
at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (9)College of Veterinary Medicine,
Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766, USA. (10)Vancouver
Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3Z6, Canada;
Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
V6H 3Z6, Canada. (11)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, the
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for
Molecular Medicine and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical
University, Taichung 402, Taiwan. (12)Department of Surgery, Samuel Oschin Cancer
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Electronic address: xiaojiang.cui@cshs.org.

The mesoderm- and epithelial-mesenchymal transition-associated transcription
factor FOXC1 is specifically overexpressed in basal-like breast cancer (BLBC),
but its biochemical function is not understood. Here, we demonstrate that FOXC1
controls cancer stem cell (CSC) properties enriched in BLBC cells via activation 
of Smoothened (SMO)-independent Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. This non-canonical
activation of Hh is specifically mediated by Gli2. Furthermore, we show that the 
N-terminal domain of FOXC1 (aa 1-68) binds directly to an internal region (aa
898-1168) of Gli2, enhancing the DNA-binding and transcription-activating
capacity of Gli2. FOXC1 expression correlates with that of Gli2 and its targets
in human breast cancers. Moreover, FOXC1 overexpression reduces sensitivity to
anti-Hedgehog (Hh) inhibitors in BLBC cells and xenograft tumors. Together, these
findings reveal FOXC1-mediated non-canonical Hh signaling that determines the
BLBC stem-like phenotype and anti-Hh sensitivity, supporting inhibition of FOXC1 
pathways as potential approaches for improving BLBC treatment.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4806384
PMID: 26565916  [PubMed - in process]


27. Dev Biol. 2016 Jan 1;409(1):55-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.033. Epub 2015
Nov 2.

Primary cilia are critical for Sonic hedgehog-mediated dopaminergic neurogenesis 
in the embryonic midbrain.

Gazea M(1), Tasouri E(2), Tolve M(1), Bosch V(1), Kabanova A(1), Gojak C(3),
Kurtulmus B(4), Novikov O(5), Spatz J(3), Pereira G(4), Hübner W(6), Brodski
C(5), Tucker KL(7), Blaess S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn,
Germany. (2)Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of Heidelberg,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Biophysical Chemistry,
University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of New Materials 
and Biosystems, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 70569 Stuttgart,
Germany. (4)Molecular Biology of Centrosomes and Cilia, German Cancer Research
Center, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of
Physiology and Cell Biology, Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.
(6)Molecular Biophotonics, University of Bielefeld, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany.
(7)Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany; Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; University of New England, College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Excellence in
the Neurosciences, Biddeford, ME 04005, USA. Electronic address:
ktucker2@une.edu. (8)University of New England, College of Osteopathic Medicine, 
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Excellence in the Neurosciences,
Biddeford, ME 04005, USA. Electronic address: sblaess@uni-bonn.de.

Midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons modulate various motor and cognitive
functions, and their dysfunction or degeneration has been implicated in several
psychiatric diseases. Both Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and Wnt signaling pathways have
been shown to be essential for normal development of mDA neurons. Primary cilia
are critical for the development of a number of structures in the brain by
serving as a hub for essential developmental signaling cascades, but their role
in the generation of mDA neurons has not been examined. We analyzed mutant mouse 
lines deficient in the intraflagellar transport protein IFT88, which is critical 
for primary cilia function. Conditional inactivation of Ift88 in the midbrain
after E9.0 results in progressive loss of primary cilia, a decreased size of the 
mDA progenitor domain, and a reduction in mDA neurons. We identified Shh
signaling as the primary cause of these defects, since conditional inactivation
of the Shh signaling pathway after E9.0, through genetic ablation of Gli2 and
Gli3 in the midbrain, results in a phenotype basically identical to the one seen 
in Ift88 conditional mutants. Moreover, the expansion of the mDA progenitor
domain observed when Shh signaling is constitutively activated does not occur in 
absence of Ift88. In contrast, clusters of Shh-responding progenitors are
maintained in the ventral midbrain of the hypomorphic Ift88 mouse mutant,
cobblestone. Despite the residual Shh signaling, the integrity of the mDA
progenitor domain is severely disturbed, and consequently very few mDA neurons
are generated in cobblestone mutants. Our results identify for the first time a
crucial role of primary cilia in the induction of mDA progenitors, define a
narrow time window in which Shh-mediated signaling is dependent upon normal
primary cilia function for this purpose, and suggest that later Wnt
signaling-dependent events act independently of primary cilia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26542012  [PubMed - in process]


28. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Dec;12(6):8121-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4452. Epub 2015 Oct 16.

MicroRNA-200a suppresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in rat hepatic
stellate cells via GLI family zinc finger 2.

Yu F(1), Zheng Y(2), Hong W(3), Chen B(3), Dong P(1), Zheng J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R. China. (2)Department of
General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University,
Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R. China. (3)Key Laboratory of Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R.
China.

Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) have an important role in liver fibrosis.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is promoted by the Hedgehog
(Hh) signaling pathway, is involved in the activation of HSCs. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs/miRs) have been reported to be involved in the progression of liver
fibrosis. A previous study indicated that the activation of HSCs was suppressed
by miR-200a via targeting transforming growth factor-ß2 and ß-catenin. However,
whether miR-200a is able to regulate the EMT in HSCs has remained elusive. The
present study revealed that miR-200a was decreased in vitro and in vivo during
liver fibrosis. Furthermore, miR-200a overexpression resulted in the inhibition
of proliferation, a-SMA expression and extracellular matrix production of
activated HSCs. Of note, miR-200a overexpression reduced myofibroblastic markers,
including a-SMA, type I collagen and desmin, and increased the epithelial cell
marker E-cadherin. These results were further confirmed by immunofluorescence
staining. Further study showed that the expression of genes associated with Hh
signaling, including Hhip, Shh and Gli1, were not affected by miR-200a. However, 
Gli2, a downstream signaling protein of the Hh pathway, was inhibited by miR-200a
and confirmed as a target of miR-200a using a dual luciferase reporter assay. In 
addition, the inhibition of the Hh pathway by miR-200a resulted in an increase of
BMP-7 and Id2 as well as a reduction of Snai1 and S100A4. Collectively, the
results of the present study demonstrated that miR-200a suppressed the EMT
process in HSCs, at least in part, via Gli2.

PMID: 26499180  [PubMed - in process]


29. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jan;1862(1):46-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.10.008. 
Epub 2015 Oct 14.

GLI2 cell-specific activity is controlled at the level of transcription and RNA
processing: Consequences to cancer metastasis.

Sadam H(1), Liivas U(2), Kazantseva A(1), Pruunsild P(3), Kazantseva J(2),
Timmusk T(3), Neuman T(2), Palm K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Protobios Llc, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Department of Gene
Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, Tallinn 12618,
Estonia. (2)Protobios Llc, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. (3)Department of
Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, Tallinn
12618, Estonia. (4)Protobios Llc, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Department 
of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, Tallinn
12618, Estonia. Electronic address: kaia@protobios.com.

High activity of GLI family zinc finger protein 2 (GLI2) promotes tumor
progression. Removal of the repressor domain at the N terminus (GLI2<U+2206>N) by
recombinant methods converts GLI2 into a powerful transcriptional activator.
However, molecular mechanisms leading to the formation of GLI2<U+2206>N activator
proteins have not been established. Herein we report for the first time that the 
functional activities of GLI2 are parted into different protein isoforms by
alternative promoter usage, selection of alternative splicing, transcription
initiation and termination sites. Functional studies using melanoma cells
revealed that transcriptional regulation of GLI2 is TGFbeta-dependent and
supports the predominant production of GLI2<U+2206>N and C-terminally truncated GLI2
(GLI2<U+2206>C) isoforms in cells with high migratory and invasive phenotype. Taken
together, these results highlight the role of transcription and RNA processing as
major processes in the regulation of GLI2 activity with severe impacts in cancer 
development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26459048  [PubMed - in process]


30. Cell Tissue Res. 2016 Mar;363(3):775-89. doi: 10.1007/s00441-015-2285-6. Epub
2015 Oct 9.

The pro-fibrotic properties of transforming growth factor on human fibroblasts
are counteracted by caffeic acid by inhibiting myofibroblast formation and
collagen synthesis.

Mia MM(1), Bank RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology & Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
R.A.Bank@umcg.nl.

Fibrosis is a chronic disorder affecting many organs. A universal process in
fibrosis is the formation of myofibroblasts and the subsequent collagen
deposition by these cells. Transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFß1) plays a major
role in the formation of myofibroblasts, e.g. by activating fibroblasts.
Currently, no treatments are available to circumvent fibrosis. Caffeic acid
phenethyl ester (CAPE) shows a broad spectrum of biological activities, including
anti-fibrotic properties in vivo in mice and rats. However, little is known about
the direct effects of CAPE on fibroblasts. We have tested whether CAPE is able to
suppress myofibroblast formation and collagen formation of human dermal and lung 
fibroblasts exposed to TGFß1, and found that this was indeed the case. In fact,
the formation of myofibroblasts by TGFß1 and subsequent collagen formation was
completely abolished by CAPE. The same was observed for fibronectin and tenascin 
C. The lack of myofibroblast formation is likely due to the suppression of GLI1
and GLI2 expression by CAPE because of diminished nuclear SMAD2/3 levels.
Post-treatment with CAPE after myofibroblast formation even resulted in a partial
reversal of myofibroblasts into fibroblasts and/or reduction in collagen
formation. Major discrepancies were seen between mRNA levels of collagen type I
and cells stained positive for collagen, underlining the need for protein data in
fibrosis studies to make reliable conclusions.

PMCID: PMC4761014
PMID: 26453399  [PubMed - in process]


31. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Oct 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Sonic Hedgehog Signaling Affected by Promoter Hypermethylation Induces Aberrant
Gli2 Expression in Spina Bifida.

Lu XL(1), Wang L(2), Chang SY(1), Shangguan SF(1), Wang Z(1), Wu LH(1), Zou
JZ(3), Xiao P(3), Li R(1), Bao YH(1), Qiu ZY(1), Zhang T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital 
Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, 100020, China. (2)Beijing Municipal Key
Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, 
Beijing, 100020, China. lily_wang@yeah.net. (3)Department of Pathology, Capital
Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, 100020, China. (4)Beijing Municipal Key
Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, 
Beijing, 100020, China. zhangtingcv@126.com.

GLI2 is a key mediator of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway and plays an
important role in neural tube development during vertebrate embryogenesis;
however, the role of gli2 in human folate-related neural tube defects remains
unclear. In this study, we compared methylation status and polymorphisms of gli2 
between spina bifida patients and a control group to explore the underlying
mechanisms related to folate deficiency in spina bifida. No single nucleotide
polymorphism was found to be significantly different between the two groups,
although gli2 methylation levels were significantly increased in spina bifida
samples, accompanied by aberrant GLI2 expression. Moreover, a prominent negative 
correlation was found between the folate level in brain tissue and the gli2
methylation status (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.41, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014), and gli2 hypermethylation increased
the risk of spina bifida with an odds ratio of 12.45 (95 % confidence interval:
2.71-57.22, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). In addition, we established a cell model to illustrate
the effect of gli2 expression and the accessibility of chromatin affected by
methylation. High gli2 and gli1 mRNA expression was detected in 5-Aza-treated
cells, while gli2 hypermethylation resulted in chromatin inaccessibility and a
reduced association with nuclear proteins containing transcriptional factors.
More meaningful to the pathway, the effect gene of the Shh pathway, gli1, was
found to have a reduced level of expression along with a decreased expression of 
gli2 in our cell model. Aberrant high methylation resulted in the low expression 
of gli2 in spina bifida, which was affected by the change in chromatin status and
the capacity of transcription factor binding.

PMID: 26446020  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 6;467(1):21-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.139. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Expression pattern of sonic hedgehog signaling and calcitonin gene-related
peptide in the socket healing process after tooth extraction.

Pang P(1), Shimo T(2), Takada H(3), Matsumoto K(3), Yoshioka N(3), Ibaragi S(3), 
Sasaki A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, 700-8525,
Japan; Department of Oromaxillofacial-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Stomatology, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning, 110002, PR China. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, 700-8525, Japan. Electronic address:
shimotsu@md.okayama-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,
Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Okayama, 700-8525, Japan.

Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), a neural development inducer, plays a significant role in
the bone healing process. Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), a neuropeptide 
marker of sensory nerves, has been demonstrated to affect bone formation. The
roles of SHH signaling and CGRP-positive sensory nerves in the alveolar bone
formation process have been unknown. Here we examined the expression patterns of 
SHH signaling and CGRP in mouse socket by immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence analysis. We found that the expression level of SHH peaked at 
day 3 and was then decreased at 5 days after tooth extraction. CGRP, PTCH1 and
GLI2 were each expressed in a similar pattern with their highest expression
levels at day 5 and day 7 after tooth extraction. CGRP and GLI2 were co-expressed
in some inflammatory cells and bone forming cells. In some areas, CGRP-positive
neurons expressed GLI2. In conclusion, SHH may affect alveolar bone healing by
interacting with CGRP-positive sensory neurons and thus regulate the socket's
healing process after tooth extraction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26427874  [PubMed - in process]


33. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33648-57. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5203.

GLI1 orchestrates CXCR4/CXCR7 signaling to enhance migration and metastasis of
breast cancer cells.

Inaguma S(1), Riku M(1), Ito H(1), Tsunoda T(1), Ikeda H(1), Kasai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.

The up-regulation of chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7 impacts on the distant
metastasis and prognosis of breast cancer, though knowledge about the regulatory 
mechanism of their expressions is limited. Meanwhile, the GLI transcription
factors of Hedgehog signaling have been reported to play a pivotal role in the
development and progression of many types of human cancer. In breast cancer, the 
increased expression of GLI1 correlated with metastasis and unfavorable overall
prognosis, though its molecular mechanism is also not fully understood. Based on 
our findings that GLI1 enhanced the lung metastasis of breast cancer cells in a
mouse model system, we comprehensively screened for genes up-regulated by GLI1 in
breast cancer cells, and as such identified CXCR4, CXCR7/ACKR3, and actin-binding
protein LCP1/L-PLASTIN, all of which have been reported to be involved in
CXCL12-stimulating signaling. In breast cancer cells, we found that GLI1 and GLI2
up-regulated these expressions, while treatment with GLI-specific inhibitor
GANT61 reduced the expressions. As for CXCR4, we confirmed it as a direct target 
of GLI1 through the reporter assay and the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
We also found that GLI1 enhanced CXCL12-induced ERK phosphorylation and cell
migration, both of which were blocked by either CXCR4-specific inhibitor or
knockdown of CXCR7 or LCP1. These evidences suggest an indispensable role of GLI1
in the migration and metastasis of breast cancer cells through CXCL12/CXCR4
signaling enhancement.

PMCID: PMC4741792
PMID: 26413813  [PubMed - in process]


34. Cell Rep. 2015 Sep 29;12(12):2021-34. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.031. Epub
2015 Sep 17.

Suppressor of Fused Is Critical for Maintenance of Neuronal Progenitor Identity
during Corticogenesis.

Yabut OR(1), Fernandez G(1), Huynh T(1), Yoon K(2), Pleasure SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of Neurology, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; College of Biotechnology and
Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 16419, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Programs in Neuroscience and Developmental Biology, Eli
and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic
address: sam.pleasure@ucsf.edu.

Proper lineage progression and diversification of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) 
ensures the generation of projection neuron (PN) subtypes in the mammalian
neocortex. Here, we show that Suppressor of Fused (Sufu) controls PN
specification by maintaining the identity of NPCs in the embryonic neocortex.
Deletion of Sufu in NPCs of the E10.5 mouse neocortex led to improper
specification of progenitors and a reduction in intermediate progenitors (IPs)
during corticogenesis. We found that Sufu deletion resulted in unstable Gli2 and 
Gli3 activity, leading to the ectopic activation of Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling. The role of Sufu in maintaining progenitor identity is critical at
early stages of corticogenesis, since deletion of Sufu at E13.5 did not cause
similar abnormalities. Our studies revealed that Sufu critically modulates Shh
signaling at early stages of neurogenesis for proper specification and
maintenance of cortical NPCs to ensure the appropriate generation of cortical PN 
lineages.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4591209 [Available on 2016-09-29]
PMID: 26387942  [PubMed - in process]


35. Sci Signal. 2015 Sep 15;8(394):ra92. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaa7355.

An essential role for Ga(i2) in Smoothened-stimulated epithelial cell
proliferation in the mammary gland.

Villanueva H(1), Visbal AP(1), Obeid NF(2), Ta AQ(2), Faruki AA(2), Wu MF(2),
Hilsenbeck SG(3), Shaw CA(4), Yu P(5), Plummer NW(6), Birnbaumer L(6), Lewis
MT(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Lester and Sue Smith Breast
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Department of
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, TEES-AgriLife Center for
Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843, USA. (6)Neurobiology Laboratory, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA. (7)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Department of Radiology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. mtlewis@bcm.edu.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is critical for organogenesis, tissue homeostasis, and
stem cell maintenance. The gene encoding Smoothened (SMO), the primary effector
of Hh signaling, is expressed aberrantly in human breast cancer, as well as in
other cancers. In mice that express a constitutively active form of SMO that does
not require Hh stimulation in mammary glands, the cells near the transgenic cells
proliferate and participate in hyperplasia formation. Although SMO is a
seven-transmembrane receptor like G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),
SMO-mediated activation of the Gli family of transcription factors is not known
to involve G proteins. However, data from Drosophila and mammalian cell lines
indicate that SMO functions as a GPCR that couples to heterotrimeric G proteins
of the pertussis toxin (PTX)-sensitive Gai class. Using genetically modified
mice, we demonstrated that SMO signaling through G proteins occurred in the
mammary gland in vivo. SMO-induced stimulation of proliferation was PTX-sensitive
and required Gai2, but not Gai1, Gai3, or activation of Gli1 or Gli2. Our
findings show that activated SMO functions as a GPCR to stimulate proliferation
in vivo, a finding that may have clinical importance because most SMO-targeted
agents have been selected based largely on their ability to block Gli-mediated
transcription.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26373672  [PubMed - in process]


36. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):24592-3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5017.

Gli2, Hedgehog and TCR signalling.

Furmanski AL(1), Crompton T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Bedfordshire, Luton, UK.
(2)Immunobiology Section, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

PMCID: PMC4694777
PMID: 26336995  [PubMed - in process]


37. Data Brief. 2015 Jul 13;4:440-6. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2015.07.003. eCollection
2015.

Altering adsorbed proteins or cellular gene expression in bone-metastatic cancer 
cells affects PTHrP and Gli2 without altering cell growth.

Page JM(1), Merkel AR(2), Ruppender NS(1), Guo R(1), Dadwal UC(3), Cannonier
S(4), Basu S(5), Guelcher SA(6), Sterling JA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37235, USA. (2)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37212, USA ; Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA ; Division of Clinical
Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA ; Center for Bone Biology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (4)Department of 
Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37212, USA ; 
Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA ; Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (5)Agilent Technologies, Chandler, AZ 85226, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37235, USA ; Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA ; Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA. (7)Department of Veterans
Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37212, USA ; Center
for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA 
; Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA ; Department of Cancer
Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The contents of this data in brief are related to the article titled "Matrix
Rigidity Regulates the Transition of Tumor Cells to a Bone-Destructive Phenotype 
through Integrin ß3 and TGF-ß Receptor Type II". In this DIB we will present our 
supplemental data investigating Integrin expression, attachment of cells to
various adhesion molecules, and changes in gene expression in multiple cancer
cell lines. Since the interactions of Integrins with adsorbed matrix proteins are
thought to affect the ability of cancer cells to interact with their underlying
substrates, we examined the expression of Integrin ß1, ß3, and ß5 in response to 
matrix rigidity. We found that only Iß3 increased with increasing substrate
modulus. While it was shown that fibronectin greatly affects the expression of
tumor-produced factors associated with bone destruction (parathyroid
hormone-related protein, PTHrP, and Gli2), poly-l-lysine, vitronectin and type I 
collagen were also analyzed as potential matrix proteins. Each of the proteins
was independently adsorbed on both rigid and compliant polyurethane films which
were subsequently used to culture cancer cells. Poly-l-lysine, vitronectin and
type I collagen all had negligible effects on PTHrP or Gli2 expression, but
fibronectin was shown to have a dose dependent effect. Finally, altering the
expression of Iß3 demonstrated that it is required for tumor cells to respond to 
the rigidity of the matrix, but does not affect other cell growth or viability.
Together these data support the data presented in our manuscript to show that the
rigidity of bone drives Integrinß3/TGF-ß crosstalk, leading to increased
expression of Gli2 and PTHrP.

PMCID: PMC4534584
PMID: 26306316  [PubMed]


38. J Neurooncol. 2015 Oct;125(1):75-8. doi: 10.1007/s11060-015-1891-1. Epub 2015 Aug
20.

CCND2, CTNNB1, DDX3X, GLI2, SMARCA4, MYC, MYCN, PTCH1, TP53, and MLL2 gene
variants and risk of childhood medulloblastoma.

Dahlin AM(1), Hollegaard MV(2), Wibom C(3), Andersson U(3), Hougaard DM(2),
Deltour I(4,)(5), Hjalmars U(3), Melin B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Sciences, Oncology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
anna.dahlin@umu.se. (2)Department of Congenital Disorders, Danish Centre for
Neonatal Screening, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Department of
Radiation Sciences, Oncology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (4)Section of
Environment and Radiation, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France. (5)Unit of Statistics, Bioinformatics and Registry, Danish Cancer Society
Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Recent studies have described a number of genes that are frequently altered in
medulloblastoma tumors and that have putative key roles in the development of the
disease. We hypothesized that common germline genetic variations in these genes
may be associated with medulloblastoma development. Based on recent publications,
we selected 10 genes that were frequently altered in medulloblastoma: CCND2,
CTNNB1, DDX3X, GLI2, SMARCA4, MYC, MYCN, PTCH1, TP53, and MLL2 (now renamed as
KMT2D). Common genetic variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms) annotating
these genes (n = 221) were genotyped in germline DNA (neonatal dried blood spot
samples) from 243 childhood medulloblastoma cases and 247 control subjects from
Sweden and Denmark. Eight genetic variants annotating three genes in the sonic
hedgehog signaling pathway; CCND2, PTCH1, and GLI2, were found to be associated
with the risk of medulloblastoma (P(combined) < 0.05). The findings were however 
not statistically significant following correction for multiple testing by the
very stringent Bonferroni method. The results do not support our hypothesis that 
common germline genetic variants in the ten studied genes are associated with the
risk of developing medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4592490
PMID: 26290144  [PubMed - in process]


39. DNA Repair (Amst). 2015 Oct;34:9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.06.006. Epub 2015
Aug 1.

p53 modulates the activity of the GLI1 oncogene through interactions with the
shared coactivator TAF9.

Yoon JW(1), Lamm M(1), Iannaccone S(1), Higashiyama N(1), Leong KF(1), Iannaccone
P(1), Walterhouse D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program of the Stanley Manne Children's Research
Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. (2)Developmental Biology Program of the Stanley Manne Children's Research
Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. Electronic address: d-walterhouse@northwestern.edu.

The GLI1 oncogene and p53 tumor suppressor gene function in an inhibitory loop
that controls stem cell and tumor cell numbers. Since GLI1 and p53 both interact 
with the coactivator TATA Binding Protein Associated Factor 9 (TAF9), we
hypothesized that competition between these transcription factors for TAF9 in
cancer cells may contribute to the inhibitory loop and directly affect GLI1
function and cellular phenotype. We showed that TAF9 interacts with the oncogenic
GLI family members GLI1 and GLI2 but not GLI3 in cell-free pull-down assays and
with GLI1 in rhabdomyosarcoma and osteosarcoma cell lines. Removal of the
TAF9-binding acidic alpha helical transactivation domain of GLI1 produced a
significant reduction in the ability of GLI1 to transform cells. We then
introduced a point mutation into GLI1 (L1052I) that eliminates TAF9 binding and a
point mutation into GLI3 (I1510L) that establishes binding. Wild-type and mutant 
GLI proteins that bind TAF9 showed enhanced transactivating and cell transforming
activity compared with those that did not. Therefore, GLI-TAF9 binding appears
important for oncogenic activity. We then determined whether wild-type p53
down-regulates GLI function by sequestering TAF9. We showed that p53 binds TAF9
with greater affinity than does GLI1 and that co-expression of p53 with GLI1 or
GLI2 down-regulated GLI-induced transactivation, which could be abrogated using
mutant forms of GLI1 or p53. This suggests that p53 sequesters TAF9 from GLI1,
which may contribute to inhibition of GLI1 activity by p53 and potentially impact
therapeutic success of agents targeting GLI-TAF9 interactions in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592456 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26282181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Med Genet. 2015 Oct;52(10):657-65. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102838. Epub
2015 Aug 14.

IFT81, encoding an IFT-B core protein, as a very rare cause of a ciliopathy
phenotype.

Perrault I(1), Halbritter J(2), Porath JD(3), Gérard X(1), Braun DA(3), Gee
HY(3), Fathy HM(4), Saunier S(5), Cormier-Daire V(6), Thomas S(7), Attié-Bitach
T(7), Boddaert N(8), Taschner M(9), Schueler M(3), Lorentzen E(9), Lifton RP(10),
Lawson JA(3), Garfa-Traore M(11), Otto EA(12), Bastin P(13), Caillaud C(14),
Kaplan J(1), Rozet JM(1), Hildebrandt F(15).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, France Paris 
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University Clinic Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany Division of Nephrology, Department of
Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Pediatric Nephrology Unit, University of Alexandria, Alexandria, Egypt.
(5)Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France INSERM UMR 1163, Molecular bases of hereditary kidney diseases,
Nephronophthisis and Hypodysplasia, Paris, France. (6)Paris Descartes-Sorbonne
Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France INSERM UMR 1163,
Molecular and Physiopathological bases of osteochondrodysplasia, Paris, France.
(7)Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris,
France INSERM UMR 1163, Embryology and genetics of human malformation, Paris,
France. (8)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades,
APHP, Descartes University, Paris, France. (9)Department of Structural Cell
Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.
(10)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, USA. (11)Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité
University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France INSERM UMR 1163, Cell imaging
platform, Paris, France. (12)Departments of Pediatrics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, USA. (13)Trypanosome Cell Biology Unit, Institut Pasteur and CNRS, URA
2581, Paris, France. (14)Biochemistry Department, Necker Hospital, Paris, France.
(15)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Bidirectional intraflagellar transport (IFT) consists of two major
protein complexes, IFT-A and IFT-B. In contrast to the IFT-B complex, all
components of IFT-A have recently been linked to human ciliopathies when
defective. We therefore hypothesised that mutations in additional IFT-B encoding 
genes can be found in patients with multisystemic ciliopathies.
METHODS: We screened 1628 individuals with reno-ocular ciliopathies by targeted
next-generation sequencing of ciliary candidate genes, including all IFT-B
encoding genes.
RESULTS: Consequently, we identified a homozygous mutation in IFT81 affecting an 
obligatory donor splice site in an individual with nephronophthisis and
polydactyly. Further, we detected a loss-of-stop mutation with extension of the
deduced protein by 10 amino acids in an individual with neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis-1. This proband presented with retinal dystrophy and brain lesions
including cerebellar atrophy, a phenotype to which the IFT81 variant might
contribute. Cultured fibroblasts of this latter affected individual showed a
significant decrease in ciliated cell abundance compared with controls and
increased expression of the transcription factor GLI2 suggesting deranged sonic
hedgehog signalling.
CONCLUSIONS: This work describes identification of mutations of IFT81 in
individuals with symptoms consistent with the clinical spectrum of ciliopathies. 
It might represent the rare case of a core IFT-B complex protein found associated
with human disease. Our data further suggest that defects in the IFT-B core are
an exceedingly rare finding, probably due to its indispensable role for ciliary
assembly in development.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4621372
PMID: 26275418  [PubMed - in process]


41. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 13;10(8):e0135804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135804.
eCollection 2015.

A Comparison of Ci/Gli Activity as Regulated by Sufu in Drosophila and Mammalian 
Hedgehog Response.

Oh S(1), Kato M(1), Zhang C(2), Guo Y(3), Beachy PA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America;
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United
States of America. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America. (3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America. (4)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, 
United States of America; Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)/Sufu), one of the most conserved components of the
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, binds Ci/Gli transcription factors and impedes
activation of target gene expression. In Drosophila, the Su(fu) mutation has a
minimal phenotype, and we show here that Ci transcriptional activity in large
part is regulated independently of Su(fu) by other pathway components. Mutant
mice lacking Sufu in contrast show excessive pathway activity and die as embryos 
with patterning defects. Here we show that in cultured cells Hh stimulation can
augment transcriptional activity of a Gli2 variant lacking Sufu interaction and, 
surprisingly, that regulation of Hh pathway targets is nearly normal in the
neural tube of Sufu-/- mutant embryos that also lack Gli1 function. Some degree
of Hh-induced transcriptional activation of Ci/Gli thus can occur independently
of Sufu in both flies and mammals. We further note that Sufu loss can also reduce
Hh induction of high-threshold neural tube fates, such as floor plate, suggesting
a possible positive pathway role for Sufu.

PMCID: PMC4536226
PMID: 26271100  [PubMed - in process]


42. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:494269. doi: 10.1155/2015/494269. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Expression Profile of Sonic Hedgehog Pathway Members in the Developing Human
Fetal Brain.

Tichy J(1), Zinke J(2), Bunz B(3), Meyermann R(3), Harter PN(2), Mittelbronn
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, University of Tuebingen, 72076
Tuebingen, Germany ; Senckenberg Institute for Neurooncology, Goethe University
Frankfurt, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany ; Edinger Institute, Institute of
Neurology, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Edinger Institute, Institute of Neurology, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60528 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology,
University of Tuebingen, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

The Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathway plays a central role in the developing mammalian
CNS. In our study, we aimed to investigate the spatiotemporal SHH pathway
expression pattern in human fetal brains. We analyzed 22 normal fetal brains for 
Shh, Patched, Smoothened, and Gli1-3 expression by immunohistochemistry. In the
telencephalon, strongest expression of Shh, Smoothened, and Gli2 was found in the
cortical plate (CP) and ventricular zone. Patched was strongly upregulated in the
ventricular zone and Gli1 in the CP. In the cerebellum, SHH pathway members were 
strongly expressed in the external granular layer (EGL). SHH pathway members
significantly decreased over time in the ventricular and subventricular zone and 
in the cerebellar EGL, while increasing levels were found in more superficial
telencephalic layers. Our findings show that SHH pathway members are strongly
expressed in areas important for proliferation and differentiation and indicate a
temporal expression gradient in telencephalic and cerebellar layers probably due 
to decreased proliferation of progenitor cells and increased differentiation. Our
data about the spatiotemporal expression of SHH pathway members in the developing
human brain serves as a base for the understanding of both normal and
pathological CNS development.

PMCID: PMC4523658
PMID: 26266257  [PubMed - in process]


43. Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1837-1848.e5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.060. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Identification of GLI Mutations in Patients With Hirschsprung Disease That
Disrupt Enteric Nervous System Development in Mice.

Liu JA(1), Lai FP(1), Gui HS(2), Sham MH(3), Tam PK(1), Garcia-Barcelo MM(1), Hui
CC(4), Ngan ES(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong; Center for Genomic
Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (4)Program in Developmental and
Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children and Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Department of
Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong. Electronic address: engan@hku.hk.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1672-5.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hirschsprung disease is characterized by a deficit in enteric 
neurons, which are derived from neural crest cells (NCCs). Aberrant hedgehog
signaling disrupts NCC differentiation and might cause Hirschsprung disease. We
performed genetic analyses to determine whether hedgehog signaling is involved in
pathogenesis.
METHODS: We performed deep-target sequencing of DNA from 20 patients with
Hirschsprung disease (16 men, 4 women), and 20 individuals without (controls),
and searched for mutation(s) in GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, SUFU, and SOX10. Biological
effects of GLI mutations were tested in luciferase reporter assays using HeLa or 
neuroblastoma cell lines. Development of the enteric nervous system was studied
in Sufu(f/f), Gli3(<U+0394>699), Wnt1-Cre, and Sox10(NGFP) mice using
immunohistochemical and whole-mount staining procedures to quantify enteric
neurons and glia and analyze axon fasciculation, respectively. NCC migration was 
studied using time-lapse imaging.
RESULTS: We identified 3 mutations in GLI in 5 patients with Hirschsprung disease
but no controls; all lead to increased transcription of SOX10 in cell lines.
SUFU, GLI, and SOX10 form a regulatory loop that controls the neuronal vs glial
lineages and migration of NCCs. Sufu mutants mice had high Gli activity, due to
loss of Sufu, disrupting the regulatory loop and migration of enteric NCCs,
leading to defective axonal fasciculation, delayed gut colonization, or
intestinal hypoganglionosis. The ratio of enteric neurons to glia correlated
inversely with Gli activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified mutations that increase GLI activity in patients with 
Hirschsprung disease. Disruption of the SUFU-GLI-SOX10 regulatory loop disrupts
migration of NCCs and development of the enteric nervous system in mice.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26261006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 Oct;11(10):568. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2015.135. Epub 2015 Aug
4.

Fibrosis: GLI2 inhibition reduces myofibroblast generation and kidney fibrosis.

Carney EF.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2935-51.

PMID: 26241018  [PubMed - in process]


45. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 15;195(6):2908-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402974. Epub 2015
Aug 3.

Modulation of the IL-6 Receptor a Underlies GLI2-Mediated Regulation of Ig
Secretion in Waldenström Macroglobulinemia Cells.

Jackson DA(1), Smith TD(1), Amarsaikhan N(1), Han W(1), Neil MS(1), Boi SK(1),
Vrabel AM(2), Tolosa EJ(2), Almada LL(2), Fernandez-Zapico ME(2), Elsawa SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL
60115; and. (2)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University,
DeKalb, IL 60115; and selsawa@niu.edu.

Ig secretion by terminally differentiated B cells is an important component of
the immune response to foreign pathogens. Its overproduction is a defining
characteristic of several B cell malignancies, including Waldenström
macroglobulinemia (WM), where elevated IgM is associated with significant
morbidity and poor prognosis. Therefore, the identification and characterization 
of the mechanisms controlling Ig secretion are of great importance for the
development of future therapeutic approaches for this disease. In this study, we 
define a novel pathway involving the oncogenic transcription factor GLI2
modulating IgM secretion by WM malignant cells. Pharmacological and genetic
inhibition of GLI2 in WM malignant cells resulted in a reduction in IgM
secretion. Screening for a mechanism identified the IL-6Ra (gp80) subunit as a
downstream target of GLI2 mediating the regulation of IgM secretion. Using a
combination of expression, luciferase, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
we demonstrate that GLI2 binds to the IL-6Ra promoter and regulates its activity 
as well as the expression of this receptor. Additionally, we were able to rescue 
the reduction in IgM secretion in the GLI2 knockdown group by overexpressing
IL-6Ra, thus defining the functional significance of this receptor in
GLI2-mediated regulation of IgM secretion. Interestingly, this occurred
independent of Hedgehog signaling, a known regulator of GLI2, as manipulation of 
Hedgehog had no effect on IgM secretion. Given the poor prognosis associated with
elevated IgM in WM patients, components of this new signaling axis could be
important therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4561187 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26238488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncol Rep. 2015 Oct;34(4):1835-44. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4152. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Effect of Rab23 on the proliferation and apoptosis in breast cancer.

Liu Y(1), Zeng C(1), Bao N(2), Zhao J(1), Hu Y(1), Li C(3), Chi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, State Key Discipline of Cell Biology, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China. (2)Team 2, Cadet 
Brigade, School of Stomatology, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China. (3)Department of Dermatology, Chinese
People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China.

Rab23, as a negative regulatory molecule of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, 
may be a new target for treating carcinoma. In the present study, we aimed to
determine whether Rab23 is expressed in breast cancer cells and whether Rab23
affects the viability and proliferation of breast cancer cells. We evaluated
Rab23 expression in several breast cancer cell lines including MDA-MB-231, Bcap37
and MCF-7 by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), western blotting and
immunofluorescence in vitro. We assessed cell growth and proliferation by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-y1)-3,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), colony
formation and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assays. The distribution of 
the cell cycle and the rate of apoptosis were assessed using flow cytometry
(FCM). In addition, we determined the mechanisms by which Rab23 regulates the Hh 
pathway by detecting the level of Gli molecules by RT-PCR. We found that Rab23
mRNA and protein levels were expressed in breast cancer cells, and the expression
of Rab23 in MDA-MB-231 cells was higher than that in the MCF-7 cells. Rab23
protein was primarily expressed and localized in the cytoplasm surrounding the
nucleus. The MTT assay showed that the absorbance value at A(490 nm) of the
Rab23-transfected group was reduced in comparison with the control group. The
number of colonies formed in the breast cancer cells was significantly reduced
and BrdU labeling was weakened in the group transfected with Rab23. The results
of FCM showed that overexpression of Rab23 protein caused cell cycle arrest in
the G1 phase and a decrease in the S phase population as well as induction of
apoptosis. Furthermore, Rab23 decreased Gli1 and Gli2 mRNA levels when compared
with the control group. Our results indicate that Rab23 is expressed in breast
cancer cells, and ectopic expression of Rab23 inhibits the growth and
proliferation as well as induces cell apoptosis in breast cancer cells. These
effects may be due to the inhibition by Rab23 of Gli1 and Gli2 mRNA expression.
These results suggest that Rab23 is a potential target for the treatment of
breast cancer.

PMID: 26238143  [PubMed - in process]


47. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 29;16(8):17344-67. doi: 10.3390/ijms160817344.

Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase Activating Polypeptide (PACAP) Pathway Is Induced by 
Mechanical Load and Reduces the Activity of Hedgehog Signaling in Chondrogenic
Micromass Cell Cultures.

Juhász T(1), Szentléleky E(2), Somogyi CS(3), Takács R(4), Dobrosi N(5), Engler
M(6), Tamás A(7), Reglodi D(8), Zákány R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen,
Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
juhaszt@anat.med.unideb.hu. (2)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98,
H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. valaki006@gmail.com. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
somogyics@anat.med.unideb.hu. (4)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98,
H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. takacs.roland@med.unideb.hu. (5)Department of Anatomy, 
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. luysica@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen,
Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
engler.mate.janos@med.unideb.hu. (7)Department of Anatomy, MTA-PTE "Lendület"
PACAP Research Team, University of Pécs, Medical School, Szigeti út 12, H-7624
Pécs, Hungary. andreatamassz@gmail.com. (8)Department of Anatomy, MTA-PTE
"Lendület" PACAP Research Team, University of Pécs, Medical School, Szigeti út
12, H-7624 Pécs, Hungary. dora.reglodi@aok.pte.hu. (9)Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. roza@anat.med.unideb.hu.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) is a neurohormone
exerting protective function during various stress conditions either in mature or
developing tissues. Previously we proved the presence of PACAP signaling elements
in chicken limb bud-derived chondrogenic cells in micromass cell cultures. Since 
no data can be found if PACAP signaling is playing any role during mechanical
stress in any tissues, we aimed to investigate its contribution in
mechanotransduction during chondrogenesis. Expressions of the mRNAs of PACAP and 
its major receptor, PAC1 increased, while that of other receptors, VPAC1, VPAC2
decreased upon mechanical stimulus. Mechanical load enhanced the expression of
collagen type X, a marker of hypertrophic differentiation of chondrocytes and
PACAP addition attenuated this elevation. Moreover, exogenous PACAP also
prevented the mechanical load evoked activation of hedgehog signaling: protein
levels of Sonic and Indian Hedgehogs and Gli1 transcription factor were lowered
while expressions of Gli2 and Gli3 were elevated by PACAP application during
mechanical load. Our results suggest that mechanical load activates PACAP
signaling and exogenous PACAP acts against the hypertrophy inducing effect of
mechanical load.

PMCID: PMC4581197
PMID: 26230691  [PubMed - in process]


48. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015 Nov;129(9):809-22. doi: 10.1042/CS20140592. Epub 2015 Jul
2.

The Hedgehog signalling pathway mediates drug response of MCF-7 mammosphere cells
in breast cancer patients.

He M(1), Fu Y(1), Yan Y(1), Xiao Q(1), Wu H(1), Yao W(1), Zhao H(1), Zhao L(1),
Jiang Q(1), Yu Z(1), Jin F(2), Mi X(3), Wang E(3), Cui Z(4), Fu L(5), Chen J(6), 
Wei M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China. (2)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province,
China. (3)Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China. (4)Center of the Laboratory Technology and
Experimental Medicine, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province,
China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (6)Department of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, U.S.A. (7)Department of Pharmacology, School of
Pharmacy, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China Institute 
of Pathology and Pathophysiology, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
Province, China weiminjiecmu@163.com.

BCSCs (breast cancer stem cells) have been shown to be resistant to chemotherapy.
However, the mechanisms underlying BCSC-mediated chemoresistance remain poorly
understood. The Hh (Hedgehog) pathway is important in the stemness maintenance of
CSCs. Nonetheless, it is unknown whether the Hh pathway is involved in
BCSC-mediated chemoresistance. In the present study, we cultured breast cancer
MCF-7 cells in suspension in serum-free medium to obtain BCSC-enriched MCF-7 MS
(MCF-7 mammosphere) cells. We showed that MCF-7 MS cells are sensitive to
salinomycin, but not paclitaxel, distinct from parent MCF-7 cells. The expression
of the critical components of Hh pathway, i.e., PTCH (Patched), SMO (Smoothened),
Gli1 and Gli2, was significantly up-regulated in MCF-7 MS cells; salinomycin, but
not paclitaxel, treatment caused a remarkable decrease in expression of those
genes in MCF-7 MS cells, but not in MCF-7 cells. Salinomycin, but not paclitaxel,
increased apoptosis, decreased the migration capacity of MCF-7 MS cells,
accompanied by a decreased expression of c-Myc, Bcl-2 and Snail, the target genes
of the Hh pathway. The salinomycin-induced cytotoxic effect could be blocked by
Shh (Sonic Hedgehog)-mediated Hh signalling activation. Inhibition of the Hh
pathway by cyclopamine could sensitize MCF-7 MS cells to paclitaxel. In addition,
salinomycin, but not paclitaxel, significantly reduced the tumour growth,
accompanied by decreased expression of PTCH, SMO, Gli1 and Gli2 in xenograft
tumours. Furthermore, the expression of SMO and Gli1 was positively correlated
with the expression of CD44+ / CD24-, and the expression of SMO and Gli1 in CD44+
/ CD24- tissues was associated with a significantly shorter OS (overall survival)
and DFS (disease-free survival) in breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMID: 26201092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2935-51. doi: 10.1172/JCI74929. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

Pharmacological GLI2 inhibition prevents myofibroblast cell-cycle progression and
reduces kidney fibrosis.

Kramann R, Fleig SV, Schneider RK, Fabian SL, DiRocco DP, Maarouf O, Wongboonsin 
J, Ikeda Y, Heckl D, Chang SL, Rennke HG, Waikar SS, Humphreys BD.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 Oct;11(10):568.

Chronic kidney disease is characterized by interstitial fibrosis and
proliferation of scar-secreting myofibroblasts, ultimately leading to end-stage
renal disease. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway transcriptional effectors GLI1 and GLI2 
are expressed in myofibroblast progenitors; however, the role of these effectors 
during fibrogenesis is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that GLI2, but
not GLI1, drives myofibroblast cell-cycle progression in cultured mesenchymal
stem cell-like progenitors. In animals exposed to unilateral ureteral
obstruction, Hh pathway suppression by expression of the GLI3 repressor in GLI1+ 
myofibroblast progenitors limited kidney fibrosis. Myofibroblast-specific
deletion of Gli2, but not Gli1, also limited kidney fibrosis, and induction of
myofibroblast-specific cell-cycle arrest mediated this inhibition. Pharmacologic 
targeting of this pathway with darinaparsin, an arsenical in clinical trials,
reduced fibrosis through reduction of GLI2 protein levels and subsequent
cell-cycle arrest in myofibroblasts. GLI2 overexpression rescued the cell-cycle
effect of darinaparsin in vitro. While darinaparsin ameliorated fibrosis in WT
and Gli1-KO mice, it was not effective in conditional Gli2-KO mice, supporting
GLI2 as a direct darinaparsin target. The GLI inhibitor GANT61 also reduced
fibrosis in mice. Finally, GLI1 and GLI2 were upregulated in the kidneys of
patients with high-grade fibrosis. Together, these data indicate that GLI
inhibition has potential as a therapeutic strategy to limit myofibroblast
proliferation in kidney fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4563736
PMID: 26193634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:147-56. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_13.

Determination of Acetylation of the Gli Transcription Factors.

Coni S(1), Di Magno L, Canettieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 324 Viale
Regina Elena, 00161, Rome, Italy.

The Gli transcription factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) are the final effectors of
the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling and play a key role in development and cancer. The
activity of the Gli proteins is finely regulated by covalent modifications, such 
as phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and acetylation. Both Gli1 and Gli2 are
acetylated at a conserved lysine, and this modification causes the inhibition of 
their transcriptional activity. Thus, the acetylation status of these proteins
represents a useful marker to monitor Hh activation in pathophysiological
conditions. Herein we describe the techniques utilized to detect in vitro and
intracellular acetylation of the Gli transcription factors.

PMID: 26179046  [PubMed - in process]


51. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:125-30. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_11.

Rapid Screening of Gli2/3 Mutants Using the Flp-In System.

Niewiadomski P(1), Rohatgi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 3
Pasteur Street, 02-093, Warszawa, Poland, p.niewiadomski@nencki.gov.pl.

Gli2 and Gli3 respond to the Hedgehog (Hh) signal in mammals by undergoing
posttranslational modifications and moving to the nucleus. The study of Gli
proteins has been hampered by the fact that their overexpression in cells
prevents their proper regulation. To address this issue, we have developed a
method of rapid generation of stable cell lines expressing near-endogenous and
approximately equal levels of wild-type and mutant Gli proteins. This method is
applicable to the study of effects of various mutations on Gli protein
modifications and activity.

PMID: 26179044  [PubMed - in process]


52. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:105-23. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_10.

Measuring Gli2 Phosphorylation by Selected Reaction Monitoring Mass Spectrometry.

Ahrends R(1), Niewiadomski P, Teruel MN, Rohatgi R.

Author information: 
(1)Project group Quantitative Systems Analysis, Leibniz-Institut für Analytische 
Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., 44227, Dortmund, Germany.

Phosphorylation is an important mechanism by which Gli proteins are regulated.
When the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is activated, multiple serine and threonine
residues of Gli2 are dephosphorylated, while at least one residue undergoes
phosphorylation. These changes in phosphorylation have functional relevance for
the transcriptional activity of Gli proteins, as shown by in vitro and in vivo
assays on Gli mutants lacking the phosphorylated residues. Here, we describe a
method of quantitatively monitoring the phosphorylation of Gli proteins by triple
quadrupole mass spectrometry of Gli2 immunoprecipitated from cell lysates. This
method is broadly applicable to the monitoring of phosphorylation changes of
immunoprecipitated Gli proteins when the putative phosphosites are known.

PMCID: PMC4699800
PMID: 26179043  [PubMed - in process]


53. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:81-92. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_8.

Measuring Expression Levels of Endogenous Gli Genes by Immunoblotting and
Real-Time PCR.

Niewiadomski P(1), Rohatgi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 02-093, 
Warszawa, Poland, p.niewiadomski@nencki.gov.pl.

Gli proteins are transcription factors that mediate the transcriptional effects
of Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates. The activities of Gli2 and Gli3 are
regulated primarily by posttranslational modifications, while Gli1 is mostly
regulated at the transcriptional level. Detection of endogenous Gli proteins had 
been hampered by lack of good antibodies, but this problem has been mostly
resolved in recent years. In this chapter we describe methods of detecting
expression of endogenous Gli genes in whole-cell lysates and in subcellular
fractions and also provide protocols for the measurement of Gli mRNA levels by
quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (qPCR).

PMID: 26179041  [PubMed - in process]


54. Nat Genet. 2015 Aug;47(8):933-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3355. Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Keratin-dependent regulation of Aire and gene expression in skin tumor
keratinocytes.

Hobbs RP(1), DePianto DJ(1), Jacob JT(1), Han MC(1), Chung BM(1), Batazzi AS(1), 
Poll BG(1), Guo Y(1), Han J(1), Ong S(2), Zheng W(1), Taube JM(3), Ciháková D(4),
Wan F(5), Coulombe PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)1] Department of Pathology,
School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2]
Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (4)1] Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (5)1] Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [3] Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 
(6)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department
of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA. [3] Department of Oncology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [4] Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [5] Department of
Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Expression of the intermediate filament protein keratin 17 (K17) is robustly
upregulated in inflammatory skin diseases and in many tumors originating in
stratified and pseudostratified epithelia. We report that autoimmune regulator
(Aire), a transcriptional regulator, is inducibly expressed in human and mouse
tumor keratinocytes in a K17-dependent manner and is required for timely onset of
Gli2-induced skin tumorigenesis in mice. The induction of Aire mRNA in
keratinocytes depends on a functional interaction between K17 and the
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein hnRNP K. Further, K17 colocalizes with
Aire protein in the nucleus of tumor-prone keratinocytes, and each factor is
bound to a specific promoter region featuring an NF-<U+03BA>B consensus sequence in a
relevant subset of K17- and Aire-dependent proinflammatory genes. These findings 
provide radically new insight into keratin intermediate filament and Aire
function, along with a molecular basis for the K17-dependent amplification of
inflammatory and immune responses in diseased epithelia.

PMCID: PMC4520766
PMID: 26168014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 11;17:92. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0603-2.

Tipping the balance between good and evil: aberrant 14-3-3<U+03B6> expression drives
oncogenic TGF-ß signaling in metastatic breast cancers.

Morrison CD(1), Schiemann WP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Wolstein
Research Building, 2103 Cornell Road, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA. cdm58@case.edu. 
(2)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Wolstein
Research Building, 2103 Cornell Road, Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA. wps20@case.edu.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß) readily suppresses the development of
early-stage breast cancers, an activity that gives way to tumor promotion in
their late-stage counterparts. The molecular mechanisms underlying this
mysterious switch in TGF-ß function remain murky. In addressing this conundrum,
Xu et al. observed aberrant 14-3-3<U+03B6> expression to prevent the formation of
tumor-suppressive Smad2/3:p53 complexes, while simultaneously driving the
generation of oncogenic Smad2/3:Gli2 complexes. Once formed, Smad2/3:Gli2
complexes stimulate the expression of parathyroid hormone-related protein
necessary for breast cancer metastasis to bone. This viewpoint highlights 14-3-3<U+03B6>
as an essential driver of oncogenic signaling by Smad2/3 and TGF-ß in metastatic 
breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4702299
PMID: 26160166  [PubMed - in process]


56. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2610-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.121616. Epub 2015 Jun
26.

Hedgehog signaling stimulates the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived 
progenitor cells in the chick retina.

Todd L(1), Fischer AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
4190 Graves Hall, 333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 4190 Graves Hall,
333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA fischer.412@osu.edu.

Müller glia can be stimulated to de-differentiate and become proliferating
progenitor cells that regenerate neurons in the retina. The signaling pathways
that regulate the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived progenitor cells
(MGPCs) are beginning to be revealed. The purpose of this study was to
investigate whether Hedgehog (Hh) signaling influences the formation of MGPCs in 
the chick retina. We find that Hh signaling is increased in damaged retinas where
MGPCs are known to form. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is normally present in the axons of
ganglion cells, but becomes associated with Müller glia and MGPCs following
retinal damage. Activation of Hh signaling with recombinant human SHH (rhShh) or 
smoothened agonist (SAG) increased levels of Ptch1, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, Hes1 and
Hes5, and stimulated the formation of proliferating MGPCs in damaged retinas. In 
undamaged retinas, SAG or rhShh had no apparent effect upon the Müller glia.
However, SAG combined with FGF2 potentiated the formation of MGPCs, whereas SAG
combined with IGF1 stimulated the nuclear migration of Müller glia, but not the
formation of MGPCs. Conversely, inhibition of Hh signaling with KAAD-cyclopamine,
Gli antagonists or antibody to Shh reduced numbers of proliferating MGPCs in
damaged and FGF2-treated retinas. Hh signaling potentiates Pax6, Klf4 and cFos
expression in Müller glia during the formation of MGPCs. We find that FGF2/MAPK
signaling recruits Hh signaling into the signaling network that drives the
formation of proliferating MGPCs. Our findings implicate Hh signaling as a key
component of the network of signaling pathways that promote the
de-differentiation of Müller glia and proliferation of MGPCs.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529028 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26116667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biomaterials. 2015 Sep;64:33-44. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.06.026. Epub
2015 Jun 16.

Matrix rigidity regulates the transition of tumor cells to a bone-destructive
phenotype through integrin ß3 and TGF-ß receptor type II.

Page JM(1), Merkel AR(2), Ruppender NS(1), Guo R(1), Dadwal UC(3), Cannonier
SA(4), Basu S(5), Guelcher SA(6), Sterling JA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37235, USA. (2)Department of Veterans Affairs: Tennessee Valley
Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37212, USA; Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Division of Clinical
Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA; Center for Bone Biology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (4)Department of 
Veterans Affairs: Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37212, USA;
Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (5)Agilent Technologies, Chandler, AZ 85226, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37235, USA; Center for Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA. (7)Department of Veterans
Affairs: Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 37212, USA; Center for
Bone Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA;
Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Cancer Biology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. Electronic
address: julie.sterling@vanderbilt.edu.

Cancer patients frequently develop skeletal metastases that significantly impact 
quality of life. Since bone metastases remain incurable, a clearer understanding 
of molecular mechanisms regulating skeletal metastases is required to develop new
therapeutics that block establishment of tumors in bone. While many studies have 
suggested that the microenvironment contributes to bone metastases, the factors
mediating tumors to progress from a quiescent to a bone-destructive state remain 
unclear. In this study, we hypothesized that the "soil" of the bone
microenvironment, specifically the rigid mineralized extracellular matrix,
stimulates the transition of the tumor cells to a bone-destructive phenotype. To 
test this hypothesis, we synthesized 2D polyurethane (PUR) films with elastic
moduli ranging from the basement membrane (70 MPa) to cortical bone (3800 MPa)
and measured expression of genes associated with mechanotransduction and bone
metastases. We found that expression of Integrin ß3 (Iß3), as well as
tumor-produced factors associated with bone destruction (Gli2 and parathyroid
hormone related protein (PTHrP)), significantly increased with matrix rigidity,
and that blocking Iß3 reduced Gli2 and PTHrP expression. To identify the
mechanism by which Iß3 regulates Gli2 and PTHrP (both are also known to be
regulated by TGF-ß), we performed Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) and
immunoprecipitation, which indicated that Iß3 co-localized with TGF-ß Receptor
Type II (TGF-ß RII) on rigid but not compliant films. Finally, transplantation of
tumor cells expressing Iß3 shRNA into the tibiae of athymic nude mice
significantly reduced PTHrP and Gli2 expression, as well as bone destruction,
suggesting a crucial role for tumor-produced Iß3 in disease progression. This
study demonstrates that the rigid mineralized bone matrix can alter gene
expression and bone destruction in an Iß3/TGF-ß-dependent manner, and suggests
that Iß3 inhibitors are a potential therapeutic approach for blocking tumor
transition to a bone destructive phenotype.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4681301 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26115412  [PubMed - in process]


58. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jun;94(25):e998. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000998.

GLI1 Transcription Factor Affects Tumor Aggressiveness in Patients With Papillary
Thyroid Cancers.

Lee J(1), Jeong S, Lee CR, Ku CR, Kang SW, Jeong JJ, Nam KH, Shin DY, Chung WY,
Lee EJ, Jo YS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery (JL, CRL, S-WK, JJJ, K-HN, WYC); and Department
of Internal Medicine (SJ, CRK, DYS, EJL, YSJ), Open NBI Convergence Technology
Research Laboratory, Severance Hospital, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

A significant proportion of patients with papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) present 
with extrathyroidal extension (ETE) and lymph node metastasis (LNM). However, the
molecular mechanism of tumor invasiveness in PTC remains to be elucidated. The
aim of this study is to understand the role of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in tumor
aggressiveness in patients with PTC. Subjects were patients who underwent
thyroidectomy from 2012 to 2013 in a single institution. Frozen or
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues with contralateral-matched normal thyroid tissues
were collected. Hh signaling activity was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Datasets from Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) (National Center for Biotechnology Information) were subjected to
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). BRAFT1799A and telomerase reverse
transcriptase promoter mutation C228T were analyzed by direct sequencing. Among
137 patients with PTC, glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1) group III
(patients in whom the ratio of GLI1 messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) level in
tumor tissue to GLI1 mRNA level in matched normal tissue was in the upper third
of the subject population) had elevated risk for ETE (odds ratio [OR] 4.381, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] 1.414-13.569, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01) and LNM (OR 5.627, 95% CI
1.674-18.913, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.005). Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 2 (GLI2) group III
also had elevated risk for ETE (OR 4.152, 95% CI 1.292-13.342, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.017) and LNM
(OR 3.924, 95% CI 1.097-14.042, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036). GSEA suggested that higher GLI1
expression is associated with expression of the KEGG gene set related to axon
guidance (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.031, false discovery rate<U+200A><<U+200A>0.05), as verified by qRT-PCR and IHC
staining in our subjects.GLI1 and GLI2 expressions were clearly related to
aggressive clinicopathological features and aberrant activation of GLI1 involved 
in the axon guidance pathway. These results may contribute to development of new 
prognostic markers, as well as novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4504527
PMID: 26107686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Craniofac Surg. 2015 Jul;26(5):1600-5. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000001526.

Irf6-Related Gene Regulatory Network Involved in Palate and Lip Development.

Dai J(1), Yu H, Si J, Fang B, Shen SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Craniomaxillofacial Science, Shanghai Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.

Numerous genes including Irf6 have been revealed to contribute to cleft lip with 
or without cleft palate (CL/P). In this study, we performed a systematic
bioinformatics analysis of Irf6-related gene regulatory network involved in
palate and lip development by using GeneDecks, DAVID, STRING, and GeneMANIA
database. Our results showed that many CL/P candidate genes have relation with
Irf6, and 9 of these genes, including Msx1, Pvrl1, Pax9, Jag2, Irf6, Tgfb3, Rara,
Gli2, and Tgfb2, were enriched into the CL/P gene group. Some of these 9 genes
also were commonly involved in different signaling pathways and different
biological processes, and they also have protein-protein interactions with Irf6. 
These findings make us analyze the intricate function of Irf6 in a CL/P gene
regulatory network, followed by guiding us to perform further functional studies 
on these genes in the future. This method also offers us a simple, cheap, but
useful method to analyze the relationship with a gene regulatory network of a
certain disease such as CL/P.

PMID: 26086926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 11;5:9746. doi: 10.1038/srep09746.

Convergence behaviour and Control in Non-Linear Biological Networks.

Karl S(1), Dandekar T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074
Würzburg, Germany.

Control of genetic regulatory networks is challenging to define and quantify.
Previous control centrality metrics, which aim to capture the ability of
individual nodes to control the system, have been found to suffer from
plausibility and applicability problems. Here we present a new approach to
control centrality based on network convergence behaviour, implemented as an
extension of our genetic regulatory network simulation framework Jimena (
http://stefan-karl.de/jimena). We distinguish three types of network control, and
show how these mathematical concepts correspond to experimentally verified node
functions and signalling pathways in immunity and cell differentiation: Total
control centrality quantifies the impact of node mutations and identifies
potential pharmacological targets such as genes involved in oncogenesis (e.g.
zinc finger protein GLI2 or bone morphogenetic proteins in chondrocytes). Dynamic
control centrality describes relaying functions as observed in signalling
cascades (e.g. src kinase or Jak/Stat pathways). Value control centrality
measures the direct influence of the value of the node on the network (e.g.
Indian hedgehog as an essential regulator of proliferation in chondrocytes).
Surveying random scale-free networks and biological networks, we find that
control of the network resides in few high degree driver nodes and networks can
be controlled best if they are sparsely connected.

PMCID: PMC4464179
PMID: 26068060  [PubMed - in process]


61. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Jun 10;7(291):291ra96. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa5731.

Integration of Hedgehog and mutant FLT3 signaling in myeloid leukemia.

Lim Y(1), Gondek L(1), Li L(1), Wang Q(1), Ma H(1), Chang E(1), Huso DL(1),
Foerster S(1), Marchionni L(1), McGovern K(2), Watkins DN(3), Peacock CD(4),
Levis M(1), Smith BD(1), Merchant AA(5), Small D(6), Matsui W(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. (2)Infinity
Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (3)Cancer Developmental Biology, The
Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New
South Wales 2010, Australia. (4)Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (6)Department of
Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. Department of Pediatrics, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. (7)Department of
Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. matsuwi@jhmi.edu.

Erratum in
    Sci Transl Med. 2015 Jul 8;7(295):295er6. Ma, Haley [corrected to Ma, Hayley].

FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations
resulting in constitutive kinase activity are common in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) and carry a poor prognosis. Several agents targeting FLT3 have been
developed, but their limited clinical activity suggests that the inhibition of
other factors contributing to the malignant phenotype is required. We examined
gene expression data sets as well as primary specimens and found that the
expression of GLI2, a major effector of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, was 
increased in FLT3-ITD compared to wild-type FLT3 AML. To examine the functional
role of the Hh pathway, we studied mice in which Flt3-ITD expression results in
an indolent myeloproliferative state and found that constitutive Hh signaling
accelerated the development of AML by enhancing signal transducer and activator
of transcription 5 (STAT5) signaling and the proliferation of bone marrow myeloid
progenitors. Furthermore, combined FLT3 and Hh pathway inhibition limited
leukemic growth in vitro and in vivo, and this approach may serve as a
therapeutic strategy for FLT3-ITD AML.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4644635
PMID: 26062848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 4;10(6):e0128350. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128350.
eCollection 2015.

Putative regulatory factors associated with intramuscular fat content.

Cesar AS(1), Regitano LC(2), Koltes JE(3), Fritz-Waters ER(3), Lanna DP(1),
Gasparin G(1), Mourão GB(1), Oliveira PS(4), Reecy JM(3), Coutinho LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of São Paulo, Piracicaba, SP,
13418-900, Brazil. (2)Embrapa Southeast-Cattle Research Center, São Carlos, SP,
13560-970, Brazil. (3)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, 
IA, 50011, United States of America. (4)Department of Genetics and Evolution,
Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, SP, 13565-905, Brazil.

Intramuscular fat (IMF) content is related to insulin resistance, which is an
important prediction factor for disorders, such as cardiovascular disease,
obesity and type 2 diabetes in human. At the same time, it is an economically
important trait, which influences the sensorial and nutritional value of meat.
The deposition of IMF is influenced by many factors such as sex, age, nutrition, 
and genetics. In this study Nellore steers (Bos taurus indicus subspecies) were
used to better understand the molecular mechanisms involved in IMF content. This 
was accomplished by identifying differentially expressed genes (DEG), biological 
pathways and putative regulatory factors. Animals included in this study had
extreme genomic estimated breeding value (GEBV) for IMF. RNA-seq analysis, gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) and co-expression network methods, such as partial
correlation coefficient with information theory (PCIT), regulatory impact factor 
(RIF) and phenotypic impact factor (PIF) were utilized to better understand
intramuscular adipogenesis. A total of 16,101 genes were analyzed in both groups 
(high (H) and low (L) GEBV) and 77 DEG (FDR 10%) were identified between the two 
groups. Pathway Studio software identified 13 significantly over-represented
pathways, functional classes and small molecule signaling pathways within the DEG
list. PCIT analyses identified genes with a difference in the number of gene-gene
correlations between H and L group and detected putative regulatory factors
involved in IMF content. Candidate genes identified by PCIT include: ANKRD26,
HOXC5 and PPAPDC2. RIF and PIF analyses identified several candidate genes: GLI2 
and IGF2 (RIF1), MPC1 and UBL5 (RIF2) and a host of small RNAs, including
miR-1281 (PIF). These findings contribute to a better understanding of the
molecular mechanisms that underlie fat content and energy balance in muscle and
provide important information for the production of healthier beef for human
consumption.

PMCID: PMC4456163
PMID: 26042666  [PubMed - in process]


63. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun 1. pii: mjv034. [Epub ahead of print]

In vivo epigenetic reprogramming of primary human colon cancer cells enhances
metastases.

Singovski G(1), Bernal C(1), Kuciak M(1), Siegl-Cachedenier I(1), Conod A(1),
Ruiz I Altaba A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland. (2)Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland
Ariel.RuizAltaba@unige.ch.

How metastases develop is not well understood and no genetic mutations have been 
reported as specific metastatic drivers. Here we have addressed the idea that
epigenetic reprogramming by GLI-regulated pluripotent stemness factors promotes
metastases. Using primary human colon cancer cells engrafted in mice, we find
that transient expression of OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 +/- cMYC establishes an enhanced
pro-metastatic state in the primary tumor that is stable through sequential
engraftments and is transmitted through clonogenic cancer stem cells. Metastatic 
reprogramming alters NANOG methylation and stably boosts NANOG and NANOGP8
expression. Metastases and reprogrammed EMT-like phenotypes require endogenous
NANOG, but enhanced NANOG is not sufficient to induce these phenotypes. Finally, 
reprogrammed tumors enhance GLI2, and we show that GLI2(high) and AXIN2(low),
which are markers of the metastatic transition of colon cancers, are prognostic
of poor disease outcome in patients. We propose that metastases arise through
epigenetic reprogramming of cancer stem cells within primary tumors.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS.

PMID: 26031752  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


64. Front Neuroanat. 2015 May 13;9:58. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00058. eCollection
2015.

Corrigendum: Differential requirements for Gli2 and Gli3 in the regional
specification of the mouse hypothalamus.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Paul FA(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Theil T(3), Puelles L(4),
Blaess S(2), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Neurodevelopmental Genetics, Life and Brain Center, Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn Bonn, Germany. (3)Centre for
Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh Edinburgh, UK. (4)Department of
Morphology, University of Murcia and IMIB, Murcia Murcia, Spain.

PMCID: PMC4429587
PMID: 26029060  [PubMed]


65. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Dec;22(12):2006-19. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.56. Epub 2015
May 29.

HEDGEHOG/GLI-E2F1 axis modulates iASPP expression and function and regulates
melanoma cell growth.

Pandolfi S(1), Montagnani V(1), Lapucci A(2), Stecca B(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori (CRL-ITT), Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Health Sciences, Section of
Clinical Pharmacology and Oncology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, Florence,
Italy.

HEDGEHOG (HH) signaling is a key regulator of tissue development and its aberrant
activation is involved in several cancer types, including melanoma. We and others
have shown a reciprocal cross talk between HH signaling and p53, whose function
is often impaired in melanoma. Here we present evidence that both GLI1 and GLI2, 
the final effectors of HH signaling, regulate the transcription factor E2F1 in
melanoma cells, by binding to a functional non-canonical GLI consensus sequence. 
Consistently, we find a significant correlation between E2F1 and PATCHED1
(PTCH1), GLI1 and GLI2 expression in human melanomas. Functionally, we find that 
E2F1 is a crucial mediator of HH signaling and it is required for melanoma cell
proliferation and xenograft growth induced by activation of the HH pathway.
Interestingly, we present evidence that the HH/GLI-E2F1 axis positively modulates
the inhibitor of apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53 (iASPP) at multiple levels.
HH activation induces iASPP expression through E2F1, which directly binds to
iASPP promoter. HH pathway also contributes to iASPP function, by the induction
of Cyclin B1 and by the E2F1-dependent regulation of CDK1, which are both
involved in iASPP activation. Our data show that activation of HH signaling
enhances proliferation in presence of E2F1 and promotes apoptosis in its absence 
or upon CDK1 inhibition, suggesting that E2F1/iASPP dictates the outcome of HH
signaling in melanoma. Together, these findings identify a novel
HH/GLI-E2F1-iASPP axis that regulates melanoma cell growth and survival,
providing an additional mechanism through which HH signaling restrains p53
proapoptotic function.

PMID: 26024388  [PubMed - in process]


66. Development. 2015 Jun 15;142(12):2194-202. doi: 10.1242/dev.115261. Epub 2015 May
28.

Intraflagellar transport 27 is essential for hedgehog signaling but dispensable
for ciliogenesis during hair follicle morphogenesis.

Yang N(1), Li L(2), Eguether T(3), Sundberg JP(4), Pazour GJ(3), Chen J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Dermatology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
NY 11794, USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Beijing 100730, China. (3)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (4)The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA. (5)Departments of Pathology and
Dermatology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
jiang.chen@stonybrook.edu.

Erratum in
    Development. 2015 Aug 15;142(16):2860.

Hair follicle morphogenesis requires precisely controlled reciprocal
communications, including hedgehog (Hh) signaling. Activation of the Hh signaling
pathway relies on the primary cilium. Disrupting ciliogenesis results in hair
follicle morphogenesis defects due to attenuated Hh signaling; however, the loss 
of cilia makes it impossible to determine whether hair follicle phenotypes in
these cilia mutants are caused by the loss of cilia, disruption of Hh signaling, 
or a combination of these events. In this study, we characterized the function of
Ift27, which encodes a subunit of intraflagellar transport (IFT) complex B. Hair 
follicle morphogenesis of Ift27-null mice was severely impaired, reminiscent of
phenotypes observed in cilia and Hh mutants. Furthermore, the Hh signaling
pathway was attenuated in Ift27 mutants, which was in association with abnormal
ciliary trafficking of SMO and GLI2, and impaired processing of Gli transcription
factors; however, formation of the ciliary axoneme was unaffected. The ciliary
localization of IFT25 (HSPB11), the binding partner of IFT27, was disrupted in
Ift27 mutant cells, and Ift25-null mice displayed hair follicle phenotypes
similar to those of Ift27 mutants. These data suggest that Ift27 and Ift25
operate in a genetically and functionally dependent manner during hair follicle
morphogenesis. This study suggests that the molecular trafficking machineries
underlying ciliogenesis and Hh signaling can be segregated, thereby providing
important insights into new avenues of inhibiting Hh signaling, which might be
adopted in the development of targeted therapies for Hh-dependent cancers, such
as basal cell carcinoma.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4483764 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 26023097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. RNA Biol. 2015;12(7):681-9. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1053687.

LncRNA BCAR4 wires up signaling transduction in breast cancer.

Xing Z(1), Park PK, Lin C, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology; MD Anderson Cancer Center;
The University of Texas ; Houston , TX , USA.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are dysregulated in many cancer types and are
believed to play crucial roles in regulating several hallmarks of cancer biology.
Currently, most studies support the concept that lncRNAs are involved in either
transcriptional or post-transcriptional processes via binding/targeting
epigenetic modifiers or hRNP complexes. The discovery of new biological functions
of lncRNA and novel RNA binding proteins suggests that lncRNAs may be implicated 
in a broad spectrum of biological processes such as signal transduction,
allosteric regulation of cytoplasmic enzymatic activities, among other potential 
processes. In a recent report that we have made, based on open-ended lncRNA
pulldown technology and a series of systematic analyses, we suggest that lncRNAs 
also play critical roles in the regulation of noncanonical Hedgehog/GLI 2 signal 
transduction pathways in cancer cells, which further broadens the scope of known 
lncRNA functions and aids in the discovery and design of more effective and
evidence-based therapeutic targets for the treatment of human cancers and other
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4615247 [Available on 2016-05-27]
PMID: 26016563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Aug;11(8):2190-7. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00129c.

Fuzzy modeling reveals a dynamic self-sustaining network of the GLI transcription
factors controlling important metabolic regulators in adult mouse hepatocytes.

Schmidt-Heck W(1), Matz-Soja M, Aleithe S, Marbach E, Guthke R, Gebhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans
Knoell Institute, Beutenbergstr. 11a, 07745 Jena, Germany.
Wolfgang.Schmidt-Heck@hki-jena.de.

The GLI transcription factors, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, transduce Hedgehog and
non-hedgehog signals and are involved in regulating development and tumorgenesis.
Surprisingly, they were recently found to modulate important functions of mature 
liver. However, less is known about their mutual interactions and possible target
genes in mature hepatocytes. To get a deeper insight into these interactions
cultured mouse hepatocytes were transfected with siRNAs against each GLI factor. 
RNA was extracted at different times and the expression levels of the genes of
interest were determined by quantitative real-time PCR. The time-dependent data
were analysed by a fuzzy logic-based modelling approach. The results indicated
that the GLI factors constitute an interconnected network. GLI2 inhibited GLI1
expression and was coupled with GLI3 by a positive feedback loop. The regulatory 
activity between GLI1 and GLI3 was more complex switching between a positive and 
a negative feedback loop depending on whether the level of GLI2 is low or high,
respectively. Generally, this network structure enables a dynamic behaviour. When
GLI2 is low, it may keep GLI1 and GLI3 activity balanced favouring the
appropriate modulation of transcription factors like the Ppars and Srebp1. When
GLI2 is high, it may prevent an uncontrolled amplification that may lead to
cancer. In conclusion, the three GLI factors in mature hepatocytes form an
interactive transcriptional network that is involved in the control of target
genes associated with metabolic zonation as well as with lipid and drug
metabolism. Its structure in mature cells seems different from embryonic cells.

PMID: 26010061  [PubMed - in process]


69. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Aug;58(8):419-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.05.001. Epub
2015 May 21.

Array-based DNA methylation analysis in individuals with developmental
delay/intellectual disability and normal molecular karyotype.

Kolarova J(1), Tangen I(1), Bens S(1), Gillessen-Kaesbach G(2), Gutwein J(1),
Kautza M(1), Rydzanicz M(3), Stephani U(4), Siebert R(1), Ammerpohl O(1), Caliebe
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel & University 
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (2)Institut für
Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. (3)Institute of Human
Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Strzeszynska 32 St, 60-479 Poznan, Poland. 
(4)Department of Neuropediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (5)Institute of Human Genetics,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel & University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. Electronic address: caliebe@medgen.uni-kiel.de.

Despite recent progress in molecular karyotyping and clinical sequencing the
cause of intellectual disability in a considerable subset of individuals affected
by this phenotype remains elusive. As intellectual disability is also a feature
of various imprinting disorders and some monogenic forms of intellectual
disability are caused by epigenetic modifiers we hypothesized that changes in DNA
methylation might be associated with or even causative in some cases of
intellectual disability. Therefore, we performed a DNA methylation analysis of
peripheral blood samples from 82 patients with intellectual disability and
additional features using the HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. The findings were
compared to that of 19 normal controls. Differentially methylated loci were
validated by bisulfite pyrosequencing. On a global level, we failed to detect a
robust DNA methylation signature segregating individuals with intellectual
disability from controls. Using an individual approach, we identified 157 regions
showing individual DNA methylation changes in at least one patient. These
correlated to 107 genes including genes linked to conditions associated with
intellectual disability, namely COLEC11, SHANK2, GLI2 and KCNQ2, as well as
imprinted genes like FAM50B and MEG3. The latter was suggestive of an undiagnosed
Temple syndrome which could be confirmed by diagnostic tests. Subsequent in-depth
analysis of imprinted loci revealed DNA methylation changes at additional
imprinted loci, i.e. PPIEL, IGF2R, MEG8 and MCTS2/HM13, in up to five patients.
Our findings indicate that imprinting disorders are rare but probably
under-diagnosed in patients with intellectual disability and moreover point to
DNA methylation changes as potential alternative means to identify deregulated
genes involved in the pathogenesis of intellectual disability.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26003415  [PubMed - in process]


70. PLoS One. 2015 May 22;10(5):e0128006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128006.
eCollection 2015.

Suppressor of Fused Is Required for Determining Digit Number and Identity via
Gli3/Fgfs/Gremlin.

Li J(1), Wang Q(1), Cui Y(1), Yang X(1), Li Y(1), Zhang X(1), Qiu M(2), Zhang
Z(3), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China;
Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky 40292, United States of America. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
United States of America.

The anterior-posterior patterning of the vertebrate limb bud requires closely
coordinated signaling interactions, including Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)-mediated
counteraction of the Gli3 transcription factor in the distal and posterior
mesenchyme of the limb bud. Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), an intracellular negative
regulator of Shh signaling via Gli2 and Gli3, is implicated in early development 
of the mouse limb bud. However, how Sufu is involved in the genetic regulation of
limb bud patterning still remains elusive. In this study, we show that the
conditional deletion of Sufu in the mesenchyme of the early limb bud results in
polydactyly with loss of digit identity and supernumerary bones in the wrist and 
the ankle. These pattern alterations are associated with anterior expansion of
HoxD genes located at the 5' end of the cluster. By focusing on gene expression
analysis of Shh/Gremlin1/Fgf signaling critical for the establishment and
maintenance of anterior-posterior patterning, we show that early response to loss
of Sufu involves anterior prolongation of Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression in the apical 
ectodermal ridge at E10.5. We also reveal the anterior activation of
Shh-dependent posterior markers Ptc1, Gli1 and Gremlin in limb buds lacking Sufu.
Furthermore, we find that loss of Sufu leads to attenuated levels of repressor
Gli2 and repressor Gli3 in the early limb bud. Moreover, expression of Hand2 is
activated in the entire limb bud at the early outgrowth stage in the mutant
lacking Sufu. Thus, we provide evidence that Sufu is involved in the genetic
network that restricts the posterior expression of Gli2/3/Hand2 and Gremlin/Fgf
in limb bud patterning.

PMCID: PMC4441507
PMID: 26001200  [PubMed - in process]


71. Sci Rep. 2015 May 20;5:10364. doi: 10.1038/srep10364.

Cell context-specific expression of primary cilia in the human testis and ciliary
coordination of Hedgehog signalling in mouse Leydig cells.

Nygaard MB(1), Almstrup K(2), Lindbæk L(3), Christensen ST(3), Svingen T(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Copenhagen University
Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark [2] Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (2)University Department
of Growth and Reproduction, Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet),
Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (3)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (4)1] University Department of Growth and
Reproduction, Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen
DK-2100, Denmark [2] Department of Toxicology and Risk Assessment, National Food 
Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Søborg DK-2860, Denmark.

Primary cilia are sensory organelles that coordinate numerous cellular signalling
pathways during development and adulthood. Defects in ciliary assembly or
function lead to a series of developmental disorders and diseases commonly
referred to as ciliopathies. Still, little is known about the formation and
function of primary cilia in the mammalian testis. Here, we characterized primary
cilia in adult human testis and report a constitutive expression of cilia in
peritubular myoid cells and a dynamic expression of cilia in differentiating
Leydig cells. Primary cilia are generally absent from cells of mature
seminiferous epithelium, but present in Sertoli cell-only tubules in Klinefelter 
syndrome testis. Peritubular cells in atrophic testis produce overly long cilia. 
Furthermore cultures of growth-arrested immature mouse Leydig cells express
primary cilia that are enriched in components of Hedgehog signalling, including
Smoothened, Patched-1, and GLI2, which are involved in regulating Leydig cell
differentiation. Stimulation of Hedgehog signalling increases the localization of
Smoothened to the cilium, which is followed by transactivation of the Hedgehog
target genes, Gli1 and Ptch1. Our findings provide new information on the
spatiotemporal formation of primary cilia in the testis and show that primary
cilia in immature Leydig cells mediate Hedgehog signalling.

PMCID: PMC4438617
PMID: 25992706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Oct;167A(10):2491-2. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37160. Epub 2015 
May 14.

GLI2 mutations typically result in pituitary anomalies with or without postaxial 
polydactyly.

Bear KA(1), Solomon BD(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tripler Army Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawaii.
(2)Inova Translational Medicine Institute, Inova Health System, Falls Church,
Virginia. (3)Inova Translational Medicine Institute and Inova Children's
Hospital, Inova Health System, Falls Church, Virginia. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond,
Virginia.

PMID: 25974718  [PubMed - in process]


73. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jun;33(6):2963-71. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3935. Epub 2015 Apr 28.

Screening of differential microRNA expression in gastric signet ring cell
carcinoma and gastric adenocarcinoma and target gene prediction.

Chen J(1), Sun D(1), Chu H(1), Gong Z(2), Zhang C(1), Gong B(1), Li Y(1), Li
N(1), Jiang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital Affiliated to Qingdao
University, Yantai, Shandong 264000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology,
Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital Affiliated to Qingdao University, Yantai, Shandong
264000, P.R. China. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Yantai Yuhuangding
Hospital Affiliated to Qingdao University, Yantai, Shandong 264000, P.R. China.

Gastric signet ring cell carcinoma (GSRCC) is a unique pathological type of
gastric carcinoma that is extremely invasive and has a poor prognosis after
diagnosis. The expression of microRNAs has been closely linked to the
carcinogenesis of gastric cancer and has been considered as a powerful prognostic
marker. Distinctive expression of miRNAs in GSRCC was investigated in the present
study. Samples of GSRCC were compared to that of intestinal gastric
adenocarcinoma using Agilent microarray technique, and two differentially
expressed miRNAs were identified, hsa-miR-665 and hsa-miR-95. qRT-PCR
verification showed downregulation of both miRNAs in signet ring cell carcinoma
and upregulation in gastric adenocarcinoma, which was not consistent with the
results obtained by the microarray. Target gene prediction using online databases
conferred two strong candidate genes, GLI2 and PLCG1. GO/KO analysis of these two
genes showed close correlations with carcinogenesis and chemoresistance. It was
concluded that hsa-miR-665 and hsa-miR-95 were downregulated in GSRCC but
upregulated in intestinal gastric adenocarcinoma, and the relatively differential
expression of the miRNAs negatively controlling their target genes could be
closely related to the high invasive metastasis and chemoresistance of GSRCC.

PMID: 25964059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Apr 17;8:877-83. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S71034. eCollection
2015.

Synergistic inhibition of colon carcinoma cell growth by Hedgehog-Gli1 inhibitor 
arsenic trioxide and phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002.

Cai X(1), Yu K(1), Zhang L(2), Li Y(1), Li Q(1), Yang Z(1), Shen T(1), Duan L(3),
Xiong W(1), Wang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Colorectal Cancer Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pathology, The 
Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, People's Republic of China.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway not only plays important roles in
embryogenesis and adult tissue homeostasis, but also in tumorigenesis. Aberrant
Hh pathway activation has been reported in a variety of malignant tumors
including colon carcinoma. Here, we sought to investigate the regulation of the
Hh pathway transcription factor Gli1 by arsenic trioxide and phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor LY294002 in colon carcinoma cells. We transfected cells
with siGli1 and observed a significant reduction of Gli1 expression in HCT116 and
HT29 cells, which was confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction and Western blots. Knocking down endogenous Gli1 reduced colon carcinoma
cell viability through inducing cell apoptosis. Similarly, knocking down Gli2
using short interfering RNA impaired colon carcinoma cell growth in vitro. To
elucidate the regulation of Gli1 expression, we found that both Gli inhibitor
arsenic trioxide and PI3K inhibitor LY294002 significantly reduced Gli1 protein
expression and colon carcinoma cell proliferation. Arsenic trioxide treatment
also reduced Gli1 downstream target gene expression, such as Bcl2 and CCND1. More
importantly, the inhibition of Hedgehog-Gli1 by arsenic trioxide showed
synergistic anticancer effect with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 in colon carcinoma
cells. Our findings suggest that the Hh pathway transcription factor Gli1 is
involved in the regulation of colon carcinoma cell viability. Inhibition of
Hedgehog-Gli1 expression by arsenic trioxide and PI3K inhibitor synergistically
reduces colon cancer cell proliferation, indicating that they could be used as an
effective anti-colon cancer combination therapy.

PMCID: PMC4407746
PMID: 25945059  [PubMed]


75. Stem Cells. 2015 Aug;33(8):2496-508. doi: 10.1002/stem.2043. Epub 2015 May 26.

Noggin-Mediated Retinal Induction Reveals a Novel Interplay Between Bone
Morphogenetic Protein Inhibition, Transforming Growth Factor ß, and Sonic
Hedgehog Signaling.

Messina A(1), Lan L(2), Incitti T(1), Bozza A(1), Andreazzoli M(2), Vignali R(2),
Cremisi F(3), Bozzi Y(1,)(4), Casarosa S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy. (2)Department of Biology,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy. (4)CNR
Institute of Neuroscience, Pisa, Italy.

It has long been known that the depletion of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) is 
one of the key factors necessary for the development of anterior neuroectodermal 
structures. However, the precise molecular mechanisms that underlie forebrain
regionalization are still not completely understood. Here, we show that Noggin1
is involved in the regionalization of anterior neural structures in a
dose-dependent manner. Low doses of Noggin1 expand prosencephalic territories,
while higher doses specify diencephalic and retinal regions at the expense of
telencephalic areas. A similar dose-dependent mechanism determines the ability of
Noggin1 to convert pluripotent cells in prosencephalic or diencephalic/retinal
precursors, as shown by transplant experiments and molecular analyses. At a
molecular level, the strong inhibition of BMP signaling exerted by high doses of 
Noggin1 reinforces the Nodal/transforming growth factor (TGF)ß signaling pathway,
leading to activation of Gli1 and Gli2 and subsequent activation of Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) signaling. We propose a new role for Noggin1 in determining
specific anterior neural structures by the modulation of TGFß and SHH signaling.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25913744  [PubMed - in process]


76. Cerebellum. 2015 Dec;14(6):688-98. doi: 10.1007/s12311-015-0672-x.

MicroRNAs Promote Granule Cell Expansion in the Cerebellum Through Gli2.

Constantin L(1), Wainwright BJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, 306 Carmody 
Road, St Lucia, Queensland, 4072, Australia. l.constantin@uq.edu.au. (2)Institute
for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, 306 Carmody Road, St
Lucia, Queensland, 4072, Australia.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulators of cerebellar function and
homeostasis. Their deregulation results in cerebellar neuronal degeneration and
spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 and contributes to medulloblastoma. Canonical miRNA
processing involves Dicer, which cleaves precursor miRNAs into mature
double-stranded RNA duplexes. In order to address the role of miRNAs in
cerebellar granule cell precursor development, loxP-flanked exons of Dicer1 were 
conditionally inactivated using the granule cell precursor-specific Atoh1-Cre
recombinase. A reduction of 87% in Dicer1 transcript was achieved in this
conditional Dicer knockdown model. Although knockdown resulted in normal
survival, mice had disruptions to the cortical layering of the anterior
cerebellum, which resulted from the premature differentiation of granule cell
precursors in this region during neonatal development. This defect manifested as 
a thinner external granular layer with ectopic mature granule cells, and a
depleted internal granular layer. We found that expression of the activator
components of the Hedgehog-Patched pathway, the Gli family of transcription
factors, was perturbed in conditional Dicer knockdown mice. We propose that loss 
of Gli2 mRNA mediated the anterior-restricted defect in conditional Dicer
knockdown mice and, as proof of principle, were able to show that miR-106b
positively regulated Gli2 mRNA expression. These findings confirm the importance 
of miRNAs as positive mediators of Hedgehog-Patched signalling during granule
cell precursor development.

PMID: 25910616  [PubMed - in process]


77. J Cell Sci. 2015 Jun 1;128(11):2085-95. doi: 10.1242/jcs.165803. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

The transcriptional activator Gli2 modulates T-cell receptor signalling through
attenuation of AP-1 and NF<U+03BA>B activity.

Furmanski AL(1), Barbarulo A(2), Solanki A(2), Lau CI(2), Sahni H(2), Saldana
JI(2), D'Acquisto F(3), Crompton T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Section, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London WC1N 1EH, UK anna.furmanski@beds.ac.uk. (2)Immunobiology Section,
Institute of Child Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(3)Centre for Biochemical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, QMUL, 
London EC1M 6BQ, UK.

Different tissues contain diverse and dynamic cellular niches, providing distinct
signals to tissue-resident or migratory infiltrating immune cells. Hedgehog (Hh) 
proteins are secreted inter-cellular signalling molecules, which are essential
during development and are important in cancer, post-natal tissue homeostasis and
repair. Hh signalling mediated by the Hh-responsive transcription factor Gli2
also has multiple roles in T-lymphocyte development and differentiation. Here, we
investigate the function of Gli2 in T-cell signalling and activation. Gene
transcription driven by the Gli2 transcriptional activator isoform (Gli2A)
attenuated T-cell activation and proliferation following T-cell receptor (TCR)
stimulation. Expression of Gli2A in T-cells altered gene expression profiles,
impaired the TCR-induced Ca(2+) flux and nuclear expression of NFAT2, suppressed 
upregulation of molecules essential for activation, and attenuated signalling
pathways upstream of the AP-1 and NF<U+03BA>B complexes, leading to reduced activation
of these important transcription factors. Inhibition of physiological
Hh-dependent transcription increased NF<U+03BA>B activity upon TCR ligation. These data 
are important for understanding the molecular mechanisms of immunomodulation,
particularly in tissues where Hh proteins or other Gli-activating ligands such as
TGFß are upregulated, including during inflammation, tissue damage and repair,
and in tumour microenvironments.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4450292
PMID: 25908851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Transl Med. 2015 Mar 21;13:98. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0453-9.

GLI2 inhibition abrogates human leukemia stem cell dormancy.

Sadarangani A(1,)(2), Pineda G(3), Lennon KM(4), Chun HJ(5), Shih A(6), Schairer 
AE(7), Court AC(8), Goff DJ(9), Prashad SL(10), Geron I(11), Wall R(12),
McPherson JD(13), Moore RA(14), Pu M(15), Bao L(16), Jackson-Fisher A(17),
Munchhof M(18), VanArsdale T(19), Reya T(20), Morris SR(21), Minden MD(22,)(23), 
Messer K(24), Mikkola HK(25), Marra MA(26), Hudson TJ(27), Jamieson CH(28,)(29).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores Cancer Center, University
of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA.
asadarangani@ucsd.edu. (2)Division of Regenerative Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0820, USA. 
asadarangani@ucsd.edu. (3)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores
Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La
Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. gpineda@ucsd.edu. (4)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell
Program and Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health
Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. klennon@ucsd.edu. (5)Canada's Michael
Smith Genome Sciences Center, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. echun@bcgsc.ca. (6)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores
Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La
Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. ashih@ucsd.edu. (7)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell
Program and Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health
Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. aschairer@ucsd.edu. (8)Department of
Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores Cancer Center, University of California
San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA.
acourtrecart@ucsd.edu. (9)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores
Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La
Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. dgoff@ucsd.edu. (10)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. sprashad@ucla.edu. (11)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell
Program and Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health
Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. igeron@ucsd.edu. (12)Department of
Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores Cancer Center, University of California
San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. rwall@ucsd.edu. 
(13)Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada.
john.mcpherson@oicr.on.ca. (14)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Center,
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. rmoore@bcgsc.ca.
(15)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores Cancer Center,
University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, 
CA, USA. mpu@ucsd.edu. (16)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores
Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La
Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. lebao@AD.UCSD.EDU. (17)Pfizer, La Jolla, CA, USA.
afisher@pfizer.com. (18)Pfizer, La Jolla, CA, USA. mMunchhof@pfizer.com.
(19)Pfizer, La Jolla, CA, USA. tVanArsdale@pfizer.com. (20)Department of
Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores Cancer Center, University of California
San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. treya@ucsd.edu. 
(21)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores Cancer Center,
University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, 
CA, USA. shmorris@ucsd.edu. (22)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. Mark.Minden@uhn.ca. (23)Princess Margaret Cancer Center,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada. Mark.Minden@uhn.ca.
(24)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores Cancer Center,
University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, 92037, 
CA, USA. kmesser@ucsd.edu. (25)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
hmikkola@mcdb.ucla.edu. (26)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Center,
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. mmarra@bcgsc.ca.
(27)Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada.
tom.hudson@oicr.on.ca. (28)Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Program and Moores
Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La
Jolla, 92037, CA, USA. cjamieson@ucsd.edu. (29)Division of Regenerative Medicine,
University of California San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, La Jolla, CA,
92093-0820, USA. cjamieson@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Dormant leukemia stem cells (LSC) promote therapeutic resistance and 
leukemic progression as a result of unbridled activation of stem cell gene
expression programs. Thus, we hypothesized that 1) deregulation of the hedgehog
(Hh) stem cell self-renewal and cell cycle regulatory pathway would promote
dormant human LSC generation and 2) that PF-04449913, a clinical antagonist of
the GLI2 transcriptional activator, smoothened (SMO), would enhance dormant human
LSC eradication.
METHODS: To test these postulates, whole transcriptome RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), 
microarray, qRT-PCR, stromal co-culture, confocal fluorescence microscopic,
nanoproteomic, serial transplantation and cell cycle analyses were performed on
FACS purified normal, chronic phase (CP) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), blast
crisis (BC) phase CML progenitors with or without PF-04449913 treatment.
RESULTS: Notably, RNA-seq analyses revealed that Hh pathway and cell cycle
regulatory gene overexpression correlated with leukemic progression. While
lentivirally enforced GLI2 expression enhanced leukemic progenitor dormancy in
stromal co-cultures, this was not observed with a mutant GLI2 lacking a
transactivation domain, suggesting that GLI2 expression prevented cell cycle
transit. Selective SMO inhibition with PF-04449913 in humanized stromal
co-cultures and LSC xenografts reduced downstream GLI2 protein and cell cycle
regulatory gene expression. Moreover, SMO inhibition enhanced cell cycle transit 
and sensitized BC LSC to tyrosine kinase inhibition in vivo at doses that spare
normal HSC.
CONCLUSION: In summary, while GLI2, forms part of a core HH pathway
transcriptional regulatory network that promotes human myeloid leukemic
progression and dormant LSC generation, selective inhibition with PF-04449913
reduces the dormant LSC burden thereby providing a strong rationale for clinical 
trials predicated on SMO inhibition in combination with TKIs or chemotherapeutic 
agents with the ultimate aim of obviating leukemic therapeutic resistance,
persistence and progression.

PMCID: PMC4414375
PMID: 25889765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jul;1850(7):1438-48. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.04.005. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Hedgehog signaling through GLI1 and GLI2 is required for epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in human trophoblasts.

Tang C(1), Mei L(1), Pan L(1), Xiong W(2), Zhu H(2), Ruan H(1), Zou C(2), Tang
L(2), Iguchi T(3), Wu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. (2)The Affiliated Children Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (3)Department of Toxicology, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka, Japan. (4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: xiwu@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is critical for human
placental development, trophoblastic differentiation, and pregnancy-associated
diseases. Here, we investigated the effects of hedgehog (HH) signaling on EMT in 
human trophoblasts, and further explored the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Human primary cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells were
used as in vitro models. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis 
were performed to examine mRNA and protein levels, respectively. Lentiviruses
expressing short hairpin RNA were used to knock down the target genes. Reporter
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation were performed to determine the
transactivity. Cell migration, invasion and colony formation were accessed by
wound healing, Matrigel-coated transwell, and colony formation assays,
respectively.
RESULTS: Activation of HH signaling induced the transdifferentiation of
cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells from epithelial to mesenchymal 
phenotypes, exhibiting the decreases in E-Cadherin expression as well as the
increases in vimentin expression, invasion, migration and colony formation.
Knockdown of GLI1 and GLI2 but not GLI3 attenuated HH-induced
transdifferentiation, whereas GLI1 was responsible for the expression of
HH-induced key EMT regulators including Snail1, Slug, and Twist, and both GLI1
and GLI2 acted directly as transcriptional repressor of CDH1 gene encoding
E-Cadherin.
CONCLUSION: HH through GLI1 and GLI2 acts as critical signals in supporting the
physiological function of mature placenta.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: HH signaling through GLI1 and GLI2 could be required for
the maintenance of human pregnancy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25888497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;54(3):R141-50. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0009. Epub 2015 Apr
15.

Role of GLI2 in hypopituitarism phenotype.

Arnhold IJ(1), França MM(2), Carvalho LR(2), Mendonca BB(2), Jorge AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Divisão de EndocrinologiaUnidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento,
Laboratorio de Hormonios e Genetica Molecular LIM/42, Hospital das Clinicas da
FMUSP, Disciplina de Endocrinologia da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Sao Paulo, Avenida Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar, 155, Prédio dos Ambulatórios, 8°
andar, Bloco 3, CEP 05403-900 Sao Paulo, BrazilUnidade de Endocrinologia
GeneticaLaboratorio de Endocrinologia Celular e Molecular LIM/25, Disciplina de
Endocrinologia da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, 01246-903
Sao Paulo, Brazil iarnhold@usp.br. (2)Divisão de EndocrinologiaUnidade de
Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e Genetica Molecular 
LIM/42, Hospital das Clinicas da FMUSP, Disciplina de Endocrinologia da Faculdade
de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Avenida Eneas de Carvalho Aguiar, 155, 
Prédio dos Ambulatórios, 8° andar, Bloco 3, CEP 05403-900 Sao Paulo,
BrazilUnidade de Endocrinologia GeneticaLaboratorio de Endocrinologia Celular e
Molecular LIM/25, Disciplina de Endocrinologia da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Sao Paulo, 01246-903 Sao Paulo, Brazil.

GLI2 is a zinc-finger transcription factor involved in the Sonic Hedgehog
pathway. Gli2 mutant mice have hypoplastic anterior and absent posterior
pituitary glands. We reviewed the literature for patients with hypopituitarism
and alterations in GLI2. Twenty-five patients (16 families) had heterozygous
truncating mutations, and the phenotype frequently included GH deficiency, a
small anterior pituitary lobe and an ectopic/undescended posterior pituitary lobe
on magnetic resonance imaging and postaxial polydactyly. The inheritance pattern 
was autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. The 
mutation was frequently inherited from an asymptomatic parent. Eleven patients
had heterozygous non-synonymous GLI2 variants that were classified as variants of
unknown significance, because they were either absent from or had a frequency
lower than 0.001 in the databases. In these patients, the posterior pituitary was
also ectopic, but none had polydactyly. A third group of variants found in
patients with hypopituitarism were considered benign because their frequency was 
= 0.001 in the databases. GLI2 is a large and polymorphic gene, and sequencing
may identify variants whose interpretation may be difficult. Incomplete
penetrance implies in the participation of other genetic and/or environmental
factors. An interaction between Gli2 mutations and prenatal ethanol exposure has 
been demonstrated in mice dysmorphology. In conclusion, a relatively high
frequency of GLI2 mutations and variants were identified in patients with
congenital GH deficiency without other brain defects, and most of these patients 
presented with combined pituitary hormone deficiency and an ectopic posterior
pituitary lobe. Future studies may clarify the relative role and frequency of
GLI2 alterations in the aetiology of hypopituitarism.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25878059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Exp Dermatol. 2015 Jul;24(7):481-4. doi: 10.1111/exd.12724.

Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor expression levels in melanoma
cells contribute to cell invasion and proliferation.

Vachtenheim J(1), Ondruová L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcription and Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical
Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) is a nodal point in
melanoma transcriptional network that regulates dozens of genes with critical
functions in cell differentiation, proliferation and survival. Highly variable
MITF expression levels exist in tumor cell subpopulations conferring marked
heterogeneity and plasticity in the tumor tissue. A model has been postulated
whereby lower MITF levels favour cell invasion and suppress proliferation,
whereas high levels stimulate differentiation and proliferation. Additionally,
MITF is considered to be a prosurvival gene and a lineage addiction oncogene in
melanoma. Herein, we review how MITF expression may affect the melanoma phenotype
with consequences on the survival, invasion and metastasis of melanoma cells, and
we discuss the research challenges.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25866058  [PubMed - in process]


82. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Mar 25;9:34. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00034. eCollection
2015.

Differential requirements for Gli2 and Gli3 in the regional specification of the 
mouse hypothalamus.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Paul FA(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Theil T(3), Puelles L(4),
Blaess S(2), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology and Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Laboratory of Neurodevelopmental Genetics, Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn Bonn,
Germany. (3)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh Edinburgh,
UK. (4)Department of Morphology, Instituto Murciano de Investigación
Biosanitaria, School of Medicine, University of Murcia Murcia, Spain ; Facultad
de Medicina, University of Murcia Murcia, Spain.

Secreted protein Sonic hedgehog (Shh) ventralizes the neural tube by modulating
the crucial balance between activating and repressing functions (GliA, GliR) of
transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3. This balance-the Shh-Gli code-is species-
and context-dependent and has been elucidated for the mouse spinal cord. The
hypothalamus, a forebrain region regulating vital functions like homeostasis and 
hormone secretion, shows dynamic and intricate Shh expression as well as complex 
regional differentiation. Here we asked if particular combinations of Gli2 and
Gli3 and of GliA and GliR functions contribute to the variety of hypothalamic
regions, i.e., we wanted to approach the question of a possible hypothalamic
version of the Shh-Gli code. Based on mouse mutant analysis, we show that: (1)
hypothalamic regional heterogeneity is based in part on differentially stringent 
requirements for Gli2 or Gli3; (2) another source of diversity are differential
requirements for Shh of neural vs. non-neural origin; (3) the medial progenitor
domain known to depend on Gli2 for its development generates several essential
hypothalamic nuclei plus the pituitary and median eminence; (4) the suppression
of Gli3R by neural and non-neural Shh is essential for hypothalamic
specification. Finally, we have mapped our results on a recent model which
considers the hypothalamus as a transverse region with alar and basal portions.
Our data confirm the model and are explained by it.

PMCID: PMC4373379
PMID: 25859185  [PubMed]


83. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 2;6:6709. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7709.

Ptch1 and Gli regulate Shh signalling dynamics via multiple mechanisms.

Cohen M(1), Kicheva A(1), Ribeiro A(1), Blassberg R(1), Page KM(2), Barnes CP(3),
Briscoe J(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC-National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London
NW7 1AA, UK. (2)Department of Mathematics and CoMPLEX, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (3)1] Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK [2]
Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

In the vertebrate neural tube, the morphogen Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) establishes a
characteristic pattern of gene expression. Here we quantify the Shh gradient in
the developing mouse neural tube and show that while the amplitude of the
gradient increases over time, the activity of the pathway transcriptional
effectors, Gli proteins, initially increases but later decreases. Computational
analysis of the pathway suggests three mechanisms that could contribute to this
adaptation: transcriptional upregulation of the inhibitory receptor Ptch1,
transcriptional downregulation of Gli and the differential stability of active
and inactive Gli isoforms. Consistent with this, Gli2 protein expression is
downregulated during neural tube patterning and adaptation continues when the
pathway is stimulated downstream of Ptch1. Moreover, the Shh-induced upregulation
of Gli2 transcription prevents Gli activity levels from adapting in a different
cell type, NIH3T3 fibroblasts, despite the upregulation of Ptch1. Multiple
mechanisms therefore contribute to the intracellular dynamics of Shh signalling, 
resulting in different signalling dynamics in different cell types.

PMCID: PMC4396374
PMID: 25833741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Development. 2015 May 1;142(9):1651-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.119669. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

The loss of Hh responsiveness by a non-ciliary Gli2 variant.

Liu J(1), Zeng H(1), Liu A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. (2)Department of Biology, Eberly
College of Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802,
USA Center for Cellular Dynamics, Huck Institute of Life Sciences, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA axl25@psu.edu.

Hedgehog signaling is crucial for vertebrate development and physiology. Gli2,
the primary effector of Hedgehog signaling, localizes to the tip of the primary
cilium, but the importance of its ciliary localization remains unclear. We
address the roles of Gli2 ciliary localization by replacing endogenous Gli2 with 
Gli2(<U+0394>CLR), a Gli2 variant not localizing to the cilium. The resulting
Gli2(<U+0394>CLRKI) and Gli2(<U+0394>CLRKI);Gli3 double mutants resemble Gli2-null and
Gli2;Gli3 double mutants, respectively, suggesting the lack of Gli2(<U+0394>CLR)
activation in development. Significantly, Gli2(<U+0394>CLR) cannot be activated either
by pharmacochemical activation of Smo in vitro or by loss of Ptch1 in vivo.
Finally, Gli2(<U+0394>CLR) exhibits strong transcriptional activator activity in the
absence of Sufu, suggesting that the lack of its activation in vivo results from 
a specific failure in relieving the inhibitory function of Sufu. Our results
provide strong evidence that the ciliary localization of Gli2 is crucial for
cilium-dependent activation of Hedgehog signaling.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25834022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):4140-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419690112. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Inversion of Sonic hedgehog action on its canonical pathway by electrical
activity.

Belgacem YH(1), Borodinsky LN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Membrane Biology and Institute for Pediatric
Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospital for Children Northern California,
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817
lnborodinsky@ucdavis.edu yhbelgacem@ucdavis.edu.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a morphogenic protein that operates through the Gli
transcription factor-dependent canonical pathway to orchestrate normal
development of many tissues. Because aberrant levels of Gli activity lead to a
wide spectrum of diseases ranging from neurodevelopmental defects to cancer,
understanding the regulatory mechanisms of Shh canonical pathway is paramount.
During early stages of spinal cord development, Shh specifies neural progenitors 
through the canonical signaling. Despite persistence of Shh as spinal cord
development progresses, Gli activity is switched off by unknown mechanisms. In
this study we find that Shh inverts its action on Gli during development.
Strikingly, Shh decreases Gli signaling in the embryonic spinal cord by an
electrical activity- and cAMP-dependent protein kinase-mediated pathway. The
inhibition of Gli activity by Shh operates at multiple levels. Shh promotes
cytosolic over nuclear localization of Gli2, induces Gli2 and Gli3 processing
into repressor forms, and activates cAMP-responsive element binding protein that 
in turn represses gli1 transcription. The regulatory mechanisms identified in
this study likely operate with different spatiotemporal resolution and ensure
effective down-regulation of the canonical Shh signaling as spinal cord
development progresses. The developmentally regulated intercalation of electrical
activity in the Shh pathway may represent a paradigm for switching from canonical
to noncanonical roles of developmental cues during neuronal differentiation and
maturation.

PMCID: PMC4386408
PMID: 25829542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Apr 14;112(15):4678-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1502301112. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

Hedgehog signaling activates a positive feedback mechanism involving insulin-like
growth factors to induce osteoblast differentiation.

Shi Y(1), Chen J(1), Karner CM(1), Long F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery. (2)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Medicine, and Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110 flong@wustl.edu.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is essential for osteoblast differentiation in the
endochondral skeleton during embryogenesis. However, the molecular mechanism
underlying the osteoblastogenic role of Hh is not completely understood. Here, we
report that Hh markedly induces the expression of insulin-like growth factor 2
(Igf2) that activates the mTORC2-Akt signaling cascade during osteoblast
differentiation. Igf2-Akt signaling, in turn, stabilizes full-length Gli2 through
Serine 230, thus enhancing the output of transcriptional activation by Hh.
Importantly, genetic deletion of the Igf signaling receptor Igf1r specifically in
Hh-responding cells diminishes bone formation in the mouse embryo. Thus, Hh
engages Igf signaling in a positive feedback mechanism to activate the osteogenic
program.

PMCID: PMC4403181
PMID: 25825734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Eur J Cell Biol. 2015 May;94(5):223-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2015.03.003. Epub
2015 Mar 20.

Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling pathway impedes cancer cell proliferation by
promotion of autophagy.

Tang X(1), Deng L(2), Chen Q(3), Wang Y(4), Xu R(3), Shi C(4), Shao J(4), Hu
G(4), Gao M(4), Rao H(5), Luo S(4), Lu Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Nanchang University, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Nanchang University, China;
Institute of Translational Medicine, Nanchang University, China. (3)The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, China. (4)The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University, China. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, China. Electronic address:
quqinlu@ncu.edu.cn.

Multiple lines of evidence implicate that aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling is involved in a variety of human cancers. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying how cancer cells respond to Hh inhibition remain to be
elucidated. In this study, we found that blockade of Hh signaling suppresses cell
proliferation in human cancer cells. Microarray analysis revealed that
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in human cancer cells are enriched in
autophagy pathway in response to the inhibition of Hh signaling. Interestingly,
inhibition of Hh signaling induced autophagy, whereas activation of Hh signaling 
by ligand treatments prevented the induction of autophagy. In addition,
inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine (3-MA) partially suppressed
cytotoxicity induced by inhibition of Hh signaling. Finally, in autophagy
deficient cells, cytotoxic effect triggered by inhibition of Hh signaling was
partially reversed, indicating the modulation of autophagy by Hh signaling is
autophagy-specific. These results suggest that inhibition of Hh signaling impedes
cancer cell proliferation in part through induction of autophagy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25824057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 May;167A(5):1121-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36972. Epub 2015
Mar 28.

A familial GLI2 deletion (2q14.2) not associated with the holoprosencephaly
syndrome phenotype.

Kordaß U(1), Schröder C, Elbracht M, Soellner L, Eggermann T.

Author information: 
(1)Praxis für Humangenetik, Greifswald, Germany.

Molecular alterations of the GLI2 gene in 2q14.2 are associated with features
from the holoprosencephaly spectrum. However, the phenotype is extremely
variable, ranging from unaffected mutation heterozygotes to isolated or combined 
pituitary hormone deficiency, and to patients with a phenotype that overlaps with
holoprosencephaly, including abnormal pituitary gland formation/function,
craniofacial dysmorphisms, branchial arch anomalies, and polydactyly. Although
many point mutations within the GLI2 gene have been identified, large (sub)
microscopic deletions affecting 2q14.2 are rare. We report on a family with a
4.3<U+2009>Mb deletion in 2q14 affecting GLI2 without any dysmorphologic features
belonging to the holoprosencephaly spectrum. This family confirms the incomplete 
penetrance of genomic disturbances affecting the GLI2 gene. However, the family
presented here is unique as none of the three identified individuals with a GLI2 
deletion showed any typical signs of holoprosencephaly, whereas all patients
reported so far were referred for genetic testing because at least one member
exhibited holoprosencephaly and related features.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25820550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 26;6:6653. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7653.

The transcription factor Foxc1 is necessary for Ihh-Gli2-regulated endochondral
ossification.

Yoshida M(1), Hata K(2), Takashima R(2), Ono K(2), Nakamura E(2), Takahata Y(2), 
Murakami T(2), Iseki S(3), Takano-Yamamoto T(4), Nishimura R(2), Yoneda T(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan [2] Division
of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Dentistry, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (2)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan. (3)Section of Molecular
Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan. 
(4)Division of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. 
(5)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan [2] Division
of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Walther Hall,
R3-C321D, 980 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) regulates endochondral ossification in both a parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP)-dependent and -independent manner by activating
transcriptional mediator Gli2. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these
processes remain elusive. Here by using in vivo microarray analysis, we identify 
forkhead box C1 (Foxc1) as a transcriptional partner of Gli2. Foxc1 stimulates
expression of Ihh target genes, including PTHrP and Col10a1, through its physical
and functional interaction with Gli2. Conversely, a dominant negative Foxc1
inhibits the Ihh target gene expression. In a spontaneous loss of Foxc1 function 
mouse (Foxc1(ch/ch)), endochondral ossification is delayed and the expression of 
Ihh target genes inhibited. Moreover, the pathological Foxc1 missense mutation
observed in the Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome impairs Gli2-Foxc1 association as well
as Ihh function. Our findings suggest that Foxc1 is an important transcriptional 
partner of Ihh-Gli2 signalling during endochondral ossification, and that
disruption of the Foxc1-Gli2 interaction causes skeletal abnormalities observed
in the Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

PMID: 25808752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 25;5:9489. doi: 10.1038/srep09489.

GLI2-dependent c-MYC upregulation mediates resistance of pancreatic cancer cells 
to the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1.

Kumar K(1), Raza SS(2), Knab LM(3), Chow CR(4), Kwok B(2), Bentrem DJ(5), Popovic
R(2), Ebine K(1), Licht JD(4), Munshi HG(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611 [2] Jesse Brown VA Medical
Center, 820 S. Damen Ave, Chicago, IL 60612. (2)Department of Medicine, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL
60611. (3)Department of Surgery, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, 676 N. St. Clair St, Chicago, IL 60611. (4)1] Department of Medicine,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave,
Chicago, IL 60611 [2] The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611. (5)1] Department
of Surgery, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 676 N. St.
Clair St, Chicago, IL 60611 [2] Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, 820 S. Damen Ave, 
Chicago, IL 60612 [3] The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611. (6)1] Department
of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 303 E.
Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611 [2] Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, 820 S. Damen
Ave, Chicago, IL 60612 [3] The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611.

JQ1 and I-BET151 are selective inhibitors of BET bromodomain proteins that have
efficacy against a number of different cancers. Since the effectiveness of
targeted therapies is often limited by development of resistance, we examined
whether it was possible for cancer cells to develop resistance to the BET
inhibitor JQ1. Here we show that pancreatic cancer cells developing resistance to
JQ1 demonstrate cross-resistance to I-BET151 and insensitivity to BRD4
downregulation. The resistant cells maintain expression of c-MYC, increase
expression of JQ1-target genes FOSL1 and HMGA2, and demonstrate evidence of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, reverting EMT fails to
sensitize the resistant cells to JQ1 treatment. Importantly, the JQ1-resistant
cells remain dependent on c-MYC that now becomes co-regulated by high levels of
GLI2. Furthermore, downregulating GLI2 re-sensitizes the resistant cells to JQ1. 
Overall, these results identify a mechanism by which cancer cells develop
resistance to BET inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4452877
PMID: 25807524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 11;10(3):e0119455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119455.
eCollection 2015.

T396I mutation of mouse Sufu reduces the stability and activity of Gli3
repressor.

Makino S(1), Zhulyn O(2), Mo R(2), Puviindran V(2), Zhang X(2), Murata T(1),
Fukumura R(1), Ishitsuka Y(1), Kotaki H(1), Matsumaru D(3), Ishii S(4), Hui
CC(2), Gondo Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mutagenesis and Genomics Team, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto and Program in 
Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced
Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan. (4)Laboratory of
Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Hedgehog signaling is primarily transduced by two transcription factors: Gli2,
which mainly acts as a full-length activator, and Gli3, which tends to be
proteolytically processed from a full-length form (Gli3FL) to an N-terminal
repressor (Gli3REP). Recent studies using a Sufu knockout mouse have indicated
that Sufu is involved in regulating Gli2 and Gli3 activator and repressor
activity at multiple steps of the signaling cascade; however, the mechanism of
specific Gli2 and Gli3 regulation remains to be elucidated. In this study, we
established an allelic series of ENU-induced mouse strains. Analysis of one of
the missense alleles, SufuT396I, showed that Thr396 residue of Sufu played a key 
role in regulation of Gli3 activity. SufuT396I/T396I embryos exhibited severe
polydactyly, which is indicative of compromised Gli3 activity. Concomitantly,
significant quantitative reductions of unprocessed Gli3 (Gli3FL) and processed
Gli3 (Gli3REP) were observed in vivo as well as in vitro. Genetic experiments
showed that patterning defects in the limb buds of SufuT396I/T396I were rescued
by a constitutive Gli3REP allele (Gli3<U+2206>699), strongly suggesting that SufuT396I
reduced the truncated Gli3 repressor. In contrast, SufuT396I qualitatively
exhibited no mutational effects on Gli2 regulation. Taken together, the results
of this study show that the Thr396 residue of Sufu is specifically required for
regulation of Gli3 but not Gli2. This implies a novel Sufu-mediated mechanism in 
which Gli2 activator and Gli3 repressor are differentially regulated.

PMCID: PMC4356511
PMID: 25760946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):342-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.02.002.

Smoothened variants explain the majority of drug resistance in basal cell
carcinoma.

Atwood SX(1), Sarin KY(1), Whitson RJ(1), Li JR(1), Kim G(1), Rezaee M(1), Ally
MS(1), Kim J(1), Yao C(1), Chang AL(1), Oro AE(2), Tang JY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology and Department of Dermatology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (2)Program in Epithelial 
Biology and Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: oro@stanford.edu. (3)Program in
Epithelial Biology and Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: tangy@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):315-6.

Advanced basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) frequently acquire resistance to Smoothened
(SMO) inhibitors through unknown mechanisms. Here we identify SMO mutations in
50% (22 of 44) of resistant BCCs and show that these mutations maintain Hedgehog 
signaling in the presence of SMO inhibitors. Alterations include four ligand
binding pocket mutations defining sites of inhibitor binding and four variants
conferring constitutive activity and inhibitor resistance, illuminating pivotal
residues that ensure receptor autoinhibition. In the presence of a SMO inhibitor,
tumor cells containing either class of SMO mutants effectively outcompete cells
containing the wild-type SMO. Finally, we show that both classes of SMO variants 
respond to aPKC-<U+03B9>/<U+03BB> or GLI2 inhibitors that operate downstream of SMO, setting
the stage for the clinical use of GLI antagonists.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4357167
PMID: 25759020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):327-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.02.001.

Genomic analysis of smoothened inhibitor resistance in basal cell carcinoma.

Sharpe HJ(1), Pau G(2), Dijkgraaf GJ(1), Basset-Seguin N(3), Modrusan Z(4),
Januario T(1), Tsui V(5), Durham AB(6), Dlugosz AA(6), Haverty PM(2), Bourgon
R(2), Tang JY(7), Sarin KY(7), Dirix L(8), Fisher DC(9), Rudin CM(10), Sofen
H(11), Migden MR(12), Yauch RL(1), de Sauvage FJ(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. (2)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Genentech,
Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (3)Paris 7 Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris
75010, France. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (5)Department of Discovery Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 
South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (6)Department of Dermatology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (7)Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (8)Sint-Augustinus Cancer Center, Antwerp University
Hospital, University of Antwerp, Antwerp 2610, Belgium. (9)Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (10)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. (11)Department of Medicine/Dermatology, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (12)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. (13)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, Inc., South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. Electronic address: sauvage@gene.com.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):315-6.

Smoothened (SMO) inhibitors are under clinical investigation for the treatment of
several cancers. Vismodegib is approved for the treatment of locally advanced and
metastatic basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Most BCC patients experience significant
clinical benefit on vismodegib, but some develop resistance. Genomic analysis of 
tumor biopsies revealed that vismodegib resistance is associated with Hedgehog
(Hh) pathway reactivation, predominantly through mutation of the drug target SMO 
and to a lesser extent through concurrent copy number changes in SUFU and GLI2.
SMO mutations either directly impaired drug binding or activated SMO to varying
levels. Furthermore, we found evidence for intra-tumor heterogeneity, suggesting 
that a combination of therapies targeting components at multiple levels of the Hh
pathway is required to overcome resistance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25759019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):252-9. eCollection 2015.

Sequential treatment with betulinic acid followed by 5-fluorouracil shows
synergistic cytotoxic activity in ovarian cancer cells.

Wang YJ(1), Liu JB(1), Dou YC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin
University Changchun 130000, China. (2)Department of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University Changchun 130000, China.

Betulinic acid selectively inhibits the growth of ovarian carcinoma cell lines
without affecting the normal cells. In the present study, the effect of
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and betulinic acid (BA) combination on ovarian carcinoma
cells was studied. The results demonstrated that ovarian carcinoma cells on
concurrent or 5-FU followed by BA treatment show increased Sub-G1 cell
population, increased rate of cell apoptosis and morphological changes in
mitochondrial membrane. In OVCAR 432 cells treatment with sequential combination 
of 5-FU and BA increased the Sub-G1 cell population to 51.3% and growth
inhibition rate of > 72%. However, exposure to BA before 5-FU treatment caused a 
decrease in rate of inhibition to < 35%. Treatment with combination of 5 µM of
5-FU and 1 µM of BA for 48 h, led to an induction of apoptosis in 79.7% and
induced morphological changes in OVCAR 432 cells. The Western blot results showed
high concentration of cytochrome c in the cell cytosol after 24 h of 5-FU and BA 
combination treatment. Treatment of BA-responsive RMS-13 cells with 5-FU and BA
combination resulted in inhibition of GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, and IGF2 genes. In
addition, we found a significant reduction in hedgehog activity of RMS-13 cells
after 5-FU and BA combination treatment by means of a hedgehog-responsive
reporter assay. Therefore, 5-FU and BA combination can be a promising regimen for
the treatment of ovarian carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4348889
PMID: 25755712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):8722-35.

Identification of a novel synthetic lethality of combined inhibition of hedgehog 
and PI3K signaling in rhabdomyosarcoma.

Graab U(1), Hahn H(2), Fulda S(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research in Pediatrics, Goethe-University,
Frankfurt, Germany. (2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center,
Goettingen, Germany. (3)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

We previously reported that aberrant HH pathway activation confers a poor
prognosis in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Searching for new treatment strategies we
therefore targeted HH signaling. Here, we identify a novel synthetic lethality of
concomitant inhibition of HH and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways in RMS by GLI1/2
inhibitor GANT61 and PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI103. Synergistic drug interaction is
confirmed by calculation of combination index (CI < 0.2). Similarly, genetic
silencing of GLI1/2 significantly increases PI103-induced apoptosis. GANT61 and
PI103 also synergize to induce apoptosis in cultured primary RMS cells
emphasizing the clinical relevance of this combination. Importantly, GANT61/PI103
cotreatment suppresses clonogenic survival, three-dimensional sphere formation
and tumor growth in an in vivo model of RMS. Mechanistic studies reveal that
GANT61 and PI103 cooperate to trigger caspase-dependent apoptosis via the
mitochondrial pathway, as demonstrated by several lines of evidence. First,
GANT61/PI103 cotreatment increases mRNA and protein expression of NOXA and BMF,
which is required for apoptosis, since knockdown of NOXA or BMF significantly
reduces GANT61/PI103-induced apoptosis. Second, GANT61/PI103 cotreatment triggers
BAK/BAX activation, which contributes to GANT61/PI103-mediated apoptosis, since
knockdown of BAK provides protection. Third, ectopic expression of BCL-2 or
non-degradable phospho-mutant MCL-1 significantly rescue GANT61/PI103-triggered
apoptosis. Fourth, GANT61/PI103 cotreatment initiate activation of the caspase
cascade via apoptosome-mediated cleavage of the initiator caspase-9, as indicated
by changes in the cleavage pattern of caspases (e.g. accumulation of the
caspase-9 p35 cleavage fragment) upon addition of the caspase inhibitor zVAD.fmk.
Thus, combined GLI1/2 and PI3K/mTOR inhibition represents a promising novel
approach for synergistic apoptosis induction and tumor growth reduction with
implications for new treatment strategies in RMS.

PMCID: PMC4496179
PMID: 25749378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Mar;50(3):371-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.08.025. Epub
2014 Dec 20.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and glioblastoma-2 (Gli-2) expressions are associated with
poor jaundice-free survival in biliary atresia.

Jung HY(1), Jing J(2), Lee KB(2), Jang JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Soonchunhyang University, Cheonan Hospital, Cheonan, 
Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: tripj@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Biliary atresia (BA) causes biliary obstruction in neonates. 
Although the Kasai operation can successfully treat certain BA cases, many
patients exhibit recurrent jaundice and secondary biliary cirrhosis requiring
liver transplantation. Consequently, studies of the prognostic factors of the
Kasai operation are needed. Accordingly, sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway expression 
at the extrahepatic bile duct (EHBD), an important bile duct repair mechanism,
will be investigated via immunohistochemistry in patients with BA to examine the 
association with post-Kasai operation prognosis.
METHODS: Fifty-seven EHBD specimens were obtained during Kasai operations from
1992 to 2009. The SHH, patched (PTCH), and glioblastoma-2 (Gli-2)
immunohistochemical staining results were analyzed quantitatively.
RESULTS: Overall, 57.9% of patients had bile flow normalization after the Kasai
operation; 43.1% did not. High preoperative serum total bilirubin, direct
bilirubin, and aspartate aminotransferase levels were associated with sustained
jaundice post-Kasai operation, as was an age =65days at the time of surgery (all 
p<0.05). High Gli-2 and SHH expression rates were significantly associated with
early post-Kasai operation jaundice relapse.
CONCLUSION: Strong Gli-2 and SHH expression in the EHBD might be a poor
prognostic factor in Kasai operation-treated patients with BA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25746691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2388-98. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1059. 
Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Expression of Hedgehog Pathway Mediator GLI Represents a Negative Prognostic
Marker in Human Acute Myeloid Leukemia and Its Inhibition Exerts Antileukemic
Effects.

Wellbrock J(1), Latuske E(1), Köhler J(1), Wagner K(2), Stamm H(1), Vettorazzi
E(3), Vohwinkel G(1), Klokow M(1), Uibeleisen R(2), Ehm P(4), Riecken K(5), Loges
S(6), Thol F(2), Schubert C(7), Amling M(8), Jücker M(4), Bokemeyer C(1), Heuser 
M(2), Krauter J(2), Fiedler W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation with
Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald University Cancer Center, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology,
Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany. (3)Department of Medical Biometry and Epidemiology, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (4)Center for Experimental
Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (5)Research Department Cell and Gene 
Therapy, Clinic for Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (6)Department of Oncology, Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation with Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald University
Cancer Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
Department of Tumor Biology, Center of Experimental Medicine, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (7)Department of Transfusion
Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (9)Department of Oncology, Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation with Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald University
Cancer Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
fiedler@uke.de.

PURPOSE: The Hedgehog pathway plays an important role in stem-cell biology and
malignant transformation. Therefore, we investigated the expression and
prognostic impact of Hedgehog pathway members in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Pretreatment samples from 104 newly diagnosed AML patients
(AMLSG 07-04 trial) were analyzed by qPCR, and expression of Hedgehog family
members was correlated with clinical outcome. Inhibition of GLI by GANT61 or
shRNA was investigated in AML cells in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Expression of receptors Smoothened and Patched-1 and their downstream
mediators, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, was found in AML patients in contrast to
Hedgehog ligands. GLI2 expression had a significant negative influence on
event-free survival (EFS), relapse-free survival (RFS), and overall survival (OS;
P = 0.037, 0.026, and 0.013, respectively) and was correlated with FLT3
mutational status (P < 0.001). Analysis of a second, independent patient cohort
confirmed the negative impact of GLI2 on EFS and OS (P = 0.007 and 0.003,
respectively; n = 290). Within this cohort, GLI1 had a negative prognostic impact
(P < 0.001 for both EFS and OS). Although AML cells did not express Hedgehog
ligands by qPCR, AML patients had significantly increased Desert Hedgehog (DHH)
plasma levels compared with healthy subjects (P = 0.002), in whom DHH was
presumably provided by bone marrow niche cells. Moreover, the GLI inhibitor
GANT61 or knockdown of GLI1/2 by shRNA caused antileukemic effects, including
induction of apoptosis, reduced proliferation, and colony formation in AML cells,
and a survival benefit in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: GLI expression is a negative prognostic factor and might represent a
novel druggable target in AML.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25745035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 17;112(11):3499-504. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1500762112. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

p63 Sustains self-renewal of mammary cancer stem cells through regulation of
Sonic Hedgehog signaling.

Memmi EM(1), Sanarico AG(1), Giacobbe A(1), Peschiaroli A(2), Frezza V(1),
Cicalese A(3), Pisati F(4), Tosoni D(3), Zhou H(5), Tonon G(6), Antonov A(7),
Melino G(8), Pelicci PG(9), Bernassola F(10).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata, Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Department of Experimental Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Rome "Tor Vergata," 00133 Rome, Italy; (2)Department of
Biochemical Sciences, Institute of Cellular Biology and Neurobiology, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, 00015 Rome, Italy; (3)Department of Experimental
Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141 Milan, Italy; (4)Institute of
Molecular Oncology (IFOM) of the Italian Foundation for Cancer Research (FIRC),
20139 Milan, Italy; (5)Department of Molecular Developmental Biology, Faculty of 
Science, Radboud University, and Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; (6)Functional
Genomics of Cancer Unit, Division of Molecular Oncology, San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy; (7)Medical Research Council, Toxicology Unit,
Leicester University, Leicester LE1 9HN, United Kingdom; and. (8)Biochemistry
Laboratory, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico, Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery,
University of Rome "Tor Vergata," 00133 Rome, Italy; Medical Research Council,
Toxicology Unit, Leicester University, Leicester LE1 9HN, United Kingdom; and
melino@uniroma2.it piergiuseppe.pelicci@ieo.eu bernasso@uniroma2.it.
(9)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141
Milan, Italy; Department of Health Sciences, Milan University, 20142 Milan, Italy
melino@uniroma2.it piergiuseppe.pelicci@ieo.eu bernasso@uniroma2.it.
(10)Biochemistry Laboratory, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata, Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Department of Experimental Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Rome "Tor Vergata," 00133 Rome, Italy; Department of
Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141 Milan, Italy;
melino@uniroma2.it piergiuseppe.pelicci@ieo.eu bernasso@uniroma2.it.

The predominant p63 isoform, <U+0394>Np63, is a master regulator of normal epithelial
stem cell (SC) maintenance. However, in vivo evidence of the regulation of cancer
stem cell (CSC) properties by p63 is still limited. Here, we exploit the
transgenic MMTV-ErbB2 (v-erb-b2 avian erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene
homolog 2) mouse model of carcinogenesis to dissect the role of p63 in the
regulation of mammary CSC self-renewal and breast tumorigenesis. ErbB2 tumor
cells enriched for SC-like properties display increased levels of <U+0394>Np63
expression compared with normal mammary progenitors. Down-regulation of p63 in
ErbB2 mammospheres markedly restricts self-renewal and expansion of CSCs, and
this action is fully independent of p53. Furthermore, transplantation of ErbB2
progenitors expressing shRNAs against p63 into the mammary fat pads of syngeneic 
mice delays tumor growth in vivo. p63 knockdown in ErbB2 progenitors diminishes
the expression of genes encoding components of the Sonic Hedgehog (Hh) signaling 
pathway, a driver of mammary SC self-renewal. Remarkably, p63 regulates the
expression of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), GLI family zinc finger 2 (Gli2), and Patched1
(Ptch1) genes by directly binding to their gene regulatory regions, and
eventually contributes to pathway activation. Collectively, these studies
highlight the importance of p63 in maintaining the self-renewal potential of
mammary CSCs via a positive modulation of the Hh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4372004
PMID: 25739959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):4357-68.

Inhibition of ERK1/2 down-regulates the Hippo/YAP signaling pathway in human
NSCLC cells.

You B(1,)(2), Yang YL(1), Xu Z(1), Dai Y(1), Liu S(1), Mao JH(3), Tetsu O(4), Li 
H(2), Jablons DM(1), You L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Affiliated with Capital University of
Medical Science, Beijing, People's Republic of China. (3)Life Sciences Division, 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA,
USA. (4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Alterations of the EGFR/ERK and Hippo/YAP pathway have been found in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Herein, we show that ERK1 and ERK2 have an effect on
the Hippo/YAP pathway in human NSCLC cells. Firstly, inhibition of ERK1/2 by
siRNA or small-molecular inhibitors decreased the YAP protein level, the reporter
activity of the Hippo pathway, and the mRNA levels of the Hippo downstream genes,
CTGF, Gli2, and BIRC5. Secondly, degradation of YAP protein was accelerated after
ERK1/2 depletion in NSCLC cell lines, in which YAP mRNA level was not decreased. 
Thirdly, forced over-expression of the ERK2 gene rescued the YAP protein level
and Hippo reporter activity after siRNA knockdown targeting 3'UTR of the ERK2
gene in NSCLC cells. Fourthly, depletion of ERK1/2 reduced the migration and
invasion of NSCLC cells. Combined depletion of ERK1/2 had a greater effect on
cell migration than depletion of either one separately. Finally, the MEK1/2
inhibitor Trametinib decreased YAP protein level and transcriptional activity of 
the Hippo pathway in NSCLC cell lines. Our results suggest that ERK1/2 inhibition
participates in reducing YAP protein level, which in turn down-regulates
expression of the downstream genes of the Hippo pathway to suppress migration and
invasion of NSCLC cells.

PMCID: PMC4414195
PMID: 25738359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Mar 1. doi: 10.1002/mc.22300. [Epub ahead of print]

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling promotes tumorigenicity and stemness via
activation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in bladder cancer.

Islam SS(1,)(2), Mokhtari RB(1), Noman AS(3), Uddin M(4), Rahman MZ(5), Azadi
MA(6), Zlotta A(7), van der Kwast T(8), Yeger H(1), Farhat WA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON, Canada. (2)Division of Urology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Chittagong, Chittagong, Bangladesh. (4)Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. (5)Department of Pathology, Chittagong
Medical College, Chittagong, Bangladesh. (6)Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Chittagong, Chittagong, Bangladesh. (7)Department of Uro-Oncology, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. (8)Department of Pathology, Laboratory
Medicine Program, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Activation of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway controls tumorigenesis
in a variety of cancers. Here, we show a role for Shh signaling in the promotion 
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), tumorigenicity, and stemness in
the bladder cancer. EMT induction was assessed by the decreased expression of
E-cadherin and ZO-1 and increased expression of N-cadherin. The induced EMT was
associated with increased cell motility, invasiveness, and clonogenicity. These
progression relevant behaviors were attenuated by treatment with Hh inhibitors
cyclopamine and GDC-0449, and after knockdown by Shh-siRNA, and led to reversal
of the EMT phenotype. The results with HTB-9 were confirmed using a second
bladder cancer cell line, BFTC905 (DM). In a xenograft mouse model TGF-ß1 treated
HTB-9 cells exhibited enhanced tumor growth. Although normal bladder epithelial
cells could also undergo EMT and upregulate Shh with TGF-ß1 they did not exhibit 
tumorigenicity. The TGF-ß1 treated HTB-9 xenografts showed strong evidence for a 
switch to a more stem cell like phenotype, with functional activation of CD133,
Sox2, Nanog, and Oct4. The bladder cancer specific stem cell markers CK5 and CK14
were upregulated in the TGF-ß1 treated xenograft tumor samples, while CD44
remained unchanged in both treated and untreated tumors. Immunohistochemical
analysis of 22 primary human bladder tumors indicated that Shh expression was
positively correlated with tumor grade and stage. Elevated expression of Ki-67,
Shh, Gli2, and N-cadherin were observed in the high grade and stage human bladder
tumor samples, and conversely, the downregulation of these genes were observed in
the low grade and stage tumor samples. Collectively, this study indicates that
TGF-ß1-induced Shh may regulate EMT and tumorigenicity in bladder cancer. Our
studies reveal that the TGF-ß1 induction of EMT and Shh is cell type context
dependent. Thus, targeting the Shh pathway could be clinically beneficial in the 
ability to reverse the EMT phenotype of tumor cells and potentially inhibit
bladder cancer progression and metastasis. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25728352  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


101. Dev Dyn. 2015 May;244(5):681-92. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24266. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Cis-regulatory control of human GLI2 expression in the developing neural tube and
limb bud.

Minhas R(1), Pauls S, Ali S, Doglio L, Khan MR, Elgar G, Abbasi AA.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Program of Comparative and Evolutionary
Genomics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad,
45320, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: GLI2, a zinc finger transcription factor, mediates Sonic hedgehog
signaling, a critical pathway in vertebrate embryogenesis. GLI2 has been
implicated in diverse set of embryonic developmental processes, including
patterning of central nervous system and limbs. In humans, mutations in GLI2 are 
associated with several developmental defects, including holoprosencephaly and
polydactyly.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate in transient transgenic zebrafish assays, the
potential of a subset of tetrapod-teleost conserved non-coding elements (CNEs)
residing within human GLI2 intronic intervals to induce reporter gene expression 
at known regions of endogenous GLI2 transcription. The regulatory activities of
these elements are observed in several embryonic domains, including neural tube
and pectoral fin. Moreover, our data reveal an overlapping expression profile of 
duplicated copies of an enhancer during zebrafish evolution.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that during vertebrate history GLI2 acquired a high
level of complexity in the genetic mechanisms regulating its expression during
spatiotemporal patterning of the central nervous system (CNS) and limbs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25715918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Feb 19;6:e1653. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.28.

Sonic hedgehog through Gli2 and Gli3 is required for the proper development of
placental labyrinth.

Pan YB(1), Gong Y(1), Ruan HF(1), Pan LY(1), Wu XK(1), Tang C(1), Wang CJ(2), Zhu
HB(2), Zhang ZM(2), Tang LF(3), Zou CC(3), Wang HB(4), Wu XM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. (2)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, The First Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (3)Department
of Internal Medicine, The Affiliated Children Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) functions as a conserved morphogen in the development of
various organs in metazoans ranging from Drosophila to humans. Here, we have
investigated the potential roles and underlying mechanisms of Shh signaling in
murine placentation. Immunostaining revealed the abundant expression of the main 
components of Shh pathway in both the trophectoderm of blastocysts and developing
placentas. Disruption of Shh led to impaired vascularogenesis of yolk sac, less
branching and malformation of placental labyrinth, thereby leading to a robust
decrease in capacity of transplacental passages. Moreover, placenta-specific gene
incorporation by lentiviral transduction of mouse blastocysts and blastocyst
transplantation robustly knocked down the expression of Gli3 and Gli2 in placenta
but not in embryos. Finally, Gli3 knockdown in Shh(-/-) placentas partially
rescued the defects of both yolk sac and placental labyrinth, and robustly
restored the capacity of transplacental passages. Gli2 knockdown in Shh(+/)(-)
placentas affected neither the capacity of tranplacental passages nor the
vascularogenesis of yolk sac, however, it partially phenocopied the labyrinthine 
defects of Shh(-/-) placentas. Taken together, these results uncover that both
Shh/Gli2 and Shh/Gli3 signals are required for proper development of murine
placentas and are possibly essential for pregnant maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4669788
PMID: 25695606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug;36(8):5807-14. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3250-4. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

Thermo-chemotherapy Induced miR-218 upregulation inhibits the invasion of gastric
cancer via targeting Gli2 and E-cadherin.

Ruan Q(1), Fang ZY, Cui SZ, Zhang XL, Wu YB, Tang HS, Tu YN, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510095, Guangdong, China.

Thermo-chemotherapy has been proven to reduce the invasion capability of cancer
cells. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this anti-invasion effect is
still unclear. In this study, the role of thermo-chemotherapy in the inhibition
of tumor invasion was studied. The results demonstrated that expression of
miR-218 was downregulated in gastric cancer tissues, which had a positive
correlation with tumor invasion and metastasis. In vitro thermo-chemotherapy
increased miR-218 expression in SGC7901 cells and inhibited both proliferation
and invasion of cancer cells. Gli2 was identified as a downstream target of
miR-218, and its expression was negatively regulated by miR-218. The
thermo-chemotherapy induced miR-218 upregulation was also accompanied by
increasing of E-cadherin expression. In conclusion, the present study indicates
that thermo-chemotherapy can effectively decrease the invasion capability of
cancer cells and increase cell-cell adhesion. miR-218 and its downstream target
Gli2, as well as E-cadherin, participate in the anti-invasion process.

PMID: 25694126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 May;172(5):603-8. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0934. Epub 2015 Feb 
18.

Sonic Hedgehog pathway is upregulated in adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas.

Gomes DC(1), Jamra SA(2), Leal LF(2), Colli LM(2), Campanini ML(2), Oliveira
RS(2), Martinelli CE Jr(2), Elias PC(2), Moreira AC(2), Machado HR(2), Saggioro
F(2), Neder L(2), Castro M(2), Antonini SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine of Ribeirao PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida
Bandeirantes, 3900 - Monte Alegre, CEP 14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo,
BrazilFederal University of UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil School of 
Medicine of Ribeirao PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes, 3900 -
Monte Alegre, CEP 14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, BrazilFederal University 
of UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (2)School of Medicine of Ribeirao 
PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes, 3900 - Monte Alegre, CEP
14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, BrazilFederal University of
UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (3)School of Medicine of Ribeirao
PretoUniversity of Sao Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes, 3900 - Monte Alegre, CEP
14049-900, Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, BrazilFederal University of
UberlandiaUberlandia, Minas Gerais, Brazil antonini@fmrp.usp.br.

OBJECTIVES: Pituitary stem cells play a role in the oncogenesis of human
adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas (aCPs). We hypothesized that crosstalk
between the Wnt/ß-catenin and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathways, both of which are
important in normal pituitary development, would contribute to the pathogenesis
of aCPs.
DESIGN: To explore the mRNA and protein expression of components of the SHH
signaling pathway in aCPs and their relationship with the identification of
CTNNB1/ß-catenin mutations and patients outcomes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 18 aCP samples, CTNNB1 was sequenced, and the mRNA
expression levels of SHH pathway members (SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, and 
SUFU) and SMO, GLI1, GLI3, SUFU, ß-catenin, and Ki67 proteins were evaluated by
quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry respectively. Anterior normal
pituitaries were used as controls. Associations between molecular findings and
clinical data were analyzed.
RESULTS: The aCPs presented higher mRNA expression of SHH (+400-fold change (FC);
P<0.01), GLI1 (+102-FC; P<0.001), and GLI3 (+5.1-FC; P<0.01) than normal anterior
pituitaries. Longer disease-free survival was associated with low SMO and SUFU
mRNA expression (P<0.01 and P=0.02 respectively). CTNNB1/ß-catenin mutations were
found in 47% of the samples. aCPs with identified mutations presented with higher
mRNA expression of SMO and GLI1 (+4.3-FC; P=0.02 and +10.2-FC; P=0.03
respectively). SMO, GLI1, GLI3, and SUFU staining was found in 85, 67, 93, and
64% of the samples respectively. Strong GLI1 and GLI3 staining was detected in
palisade cells, which also labeled Ki67, a marker of cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: The upregulation of SHH signaling occurs in aCPs. Thus, activation
of Wnt/ß-catenin and SHH pathways, both of which are important in pituitary
embryogenesis, appears to contribute to the pathogenesis of aCP.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25693592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):177-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.11.025.

14-3-3<U+03B6> turns TGF-ß's function from tumor suppressor to metastasis promoter in
breast cancer by contextual changes of Smad partners from p53 to Gli2.

Xu J(1), Acharya S(2), Sahin O(1), Zhang Q(1), Saito Y(1), Yao J(1), Wang H(1),
Li P(1), Zhang L(2), Lowery FJ(2), Kuo WL(1), Xiao Y(1), Ensor J(3), Sahin AA(4),
Zhang XH(5), Hung MC(6), Zhang JD(7), Yu D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77030, USA; The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Pathology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center and Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The University of Texas Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for Molecular Medicine and
Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung 404,
Taiwan. (7)Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, F. Hoffmann-La Roche,
Ltd., 4070 Basel, Switzerland. (8)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; The
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Electronic address: dyu@mdanderson.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):151-3.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) functions as a tumor suppressor in
premalignant cells but as a metastasis promoter in cancer cells. The dichotomous 
functions of TGF-ß are proposed to be dictated by different partners of its
downstream effector Smads. However, the mechanism for the contextual changes of
Smad partners remained undefined. Here, we demonstrate that 14-3-3<U+03B6> destabilizes 
p53, a Smad partner in premalignant mammary epithelial cells, by downregulating
14-3-3s, thus turning off TGF-ß's tumor suppression function. Conversely, 14-3-3<U+03B6>
stabilizes Gli2 in breast cancer cells, and Gli2 partners with Smads to activate 
PTHrP and promote TGF-ß-induced bone metastasis. The 14-3-3<U+03B6>-driven contextual
changes of Smad partners from p53 to Gli2 may serve as biomarkers and therapeutic
targets of TGF-ß-mediated cancer progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4325275
PMID: 25670079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):151-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.01.005.

14-3-3<U+03B6> turns TGF-ß to the dark side.

ten Dijke P(1), van Dam H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Cancer Genomics Centre Netherlands,
Leiden University Medical Center, Postbus 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, the Netherlands; 
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Box 595, 75124 Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address:
p.ten_dijke@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Cancer Genomics
Centre Netherlands, Leiden University Medical Center, Postbus 9600,
2300 RC Leiden, the Netherlands; Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science
for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 595, 75124 Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):177-92.

TGF-ß/SMAD signaling has long been known to exhibit a dual role in cancer,
questioning what determines its context-dependent functions. In this issue of
Cancer Cell, Xu and colleagues describe a critical role of the adaptor protein
14-3-3<U+03B6> in modulating SMAD activities by changing its interaction partners during
breast cancer progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25670073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genes Dev. 2015 Feb 1;29(3):262-76. doi: 10.1101/gad.252676.114.

Bifurcating action of Smoothened in Hedgehog signaling is mediated by Dlg5.

Chong YC(1), Mann RK(1), Zhao C(1), Kato M(2), Beachy PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, USA; Department of Developmental Biology,
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA; Department of Biochemistry,
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA; (2)Institute for Stem Cell 
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA; Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California 94305, USA; (3)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA; Department of
Developmental Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA;
Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305,
USA pbeachy@stanford.edu.

Binding of the Hedgehog (Hh) protein signal to its receptor, Patched, induces
accumulation of the seven-pass transmembrane protein Smoothened (Smo) within the 
primary cilium and of the zinc finger transcription factor Gli2 at the ciliary
tip, resulting ultimately in Gli-mediated changes in nuclear gene expression.
However, the mechanism by which pathway activation is communicated from Smo to
Gli2 is not known. In an effort to elucidate this mechanism, we identified Dlg5
(Discs large, homolog 5) in a biochemical screen for proteins that preferentially
interact with activated Smo. We found that disruption of Smo-Dlg5 interactions or
depletion of endogenous Dlg5 leads to diminished Hh pathway response without a
significant impact on Smo ciliary accumulation. We also found that Dlg5 is
localized at the basal body, where it associates with another pathway component, 
Kif7. We show that Dlg5 is required for Hh-induced enrichment of Kif7 and Gli2 at
the tip of the cilium but is dispensable for Gpr161 exit from the cilium and the 
consequent suppression of Gli3 processing into its repressor form. Our findings
suggest a bifurcation of Smo activity in Hh response, with a Dlg5-independent arm
for suppression of Gli repressor formation and a second arm involving Smo
interaction with Dlg5 for Gli activation.

© 2015 Chong et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4318143
PMID: 25644602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 28;10(1):e0114932. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114932.
eCollection 2015.

Rapid screening of gene function by systemic delivery of morpholino
oligonucleotides to live mouse embryos.

McClelland KS(1), Wainwright EN(1), Bowles J(1), Koopman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Traditional gene targeting methods in mice are complex and time consuming,
especially when conditional deletion methods are required. Here, we describe a
novel technique for assessing gene function by injection of modified antisense
morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) into the heart of mid-gestation mouse embryos. 
After allowing MOs to circulate through the embryonic vasculature, target tissues
were explanted, cultured and analysed for expression of key markers. We
established proof-of-principle by partially phenocopying known gene knockout
phenotypes in the fetal gonads (Stra8, Sox9) and pancreas (Sox9). We also
generated a novel double knockdown of Gli1 and Gli2, revealing defects in Leydig 
cell differentiation in the fetal testis. Finally, we gained insight into the
roles of Adamts19 and Ctrb1, genes of unknown function in sex determination and
gonadal development. These studies reveal the utility of this method as a means
of first-pass analysis of gene function during organogenesis before committing to
detailed genetic analysis.

PMCID: PMC4309589
PMID: 25629157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. FASEB J. 2015 May;29(5):2059-69. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-269209. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Modulation of Dhh signaling and altered Sertoli cell function in mice lacking the
GPR37-prosaposin receptor.

La Sala G(1), Marazziti D(1), Di Pietro C(1), Golini E(1), Matteoni R(1),
Tocchini-Valentini GP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Emma-Infrafrontier-Impc, "A.
Buzzati-Traverso" Campus, Istituto di Biologia Cellulare e Neurobiologia,
Monterotondo Scalo, Rome, Italy. (2)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
Emma-Infrafrontier-Impc, "A. Buzzati-Traverso" Campus, Istituto di Biologia
Cellulare e Neurobiologia, Monterotondo Scalo, Rome, Italy gtocchini@emma.cnr.it.

The mammalian G-protein-coupled receptor 37 (GPR37) is expressed in brain, in
adult testis, and during the early phase of gonad differentiation. Somatic
Sertoli cells (SCs) are located within the seminiferous tubules where they
support the germinal epithelium. An adequate number of SCs is required for the
complete prepubertal differentiation of germ cells and adult fertility. This
study shows that Gpr37 and its ligand prosaposin are both postnatally expressed
by SCs, whose proliferation and maturation are affected in Gpr37-null mutant mice
during postnatal testicular development. Mutant pups show a delayed timing in
sperm cell development, with a partial arrest of spermatocytes at the meiotic
pachytene (e.g., 1.5-fold increase in Gpr37(-/-) P21 pups) and their increased
apoptosis (e.g., 1.8-fold and 3.5-fold increase in Gpr37(-/-) P21 and adult mice,
respectively). Mutant adults have reduced testis weight (wild type, 299 ± 5 mg;
knockout, 258 ± 16 mg; P < 0.05) and epididymal sperm count and motility (e.g.,
1.5-fold and 1.45-fold decrease in Gpr37(-/-) mice, respectively). Lack of Gpr37 
results in the reduction in androgen receptor levels during prepubertal testis
development, alongside the altered expression of SC maturation markers. It also
affects the prepubertal testis expression of desert hedgehog (Dhh) mitogenic
cascade components (Dhh, 1.3-fold increase in Gpr37(-/-) P10 and P21 pups; Gli2, 
1.4-fold and 1.6-fold increase in Gpr37(-/-) P10 and P21 pups, respectively)
including patched homolog 1 (1.3-fold increase in Gpr37(-/-) P10 and P21 pups),
which is found localized in prepubertal SCs and is associated with Gpr37 in
cultured primary SC samples. These results indicate that Gpr37 is a specific
modulator of murine testis Dhh mitogenic signaling and SC proliferation and
maturation.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25609427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cell Signal. 2015 Mar;27(3):487-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.01.004. Epub 2015
Jan 10.

Hedgehog signaling stimulates the conversion of cholesterol to steroids.

Tang C(1), Pan Y(1), Luo H(1), Xiong W(2), Zhu H(3), Ruan H(1), Wang J(1), Zou
C(2), Tang L(2), Iguchi T(4), Long F(5), Wu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
310058, China. (2)The Affiliated Children Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, 310058, China. (3)The Affiliated First Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China. (4)Department of
Toxicology, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (5)Departments of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Medicine and Developmental Biology Washington University in 
St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA. (6)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China; Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Medicine and Developmental Biology Washington University in St. Louis, MO, 63110,
USA. Electronic address: xiwu@zju.edu.cn.

Cholesterol modification of Hedgehog (Hh) ligands is fundamental for the activity
of Hh signaling, and cholesterol biosynthesis is also required for intracellular 
Hh signaling transduction. Here, we investigated the roles and underlying
mechanism of Hh signaling in metabolism of cholesterol. The main components of
the Hh pathway are abundantly expressed in both human cytotrophoblasts and
trophoblast-like cells. Activation of Hh signaling induces the conversion of
cholesterol to progesterone (P4) and estradiol (E2) through up-regulating the
expression of steroidogenic enzymes including P450 cholesterol side chain
cleavage enzyme (P450scc), 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (3ß-HSD1), and 
aromatase. Moreover, inhibition of Hh signaling attenuates not only Hh-induced
expression of steroidogenic enzymes but also the conversion of cholesterol to P4 
and E2. Whereas Gli3 is required for Hh-induced P450scc expression, Gli2 mediates
the induction of 3ß-HSD1 and aromatase. Finally, in ovariectomized nude mice,
systemic inhibition of Hh signaling by cyclopamine suppresses circulating P4 and 
E2 levels derived from a trophoblast-like choricarcinoma xenograft, and
attenuates uterine response to P4 and E2. Together these results uncover a
hitherto uncharacterized role of Hh signaling in metabolism of cholesterol.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4333021
PMID: 25582983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Mar;14(3):727-39. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0481. Epub 
2014 Dec 31.

Histone deacetylase 6 represents a novel drug target in the oncogenic Hedgehog
signaling pathway.

Dhanyamraju PK(1), Holz PS(1), Finkernagel F(1), Fendrich V(2), Lauth M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Philipps University, Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), 
Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Marburg, Germany. (2)Department of
Surgery, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany. (3)Philipps University, Institute
of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Center for Tumor Biology and
Immunology, Marburg, Germany. lauth@imt.uni-marburg.de.

Uncontrolled Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is the cause of several malignancies,
including the pediatric cancer medulloblastoma, a neuroectodermal tumor affecting
the cerebellum. Despite the development of potent Hh pathway antagonists,
medulloblastoma drug resistance is still an unresolved issue that requires the
identification of novel drug targets. Following up on our observation that
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) expression was increased in Hh-driven
medulloblastoma, we found that this enzyme is essential for full Hh pathway
activation. Intriguingly, these stimulatory effects of HDAC6 are partly
integrated downstream of primary cilia, a known HDAC6-regulated structure. In
addition, HDAC6 is also required for the complete repression of basal Hh target
gene expression. These contrasting effects are mediated by HDAC6's impact on Gli2
mRNA and GLI3 protein expression. As a result of this complex interaction with Hh
signaling, global transcriptome analysis revealed that HDAC6 regulates only a
subset of Smoothened- and Gli-driven genes, including all well-established Hh
targets such as Ptch1 or Gli1. Importantly, medulloblastoma cell survival was
severely compromised by HDAC6 inhibition in vitro and pharmacologic HDAC6
blockade strongly reduced tumor growth in an in vivo allograft model. In summary,
our data describe an important role for HDAC6 in regulating the mammalian Hh
pathway and encourage further studies focusing on HDAC6 as a novel drug target in
medulloblastoma.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25552369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 30;6(3):1519-30.

Mitochondria-derived reactive oxygen species drive GANT61-induced mesothelioma
cell apoptosis.

Lim CB(1), Prêle CM(1,)(2), Baltic S(1), Arthur PG(3), Creaney J(4), Watkins
DN(5), Thompson PJ(1), Mutsaers SE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lung Institute of Western Australia and Centre for Asthma, Allergy and
Respiratory Research, School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western 
Australia, Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, Nedlands, WA, Australia. 
(2)Centre for Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia and Harry Perkins Institute of
Medical Research, Nedlands, WA, Australia. (3)School of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.
(4)National Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases, School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Harry Perkins Institute of Medical
Research and Australian Mesothelioma Tissue Bank, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, 
Nedlands, WA, Australia. (5)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst,
NSW, Australia.

Gli transcription factors of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway have been reported to be
drivers of malignant mesothelioma (MMe) cell survival. The Gli inhibitor GANT61
induces apoptosis in various cancer cell models, and has been associated directly
with Gli inhibition. However various chemotherapeutics can induce cell death
through generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) but whether ROS mediates
GANT61-induced apoptosis is unknown. In this study human MMe cells were treated
with GANT61 and the mechanisms regulating cell death investigated. Exposure of
MMe cells to GANT61 led to G1 phase arrest and apoptosis, which involved ROS but 
not its purported targets, GLI1 or GLI2. GANT61 triggered ROS generation and
quenching of ROS protected MMe cells from GANT61-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, 
we demonstrated that mitochondria are important in mediating GANT61 effects: (1) 
ROS production and apoptosis were blocked by mitochondrial inhibitor rotenone;
(2) GANT61 promoted superoxide formation in mitochondria; and (3) mitochondrial
DNA-deficient LO68 cells failed to induce superoxide, and were more resistant to 
apoptosis induced by GANT61 than wild-type cells. Our data demonstrate for the
first time that GANT61 induces apoptosis by promoting mitochondrial superoxide
generation independent of Gli inhibition, and highlights the therapeutic
potential of mitochondrial ROS-mediated anticancer drugs in MMe.

PMCID: PMC4359311
PMID: 25544756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;15(12):1667-76. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.972286.

Gli2 silencing enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis and reduces tumor growth in human
hepatoma cells in vivo.

Zhang DW(1), Li HY, Lau WY, Cao LQ, Li Y, Jiang XF, Yang XW, Xue P.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery ; The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University ; Guangzhou , China.

Our previous studies have showed that Gli2 played a predominant role in
proliferation and apoptosis resistance to TRAIL in hepatoma cells. The purpose of
this study was to explore whether Gli2 silencing enhances efficiency of TRAIL for
hepatoma in vivo. SMMC-7721-shRNA cells were implanted subcutaneously into nude
mices and TRAIL was injected into the peritoneal space. TUNEL assay was used to
detect apoptosis of tumor cells. The expression of Gli2, c-FLIPL, c-FLIPS, and
Bcl-2 protein was determined by immunohistochemistry, respectively. Apoptosis and
the level of caspases proteins in SMMC-7721 and HepG2 cells were detected by Flow
cytometry and Western blot. Transcriptional activity of c-FLIP induced by Gli2
was measured by luciferase reporter gene assay. The results showed that lower
volumes and weights of tumor were found in mice xenografted with SMMC-7721-shRNA 
cells as compared with control cells in the presence of TRAIL (P < 0.05). TUNEL
assay showed significantly higher apoptosis index (AI) in the SMMC-7721-shRNA
group than in the control groups (P < 0.05). There were remarkable positive
correlations between Gli2 and c-FLIPL, c-FLIPS, Bcl-2 protein expression.
Over-expression of c-FLIP or Bcl-2 in HepG2 cells attenuated TRAIL-induced
apoptosis via suppression of caspase-8 or caspase-9 activity, respectively.
Luciferase reporter gene assay found a regulatory sequence by which Gli2
activated transcription between -1007 to -244 in the c-FLIP promoter region. This
study demonstrates that Gli2 showed regulatory activity on transcription of
c-FLIP gene, and Gli2 silencing enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis via
down-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-2 in human hepatoma cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4622984
PMID: 25535898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Apr;23(2):116-21. doi: 10.1177/1066896914562278. Epub
2014 Dec 16.

Carcinosarcoma of the parotid: investigating its biology with morphoproteomics.

Vélez-Pérez A(1), Huang RS(2), Everett JM(2), Guo S(2), Buryanek J(2), Karni
RJ(2), Brown RE(2).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas at Houston Health Science Center, Houston, TX, USA
anneliese.velezperez@uth.tmc.edu. (2)The University of Texas at Houston Health
Science Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Carcinosarcoma of the parotid is a rare biphasic malignant neoplasm comprised of 
both carcinomatous and sarcomatous components representing approximately 0.4% of 
all malignant salivary gland neoplasms. We report a case of a 55-year-old
Caucasian man who presented with a progressively enlarging left facial mass.
Histopathological evaluation of the tumoral tissue revealed a high grade, mixed
epithelial and mesenchymal malignant tumor, most consistent with a carcinosarcoma
of the parotid. Morphoproteomic analysis was performed and revealed expression of
secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC); glioma-associated oncogen
protein 2 (Gli2); and phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of
transcription (p-STAT3 [Tyr705]) in the carcinomatous and malignant mesenchymal
components. These aforementioned markers have been linked to the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in which epithelial cells lose their
characteristics and phenotypically become mesenchymal cells. This finding allows 
us to further understand the biology of the 2 cellular components of the
carcinosarcoma as having a monoclonal origin.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 25515562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Apr;211(4):308-15. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.11.005. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

Autophagy is related to the hedgehog signaling pathway in human gastric
adenocarcinoma: prognostic significance of Beclin-1 and Gli2 expression in human 
gastric adenocarcinoma.

Won KY(1), Kim GY(2), Lim SJ(1), Sung JY(3), Kim YW(3), Park YK(3), Lee J(3),
Choi HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Kyung Hee
University Hospital at Gangdong, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
Electronic address: pathogen@medimail.co.kr. (3)Department of Pathology, Kyung
Hee University Hospital, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Beclin-1 induces autophagy, which is known to be involved in many
physiopathological processes such as cell development, aging, stress response,
immune response and cancer. Several studies showed that Beclin-1 expression is
associated with several prognostic factors of gastric carcinomas. Recently, the
connection between autophagy and the hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway has been
studied. Here, we investigated the relationship between the autophagy and
hedgehog (HH) signaling pathways in gastric adenocarcinoma. We evaluated Beclin-1
and Gli2 expression in 108 gastric adenocarcinoma tissues via immunohistochemical
analysis, using a tissue microarray, in relation to survival and other prognostic
factors. Our results show that increased Beclin-1 expression is correlated with
favorable clinicopathological variables including histologic grade, tumor size,
primary tumor (T) stage, lymph node metastasis, lymphatic invasion, neural
invasion, and tumor recurrence. Furthermore, increased Gli-2 expression was
correlated with several favorable clinicopathological variables including primary
tumor (T) stage, lymphatic invasion, and tumor recurrence. Increased Beclin-1
expression was significantly correlated with increased Gli2. Univariate analyses 
for disease-free survival and overall survival revealed that the higher Beclin-1 
and Gli2 expression group had a more favorable prognosis compared with the lower 
Beclin-1 and Gli2 expression group. Our results suggest that progressively
increased Beclin-1 and Gli2 expression contributes to the inhibition of tumor
growth and metastasis in gastric adenocarcinoma and Beclin-1 acts as a tumor
suppressor by regulating the HH signaling pathway through Gli2 expression in
gastric adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25512258  [PubMed - in process]


116. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2014 Jun;2(3):e00043. doi: 10.1002/prp2.43. Epub 2014 Apr
7.

NL-103, a novel dual-targeted inhibitor of histone deacetylases and hedgehog
pathway, effectively overcomes vismodegib resistance conferred by Smo mutations.

Zhao J(1), Quan H(1), Xie C(1), Lou L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai,
201203, China.

Misregulation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and medulloblastoma. Vismodegib, an orally
bioavailable Hh signal pathway inhibitor targeting Smo, has been approved for the
treatment of advanced BCC. However, acquired drug resistance to vismodegib
induced by point mutation in Smo is emerging as a major problem to vismodegib
treatment. In this study, we designed and synthesized a novel chimeric compound
NL-103, which comprises structural elements of Hh pathway inhibitor vismodegib,
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor vorinostat. NL-103 simultaneously and
significantly inhibited both HDACs and Hh pathway. Importantly, NL-103, as well
as vorinostat, effectively overcame vismodegib resistance induced by Smoothened
point mutations. Moreover, NL-103 and vorinostat, but not vismodegib,
significantly downregulated the expression of Gli2 which plays an important role 
in Hh pathway. These results indicate that HDAC inhibitory activity is essential 
for NL-103 to overcome vismodegib resistance and that dual inhibition of HDAC and
Hh signaling pathway may be a rational strategy for overcoming vismodegib
resistance. Our findings suggest that NL-103 may be a promising compound for
clinical development as a more effective Hh pathway inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC4186412
PMID: 25505589  [PubMed]


117. Cancer Cell. 2014 Dec 8;26(6):797-812. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.021.

A BCL6/BCOR/SIRT1 complex triggers neurogenesis and suppresses medulloblastoma by
repressing Sonic Hedgehog signaling.

Tiberi L(1), Bonnefont J(1), van den Ameele J(1), Le Bon SD(1), Herpoel A(1),
Bilheu A(1), Baron BW(2), Vanderhaeghen P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Institute for Interdisciplinary Research 
(IRIBHM), and ULB Institute of Neuroscience (UNI), 808 Route de Lennik, 1070
Brussels, Belgium. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (3)Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Institute for
Interdisciplinary Research (IRIBHM), and ULB Institute of Neuroscience (UNI), 808
Route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium; Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology (WELBIO), Université Libre de Bruxelles, 808 Route de Lennik, 1070 
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: pierre.vanderhaeghen@ulb.ac.be.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Feb 9;27(2):312-3.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Dec 8;26(6):773-4.

Disrupted differentiation during development can lead to oncogenesis, but the
underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we identify BCL6, a
transcriptional repressor and lymphoma oncoprotein, as a pivotal factor required 
for neurogenesis and tumor suppression of medulloblastoma (MB). BCL6 is necessary
for and capable of preventing the development of GNP-derived MB in mice, and can 
block the growth of human MB cells in vitro. BCL6 neurogenic and oncosuppressor
effects rely on direct transcriptional repression of Gli1 and Gli2 effectors of
the SHH pathway, through recruitment of BCOR corepressor and SIRT1 deacetylase.
Our findings identify the BCL6/BCOR/SIRT1 complex as a potent repressor of the
SHH pathway in normal and oncogenic neural development, with direct diagnostic
and/or therapeutic relevance for SHH MB.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25490446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Nov 26;7(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s13039-014-0085-4. eCollection
2014.

A de novo 10.79 Mb interstitial deletion at 2q13q14.2 involving PAX8 causing
hypothyroidism and mullerian agenesis: a novel case report and literature review.

Ma D(1), Marion R(2), Punjabi NP(2), Pereira E(2), Samanich J(2), Agarwal C(2),
Li J(1), Huang CK(1), Ramesh KH(1), Cannizzaro LA(1), Naeem R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Cytogenetics Lab, Department of Pathology, Montefiore 
Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1635 Poplar Street, Bronx,
NY 10461 USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital at Montefiore,
Bronx, NY USA.

Reports of interstitial deletions involving proximal long arm of chromosome 2 are
limited. Based on early chromosomal analysis studies, the phenotypic consequence 
of deletions at the ancestral chromosome fusion site at chromosome 2q13q14.1
remains unclear. A recurrent 1.71 Mb deletion at 2q13 has recently been proposed 
as a new genomic disorder, associated with an increased risk of intellectual
disability and craniofacial dysmorphism. Herein, we report the case of a
12 year-old girl with unique clinical features including global developmental
delay, mullerian agenesis, and hypothyroidism associated with a normal size and
position of the thyroid gland, as well as negative thyroid antibodies.
Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization study revealed a de novo
10.79 Mb deletion at 2q13q14.2 (111,548,932-122,336,492), which involves more
than 88 UCSC genes, 38 of which are OMIM genes, 7 of which are disease-causing
and 3 of which (including GLI2, IL1B and PAX8) show a dominant inheritance
pattern.. Interestingly, PAX8 (chr2:113,973,574-114,036,498), a member of the
paired-box gene family, is essential for the formation of thyroxine-producing
follicular cells. Autosomal dominant transmission of congenital thyroid
hypoplasia due to loss-of-function mutation of PAX8 suggests a possible
haploinsufficiency effect. Additionally, PAX8 is also expressed in the tissue
primordia that form both the mullerian duct derivatives and the upper urinary
tracts. A recent study has associated a novel PAX8 mutation with a severe form of
hypothyroidism and abnormalities in the urogenital tract. Taken together, the
unique clinical manifestation seen in this patient could be attributed to the
heterozygous deletion of PAX8 gene. A prospective investigation is merited to
fully evaluate the pathogenic effect of the interstitial deletion of 2q13q14.2.

PMCID: PMC4256837
PMID: 25484916  [PubMed]


119. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jan 28;356(2 Pt B):855-61. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.10.042.
Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Ribosomal protein S3 regulates GLI2-mediated osteosarcoma invasion.

Nagao-Kitamoto H(1), Setoguchi T(2), Kitamoto S(3), Nakamura S(1), Tsuru A(1),
Nagata M(1), Nagano S(1), Ishidou Y(4), Yokouchi M(1), Kitajima S(5), Yoshioka
T(6), Maeda S(4), Yonezawa S(3), Komiya S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan. (2)The Near-Future Locomotor
Organ Medicine Creation Course (Kusunoki Kai), Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8520,
Japan. Electronic address: setoro@m2.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of
Human Pathology, Field of Oncology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan. (4)Department of Medical Joint 
Materials, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, 
Kagoshima, Japan. (5)Department of Surgical Pathology, Kagoshima University
Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan. (6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pathology,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, 
Japan.

It has been reported that GLI2 promotes proliferation, migration, and invasion of
mesenchymal stem cell and osteosarcoma cells. To examine the molecular mechanisms
of GLI2-mediated osteosarcoma metastasis, we performed a microarray analysis. The
gene encoding ribosomal protein S3 (RPS3) was identified as a target of GLI2.
Real-time PCR revealed that RPS3 was upregulated in osteosarcoma cell lines
compared with normal osteoblast cells. Knockdown of GLI2 decreased RPS3
expression, whereas forced expression of a constitutively active form of GLI2
upregulated the expression of RPS3. RPS3 knockdown by siRNA decreased the
migration and invasion of osteosarcoma cells. Although forced expression of
constitutively active GLI2 increased the migration of human mesenchymal stem
cells, knockdown of RPS3 reduced the up-regulated migration. In contrast, forced 
expression of RPS3 increased migration and invasion of osteosarcoma cells.
Moreover, reduction of migration by GLI2 knockdown was rescued by forced
expression of RPS3. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that RPS3 expression was 
increased in primary osteosarcoma lesions with lung metastases compared with
those without. These findings indicate that GLI2-RPS3 signaling may be a marker
of invasive osteosarcoma and a therapeutic target for patients with osteosarcoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25449781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Dec 15;281(3):243-53. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.10.007. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Arsenic inhibits hedgehog signaling during P19 cell differentiation.

Liu JT(1), Bain LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Program, Clemson University, 132 Long Hall, Clemson, 
SC 29634, USA. (2)Environmental Toxicology Program, Clemson University, 132 Long 
Hall, Clemson, SC 29634, USA; Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson
University, 132 Long Hall, Clemson, SC 29634, USA. Electronic address:
lbain@clemson.edu.

Arsenic is a toxicant found in ground water around the world, and human exposure 
mainly comes from drinking water or from crops grown in areas containing arsenic 
in soils or water. Epidemiological studies have shown that arsenic exposure
during development decreased intellectual function, reduced birth weight, and
altered locomotor activity, while in vitro studies have shown that arsenite
decreased muscle and neuronal cell differentiation. The sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling pathway plays an important role during the differentiation of both
neurons and skeletal muscle. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
arsenic can disrupt Shh signaling in P19 mouse embryonic stem cells, leading to
changes muscle and neuronal cell differentiation. P19 embryonic stem cells were
exposed to 0, 0.25, or 0.5 µM of sodium arsenite for up to 9 days during cell
differentiation. We found that arsenite exposure significantly reduced transcript
levels of genes in the Shh pathway in both a time and dose-dependent manner. This
included the Shh ligand, which was decreased 2- to 3-fold, the Gli2 transcription
factor, which was decreased 2- to 3-fold, and its downstream target gene Ascl1,
which was decreased 5-fold. GLI2 protein levels and transcriptional activity were
also reduced. However, arsenic did not alter GLI2 primary cilium accumulation or 
nuclear translocation. Moreover, additional extracellular SHH rescued the
inhibitory effects of arsenic on cellular differentiation due to an increase in
GLI binding activity. Taken together, we conclude that arsenic exposure affected 
Shh signaling, ultimately decreasing the expression of the Gli2 transcription
factor. These results suggest a mechanism by which arsenic disrupts cell
differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4255151
PMID: 25448440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 15;5(23):12151-65.

GLI inhibitor GANT-61 diminishes embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma growth
by inhibiting Shh/AKT-mTOR axis.

Srivastava RK(1), Kaylani SZ(2), Edrees N(2), Li C(1), Talwelkar SS(1), Xu J(1), 
Palle K(3), Pressey JG(2), Athar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, 35294-0019, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, 35294-0019,
USA. (3)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University
of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama 36604.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) typically arises from skeletal muscle. Currently, RMS in
patients with recurrent and metastatic disease have no successful treatment. The 
molecular pathogenesis of RMS varies based on cancer sub-types. Some embryonal
RMS but not other sub-types are driven by sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway.
However, Shh pathway inhibitors particularly smoothened inhibitors are not highly
effective in animals. Here, we show that Shh pathway effectors GLI1 and/or GLI2
are over-expressed in the majority of RMS cells and that GANT-61, a specific
GLI1/2 inhibitor dampens the proliferation of both embryonal and alveolar RMS
cells-derived xenograft tumors thereby blocking their growth. As compared to
vehicle-treated control, about 50% tumor growth inhibition occurs in mice
receiving GANT-61 treatment. The proliferation inhibition was associated with
slowing of cell cycle progression which was mediated by the reduced expression of
cyclins D1/2/3 & E and the concomitant induction of p21. GANT-61 not only reduced
expression of GLI1/2 in these RMS but also significantly diminished AKT/mTOR
signaling. The therapeutic action of GANT-61 was significantly augmented when
combined with chemotherapeutic agents employed for RMS therapy such as
temsirolimus or vincristine. Finally, reduced expression of proteins driving
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) characterized the residual tumors.

PMCID: PMC4322980
PMID: 25432075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cell. 2014 Nov 20;159(5):1110-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.013. Epub 2014 Nov 
13.

lncRNA directs cooperative epigenetic regulation downstream of chemokine signals.

Xing Z(1), Lin A(1), Li C(1), Liang K(1), Wang S(1), Liu Y(1), Park PK(1), Qin
L(2), Wei Y(1), Hawke DH(3), Hung MC(4), Lin C(5), Yang L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Cancer
Biology Program, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology and Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan. (5)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA; Cancer Biology Program, The University of Texas Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: clin2@mdanderson.org. (6)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Cancer Biology Program, The University of Texas
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding
RNAs, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
Electronic address: lyang7@mdanderson.org.

lncRNAs are known to regulate a number of different developmental and tumorigenic
processes. Here, we report a role for lncRNA BCAR4 in breast cancer metastasis
that is mediated by chemokine-induced binding of BCAR4 to two transcription
factors with extended regulatory consequences. BCAR4 binding of SNIP1 and PNUTS
in response to CCL21 releases the SNIP1's inhibition of p300-dependent histone
acetylation, which in turn enables the BCAR4-recruited PNUTS to bind H3K18ac and 
relieve inhibition of RNA Pol II via activation of the PP1 phosphatase. This
mechanism activates a noncanonical Hedgehog/GLI2 transcriptional program that
promotes cell migration. BCAR4 expression correlates with advanced breast
cancers, and therapeutic delivery of locked nucleic acids (LNAs) targeting BCAR4 
strongly suppresses breast cancer metastasis in mouse models. The findings reveal
a disease-relevant lncRNA mechanism consisting of both direct coordinated protein
recruitment and indirect regulation of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4266991
PMID: 25416949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;60(1):17-25. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2014.96. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Investigation of genetic factors underlying typical orofacial clefts: mutational 
screening and copy number variation.

Simioni M(1), Araujo TK(1), Monlleo IL(2), Maurer-Morelli CV(1),
Gil-da-Silva-Lopes VL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of
Campinas, UNICAMP, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Clinical Genetics Service,
Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital and Genetics Sector, Federal University 
of Alagoas, Maceió, Alagoas, Brazil.

Typical orofacial clefts (OFCs) comprise cleft lip, cleft palate and cleft lip
and palate. The complex etiology has been postulated to involve chromosome
rearrangements, gene mutations and environmental factors. A group of genes
including IRF6, FOXE1, GLI2, MSX2, SKI, SATB2, MSX1 and FGF has been implicated
in the etiology of OFCs. Recently, the role of the copy number variations (CNVs) 
has been studied in genetic defects and diseases. CNVs act by modifying gene
expression, disrupting gene sequence or altering gene dosage. The aims of this
study were to screen the above-mentioned genes and to investigate CNVs in
patients with OFCs. The sample was composed of 23 unrelated individuals who were 
grouped according to phenotype (associated with other anomalies or isolated) and 
familial recurrence. New sequence variants in GLI2, MSX1 and FGF8 were detected
in patients, but not in their parents, as well as in 200 control chromosomes,
indicating that these were rare variants. CNV screening identified new genes that
can influence OFC pathogenesis, particularly highlighting TCEB3 and KIF7, that
could be further analyzed. The findings of the present study suggest that the
mechanism underlying CNV associated with sequence variants may play a role in the
etiology of OFC.

PMID: 25391604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jan;46(1):84-93. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.09.010. Epub 2014
Oct 7.

Elaboration of tubules with active hedgehog drives parenchymal fibrogenesis in
gestational alloimmune liver disease.

Asai A(1), Malladi S(2), Misch J(3), Pan X(4), Malladi P(5), Diehl AM(6),
Whitington PF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute, Chicago, IL 60614; Department of 
Pediatrics, Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Feinberg
School of Medicine of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611. Electronic
address: aki4810@gmail.com. (2)Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute,
Chicago, IL 60614. Electronic address: sammalladi@gmail.com. (3)Stanley Manne
Children's Research Institute, Chicago, IL 60614. Electronic address:
jmisch2008@gmail.com. (4)Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute, Chicago, IL
60614. Electronic address: xpan@luriechildrens.org. (5)Stanley Manne Children's
Research Institute, Chicago, IL 60614. Electronic address:
pmalladi@luriechildrens.org. (6)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC 27710. Electronic address: annamae.diehl@duke.edu.
(7)Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute, Chicago, IL 60614; Department of 
Pediatrics, Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Feinberg
School of Medicine of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611. Electronic
address: p-whitington@northwestern.edu.

Gestational alloimmune liver disease (GALD) produces severe neonatal liver
disease that is notable for paucity of hepatocytes, large numbers of parenchymal 
tubules, and extensive fibrosis. Liver specimens from 19 GALD cases were studied 
in comparison with 14 infants without liver disease (normal newborn liver; NNL)
to better understand the pathophysiology that would produce this characteristic
histopathology. GALD liver parenchyma contained large numbers of tubules
comprising epithelium expressing KRT7/19, EPCAM, and SOX9, suggesting biliary
progenitor status. Quantitative morphometry demonstrated that in GALD, the area
density of KRT19+ tubules was 16.4 ± 6.2 versus 2.0 ± 2.6 area% in NNL (P <
.0001). Functional hepatocyte mass was markedly reduced in GALD, 16.3 ± 6.2
versus 61.9 ± 11.0 area% of CPS1+ cells in NNL (P < .0001). A strong inverse
correlation was established between CPS1+ area density and KRT19+ area density
(r(2) = 0.66, P < .0001). Tubules showed active hedgehog signaling as determined 
by SHH and nuclear GLI2 expression and expressed the profibrogenic cytokine SPP1.
SPP1 protein content and SPP1 expression were greater in GALD than NNL (15- and
13-fold respectively; P = .002). GALD liver contained large numbers of activated 
myofibroblasts and showed greater than 10-fold more fibrosis than NNL. The extent
of fibrosis correlated with the area density of KRT19+ tubules (r(2) = 0.387, P =
.001). The data support a pathogenic model in which immune injury to fetal
hepatocytes provides a stimulus for expansion of parenchymal tubules, which, by
way of Hh activation, produce fibrogenic signals leading to vibrant fibrosis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25387814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jan;14(1):23-30. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-1040. Epub
2014 Nov 7.

Darinaparsin inhibits prostate tumor-initiating cells and Du145 xenografts and is
an inhibitor of hedgehog signaling.

Bansal N(1), Farley NJ(1), Wu L(1), Lewis J(2), Youssoufian H(2), Bertino JR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey. (2)Ziopharm
Oncology Inc., New York, New York. (3)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, New Jersey. bertinoj@cinj.rutgers.edu.

Prostate cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death in men in the United
States. A major cause of drug resistance in prostate and other epithelial tumors 
may be due to the presence of a fraction of tumor cells that retain the ability
to initiate tumors and hence are termed tumor-initiating cells (TIC) or cancer
stem cells. Here, we report that darinaparsin, an organic derivative of arsenic
trioxide, is cytotoxic to prostate cancer cell lines as well as fresh prostate
cancer cells from patients at low micromolar concentrations, and importantly
inhibits the TIC subpopulations. It also inhibits growth of the
castrate-resistant Du145 prostate tumor propagated as xenograft in mice and
inhibits the tumor-initiating potential of prostate cancer cells. Although the
mechanism by which darinaparsin acts is not completely known, we show that it
kills prostate cancer cells by blocking cells in the G2-M phase of the cell cycle
and inhibits Hedgehog signaling by downregulating Gli-2 transcriptional activity.
These data provide a rationale for evaluating darinaparsin in patients with
castrate-resistant prostate cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25381261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cancer Inform. 2014 Oct 13;13:93-108. doi: 10.4137/CIN.S18377. eCollection 2014.

CSNK1A1 and Gli2 as Novel Targets Identified Through an Integrative Analysis of
Gene Expression Data, Protein-Protein Interaction and Pathways Networks in
Glioblastoma Tumors: Can These Two Be Antagonistic Proteins?

Mishra S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, 
Hyderabad, Telangana State, India.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the malignant form of glioma, and the interplay of
different pathways working in concert in GBM development and progression needs to
be fully understood. Wnt signaling and sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathways,
having basic similarities, are among the major pathways aberrantly activated in
GBM, and hence, need to be targeted. It becomes imperative, therefore, to explore
the functioning of these pathways in context of each other in GBM. An integrative
approach may help provide new biological insights, as well as solve the problem
of identifying common drug targets for simultaneous targeting of these pathways. 
The beauty of this approach is that it can recapitulate several known facts, as
well as decipher new emerging patterns, identifying those targets that could be
missed when relying on one type of data at a time. This approach can be easily
extended to other systems to discover key patterns in the functioning of
signaling molecules. Studies were designed to assess the relationship between
significant differential expression of genes of the Wnt (Wnt/ß-catenin canonical 
and Wnt non-canonical) and SHH signaling pathways and their connectivity patterns
in interaction and signaling networks. Further, the aim was to decipher
underlying mechanistic patterns that may be involved in a more specific way and
to generate a ranked list of genes that can be used as markers or drug targets.
These studies predict that Wnt pathway plays a relatively more pro-active role
than the SHH pathway in GBM. Further, CTNNB1, CSNK1A1, and Gli2 proteins may act 
as key drug targets common to these pathways. While CTNNB1 is a widely studied
molecule in the context of GBM, the likely roles of CSNK1A1 and Gli2 are found to
be relatively novel. It is surmised that Gli2 may be antagonistic to CSNK1A1,
preventing the phosphorylation of CTNNB1 and SMO proteins in Wnt and SHH
signaling pathway, respectively, by CSNK1A1, and thereby, aberrant activation.
New insights into the possible behavior of these pathway molecules relative to
each other in GBM reveal some key interesting patterns.

PMCID: PMC4213195
PMID: 25374452  [PubMed]


127. Brain Struct Funct. 2016 Jan;221(1):665-78. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0932-4. Epub 
2014 Nov 4.

Developmental guidance of the retroflex tract at its bending point involves
Robo1-Slit2-mediated floor plate repulsion.

Moreno-Bravo JA(1), Martinez-Lopez JE(1), Madrigal MP(1), Kim M(2), Mastick
GS(2), Lopez-Bendito G(1), Martinez S(1,)(3), Puelles E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante, Universidad Miguel Hernández-CSIC,
Sant Joan d'Alacant, 03550, Alicante, Spain. (2)Department of Biology, University
of Nevada, Reno, NV, 89557, USA. (3)Instituto Murciano de Investigación Biomédica
IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain. (4)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante,
Universidad Miguel Hernández-CSIC, Sant Joan d'Alacant, 03550, Alicante, Spain.
epuelles@umh.es.

The retroflex tract contains medial habenula efferents that target the hindbrain 
interpeduncular complex and surrounding areas. This tract displays a singular
course. Initially, habenular axons extend ventralwards in front of the pretectum 
until they reach the basal plate. Next, they avoid crossing the local floor
plate, sharply changing course caudalwards (the retroflexion alluded by the tract
name) and navigate strictly antero-posteriorly across basal pretectum, midbrain
and isthmus. Once they reach rhombomere 1, the habenular axons criss-cross the
floor plate several times within the interpeduncular nuclear complex as they
innervate it. Here we described the timing and details of growth phenomena as
these axons navigate to their target. The first dorsoventral course apparently
obeys Ntn1 attraction. We checked the role of local floor plate signaling in the 
decision to avoid the thalamic floor plate and bend caudalwards. Analyzing the
altered floor and basal plates of Gli2 knockout mice, we found a contralateral
projection of most habenular axons, plus ulterior bizarre navigation
rostralwards. This crossing phenotype was due to a reduced expression of Slit
repulsive cues, suggesting involvement of the floor-derived Robo-Slit system in
the normal guidance of this tract. Using Slit and Robo mutant mice, open neural
tube and co-culture assays, we determined that Robo1-Slit2 interaction is
specifically required for impeding that medial habenular axons cross the thalamic
floor plate. This pathfinding mechanism is essential to establish the
functionally important habenulo-interpeduncular connection.

PMCID: PMC4485949
PMID: 25366972  [PubMed - in process]


128. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Oct 27;13(4):8767-75. doi: 10.4238/2014.October.27.18.

Expression analysis of Gli1 and Gli2 in different tissues and muscle-derived
cells of Qinchuan cattle.

Liu Y(1), Wang H(1), Cheng G(1), Jiang B(1), Zan L(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China zanlinsen@163.com.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates the differentiation of many kinds
of cells and plays a critical role in many embryonic and postnatal developmental 
processes. Gli1 and Gli2 are two transcription factors of the Hh signaling
pathway. In this study, we used quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction 
to detect the relative expression of Gli1 and Gli2 in 13 tissues from three
two-year-old purebred Qinchuan cattle, as well as in different cell populations
derived from muscle and different stages of myogenic differentiation of
myoblasts. The expression levels of Gli1 and Gli2 in muscle were the lowest of
the 13 tissues (P < 0.05), and they declined predominantly from preplate (pp)1 to
pp6 cells. However, the expression of Gli2 was elevated during myogenic
differentiation until the 6th day. We speculated that Hh signaling was negatively
activated in myocytes and quiescent myoblasts. The increased expression of Gli1
and Gli2 in the early days of myogenic differentiation suggested that Hh
signaling would be activated when the quiescent bovine myoblast was stimulated to
initiate myogenic differentiation.

PMID: 25366768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2014 Dec;31(8):945-59. doi: 10.1007/s10585-014-9682-1. Epub 
2014 Oct 31.

Wnt signaling induces gene expression of factors associated with bone destruction
in lung and breast cancer.

Johnson RW(1), Merkel AR, Page JM, Ruppender NS, Guelcher SA, Sterling JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System (VISN 9),
Nashville, TN, USA.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is an important regulator of bone
destruction in bone metastatic tumors. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß)
stimulates PTHrP production in part through the transcription factor Gli2, which 
is regulated independent of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in osteolytic cancer
cells. However, inhibition of TGF-ß in vivo does not fully inhibit tumor growth
in bone or tumor-induced bone destruction, suggesting other pathways are
involved. While Wnt signaling regulates Gli2 in development, the role of Wnt
signaling in bone metastasis is unknown. Therefore, we investigated whether Wnt
signaling regulates Gli2 expression in tumor cells that induce bone destruction. 
We report here that Wnt activation by ß-catenin/T cell factor 4 (TCF4)
over-expression or lithium chloride (LiCl) treatment increased Gli2 and PTHrP
expression in osteolytic cancer cells. This was mediated through the TCF and Smad
binding sites within the Gli2 promoter as determined by promoter mutation
studies, suggesting cross-talk between TGF-ß and Wnt signaling. Culture of tumor 
cells on substrates with bone-like rigidity increased Gli2 and PTHrP production, 
enhanced autocrine Wnt activity and led to an increase in the TCF/Wnt signaling
reporter (TOPFlash), enriched ß-catenin nuclear accumulation, and elevated
Wnt-related genes by PCR-array. Stromal cells serve as an additional paracrine
source of Wnt ligands and enhanced Gli2 and PTHrP mRNA levels in MDA-MB-231 and
RWGT2 cells in vitro and promoted tumor-induced bone destruction in vivo in a
ß-catenin/Wnt3a-dependent mechanism. These data indicate that a combination of
matrix rigidity and stromal-secreted factors stimulate Gli2 and PTHrP through Wnt
signaling in osteolytic breast cancer cells, and there is significant cross-talk 
between the Wnt and TGF-ß signaling pathways. This suggests that the Wnt
signaling pathway may be a potential therapeutic target for inhibiting tumor cell
response to the bone microenvironment and at the very least should be considered 
in clinical regimens targeting TGF-ß signaling.

PMCID: PMC4258192
PMID: 25359619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 May;82(5):728-38. doi: 10.1111/cen.12637. Epub 2014
Dec 9.

The role of the sonic hedgehog signalling pathway in patients with midline
defects and congenital hypopituitarism.

Gregory LC(1), Gaston-Massuet C, Andoniadou CL, Carreno G, Webb EA, Kelberman D, 
McCabe MJ, Panagiotakopoulos L, Saldanha JW, Spoudeas HA, Torpiano J, Rossi M,
Raine J, Canham N, Martinez-Barbera JP, Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Epigenetics in Health and Disease Section, Genetics and Genomic
Medicine Programme, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: The Gli family of zinc finger (GLI) transcription factors mediates 
the sonic hedgehog signalling pathway (HH) essential for CNS, early pituitary and
ventral forebrain development in mice. Human mutations in this pathway have been 
described in patients with holoprosencephaly (HPE), isolated congenital
hypopituitarism (CH) and cranial/midline facial abnormalities. Mutations in Sonic
hedgehog (SHH) have been associated with HPE but not CH, despite murine studies
indicating involvement in pituitary development.
OBJECTIVES/METHODS: We aimed to establish the role of the HH pathway in the
aetiology of hypothalamo-pituitary disorders by screening our cohort of patients 
with midline defects and/or CH for mutations in SHH, GLI2, Shh brain enhancer 2
(SBE2) and growth-arrest specific 1 (GAS1).
RESULTS: Two variants and a deletion of GLI2 were identified in three patients. A
novel variant at a highly conserved residue in the zinc finger DNA-binding
domain, c.1552G > A [pE518K], was identified in a patient with growth hormone
deficiency and low normal free T4. A nonsynonymous variant, c.2159G > A
[p.R720H], was identified in a patient with a short neck, cleft palate and
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. A 26·6 Mb deletion, 2q12·3-q21·3, encompassing
GLI2 and 77 other genes, was identified in a patient with short stature and
impaired growth. Human embryonic expression studies and molecular
characterisation of the GLI2 mutant p.E518K support the potential pathogenicity
of GLI2 mutations. No mutations were identified in GAS1 or SBE2. A novel SHH
variant, c.1295T>A [p.I432N], was identified in two siblings with variable
midline defects but normal pituitary function.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that mutations in SHH, GAS1 and SBE2 are not
associated with hypopituitarism, although GLI2 is an important candidate for CH.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25327282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Jan;68(1):6-11. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2014-202434. Epub 2014
Oct 8.

Sonic hedgehog signalling proteins are frequently expressed in retinoblastoma and
are associated with aggressive clinicopathological features.

Choe JY(1), Yun JY(1), Jeon YK(2), Kim SH(3), Choung HK(4), Oh S(5), Park M(6),
Kim JE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University, College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Gyeonggi-Do, Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University,
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Yonsei Unversity, 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Seoul National
University Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of Biostatistics, Seoul 
National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of Pathology,
Seoul National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (7)Department of
Pathology, Seoul National University, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.

AIMS: This study aimed to examine the expression of Sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signalling proteins in retinoblastoma and to evaluate its clinical significance.
METHODS: Seventy-nine enucleated retinoblastoma tumours were investigated
immunohistochemically using antibodies against SHH pathway proteins, such as SHH,
glioma-associated oncogene homologue (GLI) 1, GLI2, GLI3 and ABC binding cassette
G2 (ABCG2). Western blotting of SHH signalling proteins was performed in two
retinoblastoma cell lines.
RESULTS: SHH was expressed in most retinoblastoma cases (78 of 79, 98.7%), with
21 cases (26.6%) showing strong expression. GLI1 and GLI2 were also frequently
expressed: 67 of 78 cases (85.9%) and 71 of 77 cases (92.2%), respectively. GLI3,
a transcriptional repressor, was expressed at low levels in 23 of the 78 cases
(29.5%). High ABCG2 expression was found in 23 of the 78 cases (29.5%). High
expression levels of these proteins in retinoblastoma cell lines were confirmed
by western blotting. The expression of SHH was associated with advanced stages,
local invasion and metastasis (all p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: SHH signalling molecules were frequently expressed in retinoblastoma
tumour cells, and high SHH expression was closely related to an advanced disease 
status. Our results suggest that the SHH signalling pathway may play a role in
the progression of retinoblastoma.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25296932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 30;9(9):e108037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108037.
eCollection 2014.

A role for smoothened during murine lens and cornea development.

Choi JJ(1), Ting CT(1), Trogrlic L(1), Milevski SV(1), Familari M(2), Martinez
G(1), de Iongh RU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Development Laboratory, Anatomy & Neuroscience, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. (2)Department of Zoology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.

Various studies suggest that Hedgehog (Hh) signalling plays roles in human and
zebrafish ocular development. Recent studies (Kerr et al., Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci. 2012; 53, 3316-30) showed that conditionally activating Hh signals promotes 
murine lens epithelial cell proliferation and disrupts fibre differentiation. In 
this study we examined the expression of the Hh pathway and the requirement for
the Smoothened gene in murine lens development. Expression of Hh pathway
components in developing lens was examined by RT-PCR, immunofluorescence and in
situ hybridisation. The requirement of Smo in lens development was determined by 
conditional loss-of-function mutations, using LeCre and MLR10 Cre transgenic
mice. The phenotype of mutant mice was examined by immunofluorescence for various
markers of cell cycle, lens and cornea differentiation. Hh pathway components
(Ptch1, Smo, Gli2, Gli3) were detected in lens epithelium from E12.5. Gli2 was
particularly localised to mitotic nuclei and, at E13.5, Gli3 exhibited a shift
from cytosol to nucleus, suggesting distinct roles for these transcription
factors. Conditional deletion of Smo, from ~E12.5 (MLR10 Cre) did not affect
ocular development, whereas deletion from ~E9.5 (LeCre) resulted in lens and
corneal defects from E14.5. Mutant lenses were smaller and showed normal
expression of p57Kip2, c-Maf, E-cadherin and Pax6, reduced expression of FoxE3
and Ptch1 and decreased nuclear Hes1. There was normal G1-S phase but decreased
G2-M phase transition at E16.5 and epithelial cell death from E14.5-E16.5. Mutant
corneas were thicker due to aberrant migration of Nrp2+ cells from the
extraocular mesenchyme, resulting in delayed corneal endothelial but normal
epithelial differentiation. These results indicate the Hh pathway is required
during a discrete period (E9.5-E12.5) in lens development to regulate lens
epithelial cell proliferation, survival and FoxE3 expression. Defective corneal
development occurs secondary to defects in lens and appears to be due to
defective migration of peri-ocular Nrp2+ neural crest/mesenchymal cells.

PMCID: PMC4182430
PMID: 25268479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 29;9(9):e108248. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108248.
eCollection 2014.

Downregulation of the gli transcription factors regulator Kif7 facilitates cell
survival and migration of choriocarcinoma cells.

Ho J(1), Du Y(1), Wong OG(1), Siu MK(2), Chan KK(2), Cheung AN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, 
China. (3)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China;
Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong - Shenzhen Hospital,
Shenzhen, China.

The kinesin protein Kif7 has been recognized as an integral component of hedgehog
signalling. Aberrant activation of hedgehog signalling has been implicated in
many human solid tumours. Gestational trophoblastic disease includes frankly
malignant choriocarcinoma and potentially malignant hydatidiform mole. Here we
investigated the hedgehog signalling components expression profiles in
gestational trophoblastic disease. Downregulation of Gli1, Gli2, Gli3 and Kif7
was demonstrated in clinical samples of choriocarcinoma and hydatidiform moles as
well as choriocarcinoma cell lines when compared with normal placentas. Ectopic
expression of Kif7 in two choriocarcinoma cell lines JAR and JEG-3 led to a
decrease in cell growth and increase in apoptosis demonstrated by MTT and TUNEL
assays, respectively. Overexpression of Kif7 also led to suppressed cell
migration through transwell assay. In contrast, knocking down Kif7 in
HTR-8/SVneo, an immortalized trophoblast cell line, increased cell number over
time and increased the migratory ability of the cells. Taken together, Kif7 may
contribute to pathogenesis of gestational trophoblastic disease through enhancing
survival and promoting dissemination of trophoblasts.

PMCID: PMC4180749
PMID: 25265279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Dec;164A(12):3194-202. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36786. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

De novo interstitial deletion 2q14.1q22.1: is there a recognizable phenotype?

Greally MT(1), Robinson E, Allen NM, O'Donovan D, Crolla JA.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin,
Dublin, Ireland.

In this report we describe a male patient with a rare de novo interstitial
deletion of chromosome 2q14.1-q22.1. His karyotype was reported as
46,XY,del(2)(q13q21) but subsequent array comparative genomic hybridization
(array CGH) analysis redefined the deletion breakpoints as 2q14.1 and 2q22.1.
Eight patients have been reported with deletions either within or spanning the
region 2q13 or 2q14 to 2q22.1. In five patients the diagnosis was made by
karyotype analysis alone and in three reported patients and the proband array CGH
analysis was also performed. When the proband was compared with the eight
previously reported patients it was apparent that they shared many clinical
findings suggesting that patients with a de novo interstitial deletion involving 
2q13 or 2q14 to 2q21 or 2q22 may have a recognizable phenotype. There are 14
known disease-associated genes in the deleted region of 2q14.1-q22.1 and their
possible phenotypic effects on the proband and the eight previously reported
patients are discussed.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25263257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Dec;99(12):E2744-53. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2155.

Transcriptomic changes during the pre-receptive to receptive transition in human 
endometrium detected by RNA-Seq.

Hu S(1), Yao G, Wang Y, Xu H, Ji X, He Y, Zhu Q, Chen Z, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics
(S.G.H., Y.W., H.J.X., X.W.J., Y.Q.H., Q.L.Z., Z.J.C., Y.S.), Center for
Reproductive Medicine, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200135, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory for Molecular
Andrology (S.G.H., G.X.Y.), State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute 
of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

CONTEXT: Identifying novel molecular markers for assessing endometrial
receptivity is necessary for understanding human implantation and may help in
improving the clinical outcome of in vitro fertilization.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to compare the gene expression profiles of the pre-receptive 
vs receptive phases of the natural cycle in human endometrial biopsies.
DESIGN: The design of this study was detecting the global gene expression profile
of human endometrial receptivity by RNA-Seq.
SETTING: This study was conducted at a university reproductive center.
PARTICIPANTS: Twelve women with normal menstrual cycles participated in the
study.
INTERVENTION: Study interventions included endometrial biopsies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The endometrial transcriptomes were determined by RNA-Seq,
and the expression of selected differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was
validated by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: A total of 2372 DEGs were identified by RNA-Seq. Of these genes, 1099
were up-regulated at LH+7 versus LH+2, whereas 1273 were down-regulated. Nineteen
selected genes were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. We first demonstrated that 
metallothionein (MT) family members, MT1E, F, G, H, M, X, and 2A, and four novel 
transcripts, HAP1, ZCCHC12, MRAP2, and OVGP1, which were not previously linked to
endometrial physiology, showed significant expression changes during
implantation. Mineral absorption was the most enriched pathway for up-regulated
genes, and cell cycle was enriched for down-regulated genes. Gene co-expression
network analysis identified five core regulatory factors (GLI2, CDC25A, TLR9,
MT1G, and SLC5A1) that are involved in endometrial receptivity during
implantation. Examination of the promoter regions of the DEGs identified AP2 and 
SP1 binding sites, suggesting a potential regulatory role in endometrial gene
expression for these two transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first RNA-Seq-based transcriptome comparison
of pre-receptive and receptive human endometria. Many novel candidate genes,
which have not been previously studied in human endometrium, may have functional 
significance during implantation and serve as molecular markers for endometrial
receptivity.

PMID: 25243572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Dev Biol. 2014 Nov 15;395(2):287-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.09.008. Epub 2014 
Sep 16.

Chibby functions in Xenopus ciliary assembly, embryonic development, and the
regulation of gene expression.

Shi J(1), Zhao Y(1), Galati D(1), Winey M(1), Klymkowsky MW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, & Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder,
CO 80309-347, USA. (2)Molecular, Cellular, & Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-347, USA. Electronic address:
michael.klymkowsky@colorado.edu.

Wnt signaling and ciliogenesis are core features of embryonic development in a
range of metazoans. Chibby (Cby), a basal-body associated protein, regulates
ß-catenin-mediated Wnt signaling in the mouse but not Drosophila. Here we present
an analysis of Cby's embryonic expression and morphant phenotypes in Xenopus
laevis. Cby RNA is supplied maternally, negatively regulated by Snail2 but not
Twist1, preferentially expressed in the neuroectoderm, and regulates
ß-catenin-mediated gene expression. Reducing Cby levels reduced the density of
multiciliated cells, the number of basal bodies per multiciliated cell, and the
numbers of neural tube primary cilia; it also led to abnormal development of the 
neural crest, central nervous system, and pronephros, all defects that were
rescued by a Cby-GFP chimera. Reduction of Cby led to an increase in Wnt8a and
decreases in Gli2, Gli3, and Shh RNA levels. Many, but not all, morphant
phenotypes were significantly reversed by the Wnt inhibitor SFRP2. These
observations extend our understanding of Cby's role in mediating the network of
interactions between ciliogenesis, signaling systems and tissue patterning.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4539557
PMID: 25220153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):7065-80.

Proteasome inhibition reverses hedgehog inhibitor and taxane resistance in
ovarian cancer.

Steg AD(1), Burke MR(2), Amm HM(3), Katre AA(4), Dobbin ZC(4), Jeong DH(5),
Landen CN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL. McWhorter School of Pharmacy, Samford University, Birmingham, AL.
These authors contributed equally to this work. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. These authors
contributed equally to this work. (3)Institute of Oral Health Research,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL. (4)Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Busan Paik Hospital, Inje University, 
Gimhae, South Korea. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA. These authors contributed equally to this work.

The goal of this study was to determine whether combined targeted therapies,
specifically those against the Notch, hedgehog and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways,
could overcome ovarian cancer chemoresistance. Chemoresistant ovarian cancer
cells were exposed to gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSI-I, Compound E) or the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, alone and in combination with the hedgehog
antagonist, LDE225. Bortezomib, alone and in combination with LDE225, was
evaluated for effects on paclitaxel efficacy. Cell viability and cell cycle
analysis were assessed by MTT assay and propidium iodide staining, respectively. 
Proteasome activity and gene expression were determined by luminescence assay and
qPCR, respectively. Studies demonstrated that GSI-I, but not Compound E,
inhibited proteasome activity, similar to bortezomib. Proteasome inhibition
decreased hedgehog target genes (PTCH1, GLI1 and GLI2) and increased LDE225
sensitivity in vitro. Bortezomib, alone and in combination with LDE225, increased
paclitaxel sensitivity through apoptosis and G2/M arrest. Expression of the
multi-drug resistance gene ABCB1/MDR1 was decreased and acetylation of a-tubulin,
a marker of microtubule stabilization, was increased following bortezomib
treatment. HDAC6 inhibitor tubastatin-a demonstrated that microtubule effects are
associated with hedgehog inhibition and sensitization to paclitaxel and LDE225.
These results suggest that proteasome inhibition, through alteration of
microtubule dynamics and hedgehog signaling, can reverse taxane-mediated
chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4196184
PMID: 25216523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Environ Toxicol. 2016 Mar;31(3):261-8. doi: 10.1002/tox.22040. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Genetic research and structural dysplasia assessment of anorectal malformations
in neonatal male rats induced by di(n-butyl) phthalate.

Liu ZH(1), Li EH(1), Xu DL(1), Sun WL(2), Hong Y(3), Zhao W(1), Xia SJ(1), Jiang 
JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shanghai First People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiaotong University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, China. (2)Department of 
Geriatrics, Shanghai First People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong
University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, China. (3)Department of Central
Laboratory, Shanghai First People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong
University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, China.

This study was the first to investigate the genetic abnormalities and structural 
dysplasia of anorectal malformations (ARMs) in male rats induced by di(n-butyl)
phthalate (DBP). DBP was administered to timed-pregnant rats to establish the ARM
rat model. The incidence of ARMs in male offspring was 39.5%. In neonatal period,
decreased body weight and anogenital distance were observed. The general image
and histological analysis of male offspring confirmed the presence of ARMs.
Anatomical examination of the ARM male rats revealed the dysplasia in solid
organs (heart-lung, liver, spleen, and kidney). The decreases of serum
testosterone concentration and androgen receptor expression in terminal rectum
were indicative of the antiandrogenic effects of DBP. Moreover, significant
decreased mRNA expressions of these androgen-related genes such as sonic
hedgehog, Gli2, Gli3, bone morphogenetic protein 4, Wnt5a, Hoxa13, Hoxd13,
fibroblast growth factor 10, and fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 were found
in terminal rectum of the ARM male pubs. These results demonstrated that
development of ARM rats was impaired by maternal exposure to DBP. The
antiandrogenic effects of DBP disturbing the androgen-related signaling networks 
might play an important role in the occurrence of ARMs. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. Environ Toxicol 31: 261-268, 2016.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25213187  [PubMed - in process]


139. Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1770. doi: 10.1002/hep.27432. Epub 2015 Mar 19.

GLI2 as a marker of hedgehog-responsive cells.

Grzelak CA(1), Sigglekow ND, McCaughan GW.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Injury and Cancer, Centenary Institute, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1770-1.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2015 Jan;61(1):98-107.

PMID: 25209117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 11;33:75. doi: 10.1186/s13046-014-0075-8.

SPOP suppresses tumorigenesis by regulating Hedgehog/Gli2 signaling pathway in
gastric cancer.

Zeng C, Wang Y, Lu Q, Chen J, Zhang J, Liu T, Lv N, Luo S.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that aberrant activation of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling by Gli transcription factors is characteristic of a variety of
aggressive human carcinomas including gastric cancer. Speckle-type POZ protein,
SPOP, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor, and it is found to inhibit oncogenic
signaling. However, the molecular mechanisms are largely unknown.
METHODS: In this study, we characterized the expression of SPOP in 88 pairs of
gastric cancer tissues and adjacent tissues by immunohistochemical staining and
Western blotting. The relationship between SPOP expression and clinical
pathologic factors was analyzed. Transfected gastric cancer cell lines were used 
in cell viability, wound healing and colony formation assays. The interaction of 
SPOP with Gli2 and other related apoptotic proteins was assessed by
immunoprecipitation, Western blotting, real-time PCR and dual luciferase reporter
assays. Intracellular interaction of SPOP and Gli2 was visualized by
immunofluorescent staining in gastric cancer cells.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining of SPOP can be detected in gastric cancer
tissues but much less than adjacent gastric tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). High SPOP
expression is negatively correlated with lymph node metastasis, poor histological
differentiation, and tumor malignancy according to TNM staging. In vitro
experiments revealed that over-expression of SPOP prevented tumor cells from
proliferation, migration and colony formation in gastric cancer cell lines.
Likewise, repression of SPOP promoted cell viability, migration, proliferation,
and attenuated apoptosis. Mechanistic studies revealed that increasing SPOP
accelerated Gli2 degradation but regardless of Gli2 synthesis. Furthermore,
cytoplasmic Gli2 decreased markedly along with the abundant expression of SPOP in
MKN45 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that SPOP plays critical roles in suppressing 
gastric tumorigenesis through inhibiting Hh/Gli2 signaling pathway. It may
provide an alternative strategy for developing therapeutic agents of gastric
cancer in future.

PMCID: PMC4172815
PMID: 25204354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Sep;13(2):284-99. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.06.006. Epub 2014
Jul 8.

Primary cilium-associated genes mediate bone marrow stromal cell response to
hypoxia.

Brown JA(1), Santra T(2), Owens P(3), Morrison AM(4), Barry F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Ireland, Regenerative Medicine Institute (REMEDI), National
University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland; Regenerative Medicine Institute (REMEDI),
National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. Electronic address:
james.brown@nuigalway.ie. (2)Systems Biology Ireland, Conway Institute,
University College Dublin (UCD), Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address:
tapesh.santra@gmail.com. (3)Centre for Microscopy and Imaging, Anatomy
Department, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. Electronic address: 
peter.owens@nuigalway.ie. (4)Regenerative Medicine Institute (REMEDI), National
University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. Electronic address:
aline.morrison@nuigalway.ie. (5)Systems Biology Ireland, Regenerative Medicine
Institute (REMEDI), National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland; Regenerative
Medicine Institute (REMEDI), National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
Electronic address: frank.barry@nuigalway.ie.

Currently there is intense interest in using mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) for
therapeutic interventions in many diseases and conditions. To accelerate the
therapeutic use of stem cells we must understand how they sense their
environment. Primary cilia are an extracellular sensory organelle present on most
growth arrested cells that transduce information about the cellular environment
into cells, triggering signaling cascades that have profound effects on
development, cell cycle, proliferation, differentiation and migration. Migrating 
cells likely encounter differing oxygen tensions, therefore we investigated the
effect of oxygen tension on cilia. Using bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs, also
known as bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells) we found that oxygen tension
significantly affected the length of cilia in primary BMSCs. Chronic exposure to 
hypoxia specifically down-regulated genes involved in hedgehog signaling and
re-localized the Smo and Gli2 proteins to cilia. Investigating the effects of
chemotactic migration on cilia, we observed significantly longer cilia in
migrating cells which was again, strongly influenced by oxygen tension. Finally, 
using computational modeling we identified links between migration and ciliation 
signaling pathways, characterizing the novel role of HSP90 and PI3K signaling in 
regulating BMSC cilia length. These findings enhance our current understanding of
BMSC adaptions to hypoxia and advance our knowledge of BMSC biology and cilia
regulation.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25171775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 28;9(8):e106106. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106106.
eCollection 2014.

Gli regulates MUC5AC transcription in human gastrointestinal cells.

Kageyama-Yahara N(1), Yamamichi N(1), Takahashi Y(1), Nakayama C(1), Shiogama
K(2), Inada K(2), Konno-Shimizu M(1), Kodashima S(1), Fujishiro M(1), Tsutsumi
Y(2), Ichinose M(3), Koike K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (2)1st Department of Pathology, Fujita Health
University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. (3)Second Department of
Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical College, Kimiidera, Wakayama, Japan.

MUC5AC is a well-known gastric differentiation marker, which has been frequently 
used for the classification of stomach cancer. Immunohistochemistry revealed that
expression of MUC5AC decreases accompanied with increased malignant property of
gastric mucosa, which further suggests the importance of MUC5AC gene regulation. 
Alignment of the 5'-flanking regions of MUC5AC gene of 13 mammal species denoted 
high homology within 200 bp upstream of the coding region. Luciferase activities 
of the deletion constructs containing upstream 451 bp or shorter fragments
demonstrated that 15 bp region between -111 and -125 bp plays a critical role on 
MUC5AC promoter activity in gastrointestinal cells. We found a putative
Gli-binding site in this 15 bp sequence, and named this region a highly conserved
region containing a Gli-binding site (HCR-Gli). Overexpression of Gli homologs
(Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) clearly enhanced MUC5AC promoter activity. Exogenous
modulation of Gli1 and Gli2 also affected the endogenous MUC5AC gene expression
in gastrointestinal cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that
Gli1 directly binds to HCR-Gli: Gli regulates MUC5AC transcription via direct
protein-DNA interaction. Conversely, in the 30 human cancer cell lines and
various normal tissues, expression patterns of MUC5AC and Gli did not coincide
wholly: MUC5AC showed cell line-specific or tissue-specific expression whereas
Gli mostly revealed ubiquitous expression. Luciferase promoter assays suggested
that the far distal MUC5AC promoter region containing upstream 4010 bp seems to
have several enhancer elements for gene transcription. In addition, treatments
with DNA demethylation reagent and/or histone deacetylase inhibitor induced
MUC5AC expression in several cell lines that were deficient in MUC5AC expression.
These results indicated that Gli is necessary but not sufficient for MUC5AC
expression: namely, the multiple regulatory mechanisms should work in the distal 
promoter region of MUC5AC gene.

PMCID: PMC4148389
PMID: 25166306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Nov;135(2):305-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.08.026. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

Prognostic impact of the expression of Hedgehog proteins in cervical carcinoma
FIGO stages I-IV treated with radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy.

Bohr Mordhorst L(1), Ahlin C(1), Sorbe B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Örebro University Hospital, SE-701 85 Örebro, Sweden. 
(2)Department of Oncology, Örebro University Hospital, SE-701 85 Örebro, Sweden. 
Electronic address: bengt.sorbe@orebroll.se.

OBJECTIVE: Hedgehog signaling proteins were assessed in patients with cervical
carcinoma receiving chemoradiation. Associations between five Hedgehog proteins
and prognosis were studied.
METHODS: In all, 131 cases of cervical carcinomas (FIGO stages I-IV) were
immunohistochemically (IHC) analyzed for Patched (PTCH), Smoothened (SMO), and
GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 protein expression. Associations between Hedgehog protein
expressions, clinicopathological factors, and clinical outcome data were
examined.
RESULTS: Positive IHC staining for the five Hedgehog proteins was recorded in 8% 
to 37% of the tumor cells. The highest frequency was noted for SMO and the lowest
for GLI1. There was a significant association between low SMO- and
GLI2-expression and KRAS-mutation. Tumors with overexpressed SMO had a higher
frequency of residual tumor or local recurrences than tumors with low SMO
expression. Patients with tumors expressing PTCH in more than 75% of the cells
had significantly (P=0.023) better recurrence-free survival than patients with
tumors with low expression. The opposite situation was true for SMO. For GLI2,
there was a statistically significant difference with regard to overall (P=0.004)
and distant (P=0.015) relapse rate for groups with expression of GLI2 in the
range of 5-25% compared to higher rates.
CONCLUSIONS: A predictive and prognostic value was found for PTCH, SMO, and GLI2 
with regard to residual carcinoma, local recurrences, and for GLI2 distant
relapses. The Hedgehog signaling pathway also seems to play an important role in 
cervical carcinogenesis together with HPV16-infection and KRAS-mutation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25158038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Dec;397(1-2):277-83. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2195-z. Epub 
2014 Aug 26.

miR-202 suppresses proliferation and induces apoptosis of osteosarcoma cells by
downregulating Gli2.

Sun Z(1), Zhang T, Hong H, Liu Q, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traumatology, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, 264025, Shandong
Province, China.

Accumulating data have shown that microRNAs are involved in the pathogenesis of
cancer. miR-202 has been confirmed to be downregulated in several types of human 
cancer. However, the expression and biological role of miR-202 in osteosarcoma
(OS) carcinogenesis and progression remain unclear. In this study, we
demonstrated that miR-202 expression is significantly decreased in human OS cell 
lines and specimens. Restoration of miR-202 expression could inhibit OS cell
proliferation, induce cell apoptosis, and suppress tumor growth in nude mice
models. We subsequently identified the transcription factor Gli2 as a direct
target of miR-202. Overexpression of Gli2 blocked the inhibitory function of
miR-202. Taken together, our results indicate that miR-202 acts as a novel tumor 
suppressor to regulate OS cell proliferation and apoptosis through downregulating
Gli2 expression.

PMID: 25156120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Prostate. 2014 Oct;74(14):1400-10. doi: 10.1002/pros.22855. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Determinants of Gli2 co-activation of wildtype and naturally truncated androgen
receptors.

Li N(1), Chen M, Truong S, Yan C, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Gli2, a transcription factor in the Hedgehog pathway, is
overexpressed in castrate-resistant prostate cancer (PCa). Previously we showed
that Gli2 overexpression increased transcriptional activity of androgen receptor 
(AR) and conferred androgen growth-independence to normally growth-dependent PCa 
cells. Here we localized the regions of AR-Gli2 protein interaction and
determined the domains within Gli2 needed for AR co-activation.
METHODS: Co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pulldown assays were used to define
AR-Gli binding domains. Co-activation assays using androgen-responsive promoter
reporters were used to define Gli2 regions needed for AR co-activation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were used to confirm nuclear interactions of
Gli2 with AR in PCa cells.
RESULTS: The Gli2 C-terminal domain (CTD) is sufficient for AR co-activation. Two
elements within the CTD were required: (1) an AR binding domain within aa628-897;
and (2) at least part of the Gli2 transactivation domain within aa1252-1586. In
turn, Gli2 binds the tau5/AF5 ligand-independent activation domain in the AR
N-terminus. Mutations in the WxxLF motif in tau5/AF5 greatly diminished binding
to Gli2-CTD. Gli2 interaction with AR tau5/AF5 was further substantiated by the
ability of Gli2/Gli2-CTD to co-activate truncated AR splice variants
(AR-V7/ARV567es). ChIP assays confirmed that Gli2 associates with chromatin at
androgen response elements found near androgen-responsive genes in LNCaP cells.
These assays also showed that AR associates with chromatin containing a
Gli-response element near a Gli-responsive gene.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that Gli2 overexpression in PCa cells might
support development of castration resistant PCa through AR co-activation and
suggests that AR might modulate transcription from Gli2.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25132524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Oncol Rep. 2014 Oct;32(4):1622-30. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3372. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

Hedgehog pathway inhibitor-4 suppresses malignant properties of chondrosarcoma
cells by disturbing tumor ciliogenesis.

Xiang W(1), Jiang T(2), Guo F(1), Gong C(3), Yang K(1), Wu Y(1), Huang X(1),
Cheng W(4), Xu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Wuhan Integrated Traditional Chinese Medicine and
Western Medicine Hospital, Wuhan No. 1 Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.

Chondrosarcoma is a type of malignant bone tumor secreting cartilage-like matrix.
In clinical treatment, there is no frequently used drug treatment option except
for surgical resection. Hedgehog (HH) pathway is a classical signaling pathway
that regulates normal cartilage cell development. In order to detect the role
that HH pathway plays in chondrosarcoma, we used immunohistochemistry and found
this tumor clearly expressed HH pathway-related proteins. Treatment with HH
pathway inhibitor-4 (HPI-4) could significantly decrease human chondrosarcoma
cell proliferation, invasion and migration ability. Furthermore, HPI-4 could
distinctly disturb HH pathway-mediated ciliogenesis and suppress primary
cilia-related protein intraflagellar transport protein IFT88 expression. HH
downstream effect molecular GLI2 was restrained to block parathyroid
hormone-related protein and affect MAPK/ERK-regulated matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP2 and MMP9). These results indicated that activated HH pathway existed in
chondrosarcoma and HPI-4 could be a new therapeutic option specific to
chondrosarcoma expressing elevated levels of HH pathway.

PMID: 25110171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. World J Surg Oncol. 2014 Aug 8;12:253. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-12-253.

Expression of the GLI family genes is associated with tumor progression in
advanced lung adenocarcinoma.

Ishikawa M(1), Sonobe M, Imamura N, Sowa T, Shikuma K, Date H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, 54
Shogoin-kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. mishi@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is aberrantly activated in
various cancers. Expression of the GLI family of genes, which encode for
transcriptional factors of the Hh pathway, has not been fully assessed in
clinical samples of advanced lung adenocarcinoma. In this study, we
retrospectively evaluated the expression of the GLI family of genes in advanced
stage lung adenocarcinoma samples and determined their relation to patient
survival.
METHODS: The levels of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 mRNA expression were measured by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction in surgically obtained tissue
samples from stage II-IV lung adenocarcinoma patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>102). Pairwise
comparisons between all three GLI mRNA expression were performed, and after
dichotomizing the patients into low and high expression groups according to each 
GLI mRNA expression level, survival curves were calculated and multivariate
analyses were conducted.
RESULTS: Significant positive correlation was found between GLI1 and GLI3 mRNA
expression (P <0.001). Tumors with higher expression (upper 15%) of GLI1 or GLI3 
mRNA were associated with poor survival in stage II-IV (5-year overall survival
rates: GLI1 mRNA low, 41.7% vs. high, 20.0%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0074; GLI3 mRNA low, 43.1% vs.
high, 13.3%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0062) and stage III-IV (5-year overall survival rates: GLI1
mRNA low, 34.0% vs. high, 0%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0012; GLI3 mRNA low, 33.4% vs. high, 7.7%,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.057) lung adenocarcinoma patients. GLI2 mRNA expression did not appear to
have great clinical significance. Multivariate analysis revealed higher GLI1 mRNA
expression as an independent factor for unfavorable patient survival (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0030,
hazard ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.1, 95% confidence interval<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.5-6.2), as well as tumor
differentiation and stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of GLI1 and GLI3 mRNA was strongly correlated, and their 
overexpression, especially that of GLI1, was found to be predictive of aggressive
tumor behavior. This study indicates that the Hh pathway may be a key oncogenic
signaling network in tumor pathogenesis and, thus, a potential therapeutic target
in advanced lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4249769
PMID: 25103784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Br J Cancer. 2014 Sep 9;111(6):1168-79. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.421. Epub 2014 Aug 
5.

Inhibition of Hedgehog signalling by NVP-LDE225 (Erismodegib) interferes with
growth and invasion of human renal cell carcinoma cells.

D'Amato C(1), Rosa R(1), Marciano R(1), D'Amato V(1), Formisano L(1), Nappi L(1),
Raimondo L(1), Di Mauro C(1), Servetto A(1), Fulciniti F(2), Cipolletta A(2),
Bianco C(3), Ciardiello F(4), Veneziani BM(5), De Placido S(1), Bianco R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia,
Università di Napoli "Federico II", Via S. Pansini 5, Napoli 80131, Italy.
(2)Anatomia Patologica e Citopatologia, Istituto Nazionale Tumori 'Fondazione G. 
Pascale', IRCCS, Napoli 80131, Italy. (3)Radioterapia, Istituto Nazionale Tumori 
'Fondazione G. Pascale', IRCCS, Napoli 80131, Italy. (4)Dipartimento
Medico-Chirurgico di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale 'F. Magrassi e A.
Lanzara', II Universitá degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli 80131, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di
Napoli "Federico II", Napoli 80131, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Multiple lines of evidence support that the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling 
has a role in the maintenance and progression of different human cancers.
Therefore, inhibition of the Hh pathway represents a valid anticancer therapeutic
approach for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients. NVP-LDE225 is a Smoothened
(Smo) antagonist that induces dose-related inhibition of Hh and Smo-dependent
tumour growth.
METHODS: We assayed the effects of NVP-LDE225 alone or in combination with
everolimus or sunitinib on the growth and invasion of human RCC models both in
vitro and in vivo. To this aim, we used a panel of human RCC models, comprising
cells with acquired resistance to sunitinib - a multiple tyrosine kinase
inhibitor approved as a first-line treatment for RCC.
RESULTS: NVP-LDE225 cooperated with either everolimus or sunitinib to inhibit
proliferation, migration, and invasion of RCC cells even in sunitinib-resistant
(SuR) cells. Some major transducers involved in tumour cell motility, including
paxillin, were also efficiently inhibited by the combination therapy, as
demonstrated by western blot and confocal microscopy assays. Moreover, these
combined treatments inhibited tumour growth and increased animal survival in nude
mice xenografted with SuR RCC cells. Finally, lung micrometastasis formation was 
reduced when mice were treated with NVP-LDE225 plus everolimus or sunitinib, as
evidenced by artificial metastatic assays.
CONCLUSIONS: Hedgehog inhibition by NVP-LDE225 plus sunitinib or everolimus
bolsters antitumour activity by interfering with tumour growth and metastatic
spread, even in SuR cells. Thus, this new evidence puts forward a new promising
therapeutic approach for RCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4453852
PMID: 25093491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. BMC Cancer. 2014 Aug 1;14:559. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-559.

<U+0394>Np63a enhances the oncogenic phenotype of osteosarcoma cells by inducing the
expression of GLI2.

Ram Kumar RM(1), Betz MM, Robl B, Born W, Fuchs B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Orthopaedic Research, Department of Orthopaedics, Balgrist
University Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
rkumar@research.balgrist.ch.

BACKGROUND: <U+0394>Np63, a splice variant of p63, is overexpressed and exhibits
oncogenic activity in many cancers including pancreatic and breast cancer and
promotes cell survival by inhibiting apoptosis. Despite its role in
tumorigenesis, mechanistic activity of <U+0394>Np63 mediated oncogenic function in
osteosarcoma is poorly understood.
METHODS: The expression levels of p63 isoforms in osteosarcoma cell lines were
identified using quantitative techniques. Expression profiling using microarray, 
siRNA mediated loss-of-function, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were
employed to identify novel <U+0394>Np63a targets in p63-null osteosarcoma SaOS-2 cells
that were engineered to express <U+0394>Np63a. The phenotype of SaOS-2-<U+0394>Np63a cells was 
assessed using wound-healing, colony formation, and proliferation assays.
RESULTS: The comparative expression analyses identified <U+0394>Np63a as the predominant
p63 isoform expressed by invasive OS cell lines. Phenotypic analyses of
SaOS-2-<U+0394>Np63a cells in vitro indicate that <U+0394>Np63a imparted tumorigenic attributes
upon tumor cells. Further, we show that in osteosarcoma cells <U+0394>Np63a directly
regulated the transcription factor GLI2, which is a component of the hedgehog
signaling pathway, and that functional interactions between <U+0394>Np63a and GLI2
confer oncogenic properties upon OS cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we report that GLI2 is the novel target gene of <U+0394>Np63a and
that <U+0394>Np63a-GLI2 crosstalk in osteosarcoma cells is a necessary event in
osteosarcoma progression. Defining the exact mechanisms involved in this
interaction that mediate the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma promises to identify
targets for drug therapy.

PMCID: PMC4125704
PMID: 25085524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 15;136(6):1276-84. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29107. Epub 2014 Aug
8.

GLI2 is a novel therapeutic target for metastasis of osteosarcoma.

Nagao-Kitamoto H(1), Nagata M, Nagano S, Kitamoto S, Ishidou Y, Yamamoto T,
Nakamura S, Tsuru A, Abematsu M, Fujimoto Y, Yokouchi M, Kitajima S, Yoshioka T, 
Maeda S, Yonezawa S, Komiya S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been reported in several
malignancies. We previously demonstrated that knockdown of GLI2 inhibited
proliferation of osteosarcoma cells through regulation of the cell cycle. In this
study, we analyzed the function of GLI2 in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma
metastasis. Immunohistochemical studies showed that GLI2 was overexpressed in
patient osteosarcoma specimens. Knockdown of GLI2 inhibited migration and
invasion of osteosarcoma cells. In contrast, the forced expression of
constitutively active GLI2 in mesenchymal stem cells promoted invasion. In
addition, xenograft models showed that knockdown of GLI2 decreased lung
metastasis of osteosarcomas. To examine clinical applications, we evaluated the
efficacy of arsenic trioxide (ATO), which is a Food and Drug
Administration-approved antitumor drug, on osteosarcoma cells. ATO treatment
suppressed the invasiveness of osteosarcoma cells by inhibiting the
transcriptional activity of GLI2. In addition, the combination of Hh inhibitors
including ATO, vismodegib and GANT61 prevented migration and metastasis of
osteosarcoma cells. Consequently, our findings suggested that GLI2 regulated
metastasis as well as the progression of osteosarcomas. Inhibition of the GLI2
transcription may be an effective therapeutic method for preventing osteosarcoma 
metastasis.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25082385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jul 24;15(8):13135-50. doi: 10.3390/ijms150813135.

Overexpression of Shox2 leads to congenital dysplasia of the temporomandibular
joint in mice.

Li X(1), Liang W(2), Ye H(3), Weng X(4), Liu F(5), Liu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. lixihaifz@gmail.com. (2)Research Base of
Traditional Chinese Medicine Syndrome, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. liangwennafz@gmail.com. (3)Academy of Integrative
Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122,
China. yehzfjzy@gmail.com. (4)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. wengxiapingfz@gmail.com.
(5)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou 350122, China. liufayuanfz@gmail.com. (6)Academy of Integrative 
Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 350122,
China. liuxianxiangfz@gmail.com.

Our previous study reported that inactivation of Shox2 led to dysplasia and
ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), and that replacing Shox2 with
human Shox partially rescued the phenotype with a prematurely worn out articular 
disc. However, the mechanisms of Shox2 activity in TMJ development remain to be
elucidated. In this study, we investigated the molecular and cellular basis for
the congenital dysplasia of TMJ in Wnt1-Cre; pMes-stop Shox2 mice. We found that 
condyle and glenoid fossa dysplasia occurs primarily in the second week after the
birth. The dysplastic TMJ of Wnt1-Cre; pMes-stop Shox2 mice exhibits a loss of
Collagen type I, Collagen type II, Ihh and Gli2. In situ zymography and
immunohistochemistry further demonstrate an up-regulation of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP9 and MMP13, accompanied by a significantly
increased cell apoptosis. In addition, the cell proliferation and expressions of 
Sox9, Runx2 and Ihh are no different in the embryonic TMJ between the wild type
and mutant mice. Our results show that overexpression of Shox2 leads to the loss 
of extracellular matrix and the increase of cell apoptosis in TMJ dysplasia by
up-regulating MMPs and down-regulating the Ihh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4159784
PMID: 25062348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Apr;82(4):562-9. doi: 10.1111/cen.12565. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Sonic Hedgehog mutations are not a common cause of congenital hypopituitarism in 
the absence of complex midline cerebral defects.

Paulo SS(1), Fernandes-Rosa FL, Turatti W, Coeli-Lacchini FB, Martinelli CE Jr,
Nakiri GS, Moreira AC, Santos AC, de Castro M, Antonini SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, University of 
Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.

CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and GLI2, an obligatory mediator of
SHH signal transduction, are holoprosencephaly (HPE)-associated genes essential
in pituitary formation. GLI2 variants have been found in patients with congenital
hypopituitarism without complex midline cerebral defects (MCD). However, data on 
the occurrence of SHH mutations in these patients are limited. We screened for
SHH and GLI2 mutations or copy number variations (CNV) in patients with
congenital hypopituitarism without MCD or with variable degrees of MCD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Detailed data on clinical, laboratory and neuroimaging
findings of 115 patients presenting with congenital hypopituitarism without MCD, 
septo-optic dysplasia or HPE were analysed. The SHH and GLI2 genes were directly 
sequenced, and the presence of gene CNV was analysed by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA).
RESULTS: Anterior pituitary deficiency was found in 74% and 53% of patients with 
SOD or HPE, respectively. Diabetes insipidus was common in patients with HPE
(47%) but infrequent in patients with congenital hypopituitarism or SOD (7% and
8%, respectively). A single heterozygous nonsense SHH mutation (p.Tyr175Ter) was 
found in a patient presenting with hypopituitarism and alobar HPE. No other SHH
mutations or CNV were found. Nine GLI2 variations (8 missense and 1 frameshift)
including a homozygous and a compound heterozygous variation were found in
patients with congenital hypopituitarism or SOD, but not in HPE patients. No GLI2
CNV were found.
CONCLUSION: SHH mutations or copy number variations are not a common cause of
congenital hypopituitarism in patients without complex midline cerebral defects. 
GLI2 variants are found in some patients with congenital hypopituitarism without 
complex midline cerebral defects or septo-optic dysplasia. However, functional
analyses of these variants are needed to strengthen genotype-phenotype
relationship.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25056824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Development. 2014 Aug;141(15):3003-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.105924.

The cellular and molecular etiology of the craniofacial defects in the avian
ciliopathic mutant talpid2.

Chang CF(1), Schock EN(1), O'Hare EA(2), Dodgson J(3), Cheng HH(4), Muir WM(5),
Edelmann RE(6), Delany ME(2), Brugmann SA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA Division of Developmental
Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (2)College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences,
Department of Animal Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616,
USA. (3)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824, USA. (4)USDA Avian Disease and Oncology Laboratory, East
Lansing, MI 48823, USA. (5)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. (6)Center for Advanced Microscopy and Imaging, Miami
University, Oxford, OH 45056, USA. (7)Division of Plastic Surgery, Department of 
Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA
Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA
samantha.brugmann@cchmc.org.

talpid(2) is an avian autosomal recessive mutant with a myriad of congenital
malformations, including polydactyly and facial clefting. Although phenotypically
similar to talpid(3), talpid(2) has a distinct facial phenotype and an unknown
cellular, molecular and genetic basis. We set out to determine the etiology of
the craniofacial phenotype of this mutant. We confirmed that primary cilia were
disrupted in talpid(2) mutants. Molecularly, we found disruptions in Hedgehog
signaling. Post-translational processing of GLI2 and GLI3 was aberrant in the
developing facial prominences. Although both GLI2 and GLI3 processing were
disrupted in talpid(2) mutants, only GLI3 activator levels were significantly
altered in the nucleus. Through additional fine mapping and whole-genome
sequencing, we determined that the talpid(2) phenotype was linked to a 1.4 Mb
region on GGA1q that contained the gene encoding the ciliary protein C2CD3. We
cloned the avian ortholog of C2CD3 and found its expression was ubiquitous, but
most robust in the developing limbs and facial prominences. Furthermore, we found
that C2CD3 is localized proximal to the ciliary axoneme and is important for
docking the mother centriole to the ciliary vesicle and cell membrane. Finally,
we identified a 19 bp deletion in talpid(2) C2CD3 that produces a premature stop 
codon, and thus a truncated protein, as the likely causal allele for the
phenotype. Together, these data provide insight into the cellular, molecular and 
genetic etiology of the talpid(2) phenotype. Our data suggest that, although the 
talpid(2) and talpid(3) mutations affect a common ciliogenesis pathway, they are 
caused by mutations in different ciliary proteins that result in differences in
craniofacial phenotype.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197679
PMID: 25053433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Urol. 2014 Dec;192(6):1842-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.07.013. Epub 2014 Jul
18.

DHH is an independent prognosticator of oncologic outcome of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma.

Jäger W(1), Thomas C(2), Fazli L(3), Hurtado-Coll A(3), Li E(3), Janssen C(1),
Gust KM(3), So AI(3), Hainz M(4), Schmidtmann I(5), Roos FC(2), Thüroff JW(2),
Brenner W(2), Black PC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urologic Sciences, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Urology,
Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. (2)Department of Urology, Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. (3)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department
of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (4)Institute of Pathology, Johannes Gutenberg University,
Mainz, Germany. (5)Institute of Medical Biostatistics, Epidemiology and
Informatics, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. (6)Vancouver Prostate
Centre and Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: pblack@mail.ubc.ca.

PURPOSE: Aberrant HH signaling has proved important in the pathogenesis of
several solid cancers. Limited in vitro analyses suggested an oncogenic role for 
HH in renal cell carcinoma. In this explorative study we sought to validate
aberrant HH expression in patients with renal cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A tissue microarray was constructed from 140 radical
nephrectomy specimens of patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma. We
performed immunohistochemistry for Ki67 and HH pathway biomarkers, including
PTCH1, Smo, SHH, IHH, DHH, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Staining intensity was measured
by automated image processing and related to tumor stage and grade. The impact of
biomarker expression on cancer specific survival was determined by univariate and
multivariate Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: Gli3, PTCH1, DHH and SHH demonstrated markedly higher expression in high
than in low grade tumors. Tumor stage was not associated with marker expression. 
On univariate analysis DHH expression, and tumor grade and stage were associated 
with cancer specific survival. Multivariate analysis revealed that DHH, grade and
stage were independent predictors of cancer specific survival.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge we report for the first time that a biomarker
of the HH pathway is associated with adverse pathological features and poor
disease outcomes in patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma. DHH may serve 
as an independent predictor of cancer specific survival in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma cases. This supports further evaluation of HH signaling to validate the
pathway as a target for novel therapy.

Copyright © 2014 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25046620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Jul 17;16(4):R152. doi: 10.1186/ar4614.

Naproxen affects osteogenesis of human mesenchymal stem cells via regulation of
Indian hedgehog signaling molecules.

Salem O, Wang HT, Alaseem AM, Ciobanu O, Hadjab I, Gawri R, Antoniou J, Mwale F.

INTRODUCTION: We previously showed that type X collagen, a marker of late stage
chondrocyte hypertrophy (associated with endochondral ossification), is
constitutively expressed by mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) from osteoarthritis
patients and this may be related to Naproxen (Npx), a nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug used for therapy. Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays an
important role during the development of bone. We tested the hypothesis that Npx 
affected osteogenic differentiation of human MSCs through the expression of
Indian hedgehog (IHH), Patched-1 (PTC1) and GLI family members GLI1, GLI2, GLI3
in vitro.
METHODS: MSCs were cultured in osteogenic differentiation medium without
(control) or with 0.5 µM Npx. The expression of collagen type X, alpha 1
(COL10A1), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteopontin (OPN), osteocalcin (OC),
collagen type I, alpha 1 (COL1A1) was analyzed with real-time reverse
transcription (RT) PCR, and the ALP activity was measured. The osteogenesis of
MSCs was monitored by mineral staining and quantification with alizarin red S. To
examine whether Npx affects osteogenic differentiation through HH signaling, the 
effect of Npx on the expression of IHH, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3 and PTC1 was analyzed
with real-time RT PCR. The effect of cyclopamine (Cpn), a HH signaling inhibitor,
on the expression of COL10A1, ALP, OC and COL1A1 was also determined.
RESULTS: When MSCs were cultured in osteogenic differentiation medium, Npx
supplementation led to a significant decrease in ALP gene expression as well as
its activity, and had a tendency to decrease mineral deposition. It also
decreased the expression of COL1A1 significantly. In contrast, the gene
expression of COL10A1 and OPN were upregulated significantly by Npx. No
significant effect was found on OC expression. The expression of IHH, PTC1, GLI1,
and GLI2 was increased by Npx, while no significant difference was observed on
GLI3 expression. Cpn reversed the effect of Npx on the expression of COL10A1,
ALP, OPN and COL1A1.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that Npx can affect gene expression during
osteogenic differentiation of MSCs, and downregulate mineral deposition in the
extracellular matrix through IHH signaling. Therefore, Npx could affect
MSC-mediated repair of subchondral bone in OA patients.

PMCID: PMC4223691
PMID: 25034046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 5;289(36):24898-910. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570507. Epub
2014 Jul 15.

Indian hedgehog signaling regulates transcription and expression of collagen type
X via Runx2/Smads interactions.

Amano K(1), Densmore M(2), Nishimura R(3), Lanske B(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oral Medicine, Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School 
of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and the Departments of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery and. (2)From the Department of Oral Medicine, Infection,
and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (4)From the Department of Oral Medicine,
Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts
02115 and beate_lanske@hsdm.harvard.edu.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is essential for chondrocyte differentiation and
endochondral ossification and acts with parathyroid hormone-related peptide in a 
negative feedback loop to regulate early chondrocyte differentiation and entry to
hypertrophic differentiation. Independent of this function, we and others
recently reported independent Ihh functions to promote chondrocyte hypertrophy
and matrix mineralization in vivo and in vitro. However, the molecular mechanisms
for these actions and their functional significance are still unknown. We
recently discovered that Ihh overexpression in chondrocytes stimulated the
expression of late chondrocyte differentiation markers and induced matrix
mineralization. Focusing on collagen type X (Col10a1) expression and
transcription, we observed that hedgehog downstream transcription factors
GLI-Krüppel family members (Gli) 1/2 increased COL10A1 promoter activity and
identified a novel Gli1/2 response element in the 250-bp basic promoter. In
addition, we found that Ihh induced Runx2 expression in chondrocytes without
up-regulating other modulators of chondrocyte maturation such as Mef2c, Foxa2,
and Foxa3. Runx2 promoted Col10a1 expression in cooperation with Ihh. Further
analyses using promoter assays, immunofluorescence, and binding assays showed the
interaction of Gli1/2 in a complex with Runx2/Smads induces chondrocyte
differentiation. Finally, we could demonstrate that Ihh promotes in vitro matrix 
mineralization using similar molecular mechanisms. Our data provide an in vitro
mechanism for Ihh signaling to positively regulate Col10a1 transcription. Thus,
Ihh signaling could be an important player for not only early chondrocyte
differentiation but maturation and calcification of chondrocytes.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4155658
PMID: 25028519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Aug;8(2):676-680. Epub 2014 May 28.

TNF-a enhances the effect of TGF-ß on Gli2 expression in the KG-1 leukemic cell
line.

Li Z(1), Li B(1), Pan J(1), Jin J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital of Liaoning Medical
College, Jinzhou, Liaoning 121001, P.R.China.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates a variety of tumor-related
diseases, including leukemia. The present study aimed to determine whether there 
was an interaction between the Hh signaling pathway and transforming growth
factor (TGF)-ß in the KG-1 cell line. KG-1 cells were treated with TGF-ß, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-a and specific inhibitor of smad3 (SIS3). The expression
level of Gli family zinc finger 2 (Gli2) was detected by quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction (qPCR) and western blot analyses. The results revealed that TGF-ß 
significantly decreased the expression level of Gli2 in KG-1 cells, and that
TNF-a and TGF-ß together further reduced Gli2 expression in KG-1 cells. SIS3
inhibited the effect of TGF-ß. These results suggest that Gli2 expression in KG-1
cells is suppressed by TGF-ß in a Smad3-dependent manner, TNF-a can enhance the
effect of TGF-ß on Gli2 expression and that this occurs independently of Hh
receptor signaling.

PMCID: PMC4079412
PMID: 25009639  [PubMed]


158. Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):732-40. doi: 10.1038/nm.3613. Epub 2014 Jun 29.

Epigenetic targeting of Hedgehog pathway transcriptional output through BET
bromodomain inhibition.

Tang Y(1), Gholamin S(2), Schubert S(1), Willardson MI(3), Lee A(4),
Bandopadhayay P(5), Bergthold G(6), Masoud S(7), Nguyen B(7), Vue N(7), Balansay 
B(7), Yu F(1), Oh S(1), Woo P(7), Chen S(7), Ponnuswami A(7), Monje M(7), Atwood 
SX(4), Whitson RJ(4), Mitra S(2), Cheshier SH(2), Qi J(8), Beroukhim R(9), Tang
JY(4), Wechsler-Reya R(10), Oro AE(4), Link BA(3), Bradner JE(9), Cho YJ(11).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. [2] Department of Neurosurgery,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (2)Department 
of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA. (4)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (5)1] Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2]
Pediatric Neuro-oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [4] 
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (6)1]
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Pediatric Neuro-oncology, Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Division 
of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (7)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (8)Department 
of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)1] Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (10)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research, La
Jolla, California, USA. (11)1] Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. [2] Department
of Neurosurgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California,
USA. [3] Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California, USA.

Hedgehog signaling drives oncogenesis in several cancers, and strategies
targeting this pathway have been developed, most notably through inhibition of
Smoothened (SMO). However, resistance to Smoothened inhibitors occurs by genetic 
changes of Smoothened or other downstream Hedgehog components. Here we overcome
these resistance mechanisms by modulating GLI transcription through inhibition of
bromo and extra C-terminal (BET) bromodomain proteins. We show that BRD4 and
other BET bromodomain proteins regulate GLI transcription downstream of SMO and
suppressor of fused (SUFU), and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies reveal that
BRD4 directly occupies GLI1 and GLI2 promoters, with a substantial decrease in
engagement of these sites after treatment with JQ1, a small-molecule inhibitor
targeting BRD4. Globally, genes associated with medulloblastoma-specific GLI1
binding sites are downregulated in response to JQ1 treatment, supporting direct
regulation of GLI activity by BRD4. Notably, patient- and GEMM (genetically
engineered mouse model)-derived Hedgehog-driven tumors (basal cell carcinoma,
medulloblastoma and atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor) respond to JQ1 even when
harboring genetic lesions rendering them resistant to Smoothened antagonists.
Altogether, our results reveal BET proteins as critical regulators of Hedgehog
pathway transcriptional output and nominate BET bromodomain inhibitors as a
strategy for treating Hedgehog-driven tumors with emerged or a priori resistance 
to Smoothened antagonists.

PMCID: PMC4108909
PMID: 24973920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Oncotarget. 2014 Jun 30;5(12):4492-503.

Mode and specificity of binding of the small molecule GANT61 to GLI determines
inhibition of GLI-DNA binding.

Agyeman A(1), Jha BK, Mazumdar T, Houghton JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH.

The GLI genes, GLI1 and GLI2, are transcription factors that regulate target
genes at the distal end of the canonical Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway
(SHH->PTCH->SMO->GLI), tightly regulated in embryonic development, tissue
patterning and differentiation. Both GLI1 and GLI2 are oncogenes, constitutively 
activated in many types of human cancers. In colon cancer cells oncogenic
KRAS-GLI signaling circumvents the HH-SMO-GLI axis to channel through and
activate GLI in the transcriptional regulation of target genes. We have observed 
extensive cell death in a panel of 7 human colon carcinoma cell lines using the
small molecule GLI inhibitor GANT61. Using computational docking and experimental
confirmation by Surface Plasmon Resonance, GANT61 binds to the 5-zinc finger GLI1
protein between zinc fingers 2 and 3 at sites E119 and E167, independent of the
GLI-DNA binding region, and conserved between GLI1 and GLI2. GANT61 does not bind
to other zinc finger transcription factors (KLF4, TFIIß). Mutating the predicted 
GANT61 binding sites in GLI1 significantly inhibits GANT61-GLI binding and
GLI-luciferase activity. Data establish the specificity of GANT61 for targeting
GLI, and substantiate the critical role of GLI in cancer cell survival. Thus,
targeting GLI in cancer therapeutics may be of high impact.

PMCID: PMC4147340
PMID: 24962990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):324-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.014. Epub 2014 
Jun 2.

Differential regulation of Gli proteins by Sufu in the lung affects PDGF
signaling and myofibroblast development.

Lin C(1), Chen MH(2), Yao E(1), Song H(1), Gacayan R(1), Hui CC(3), Chuang PT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94158, United States. (2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94158, United States; USDA/ARS Children<U+05F3>s Nutrition
Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, United States. (3)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Cardiovascular Research Institute,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, United States. Electronic
address: pao-tien.chuang@ucsf.edu.

Mammalian Hedgehog (Hh) signaling relies on three Gli transcription factors to
mediate Hh responses. This process is controlled in part by a major negative
regulator, Sufu, through its effects on Gli protein level, distribution and
activity. In this report, we showed that Sufu regulates Gli1 protein levels by
antagonizing Numb/Itch. Otherwise, Numb/Itch would induce Gli1 protein
degradation. This is in contrast to inhibition of Spop-mediated degradation of
Gli2/3 by Sufu. Thus, controlling protein levels of all three Gli genes by Sufu
is a conserved mechanism to modulate Hh responses albeit via distinct pathways.
These findings in cell-based assays were further validated in vivo. In analyzing 
how Sufu controls Gli proteins in different tissues, we discovered that loss of
Sufu in the lung exerts different effects on Hh target genes. Hh targets
Ptch1/Hhip are upregulated in Sufu-deficient lungs, consistent with Hh pathway
activation. Surprisingly, protein levels of Hh target Gli1 are reduced. We also
found that myofibroblasts are absent from many prospective alveoli of
Sufu-deficient lungs. Myofibroblast development is dependent on PDGF signaling.
Interestingly, analysis of the Pdgfra promoter revealed a canonical Gli-binding
site where Gli1 resides. These studies support a model in which loss of Sufu
contributes to compromised Pdgfra activation and disrupts myofibroblast
development in the lung. Our work illustrates the unappreciated complexity of Hh 
responses where distinct Hh targets could respond differently depending on the
availability of Gli proteins that control their expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4106470
PMID: 24886827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS One. 2014 May 27;9(5):e97926. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097926. eCollection
2014.

Mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neuronal differentiation does not involve
GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling and is under the direct influence of canonical WNT
signaling.

Mesman S(1), von Oerthel L(1), Smidt MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, CNS, FNWI University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and WNT proteins are key regulators in many developmental
processes, like embryonic patterning and brain development. In the brain, SHH is 
expressed in a gradient starting in the floor plate (FP) progressing ventrally in
the midbrain, where it is thought to be involved in the development and
specification of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mdDA) neurons. GLI2A-mediated
SHH-signaling induces the expression of Gli1, which is inhibited when cells start
expressing SHH themselves. To determine whether mdDA neurons receive
GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling during differentiation, we used a BAC-transgenic
mouse model expressing eGFP under the control of the Gli1 promoter. This
mouse-model allowed for mapping of GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling temporal and
spatial in the mouse midbrain. Since mdDA neurons are born from E10.5, peaking at
E11.0-E12.0, we examined Gli1-eGFP embryos at E11.5, E12.5, and E13.5, indicating
whether Gli1 was induced before or during mdDA development and differentiation.
Our data indicate that GLI2A-mediated SHH-signaling is not involved in mdDA
neuronal differentiation. However, it appears to be involved in the
differentiation of neurons which make up a subset of the red nucleus (RN). In
order to detect whether mdDA neuronal differentiation may be under the control of
canonical WNT-signaling, we used a transgenic mouse-line expressing LacZ under
the influence of stable ß-catenin. Here, we show that TH+ neurons of the midbrain
receive canonical WNT-signaling during differentiation. Therefore, we suggest
that early SHH-signaling is indirectly involved in mdDA development through early
patterning of the midbrain area, whereas canonical WNT-signaling is directly
involved in the differentiation of the mdDA neuronal population.

PMCID: PMC4035267
PMID: 24865218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 10;111(23):8541-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1323161111. Epub 2014 May 22.

Intestinal cell kinase, a protein associated with
endocrine-cerebro-osteodysplasia syndrome, is a key regulator of cilia length and
Hedgehog signaling.

Moon H(1), Song J(1), Shin JO(2), Lee H(1), Kim HK(2), Eggenschwiller JT(3), Bok 
J(4), Ko HW(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk University-Seoul, Goyang, 410-820, Korea;
(2)Department of Anatomy, BK21 Plus Project for Medical Science, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea; and. (3)Department of
Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30606. (4)Department of Anatomy, BK21
Plus Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
120-752, Korea; and kohw@dongguk.edu bokj@yuhs.ac. (5)College of Pharmacy,
Dongguk University-Seoul, Goyang, 410-820, Korea; kohw@dongguk.edu bokj@yuhs.ac.

Endocrine-cerebro-osteodysplasia (ECO) syndrome is a recessive genetic disorder
associated with multiple congenital defects in endocrine, cerebral, and skeletal 
systems that is caused by a missense mutation in the mitogen-activated protein
kinase-like intestinal cell kinase (ICK) gene. In algae and invertebrates, ICK
homologs are involved in flagellar formation and ciliogenesis, respectively.
However, it is not clear whether this role of ICK is conserved in mammals and how
a lack of functional ICK results in the characteristic phenotypes of human ECO
syndrome. Here, we generated Ick knockout mice to elucidate the precise role of
ICK in mammalian development and to examine the pathological mechanisms of ECO
syndrome. Ick null mouse embryos displayed cleft palate, hydrocephalus,
polydactyly, and delayed skeletal development, closely resembling ECO syndrome
phenotypes. In cultured cells, down-regulation of Ick or overexpression of
kinase-dead or ECO syndrome mutant ICK resulted in an elongation of primary cilia
and abnormal Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Wild-type ICK proteins were
generally localized in the proximal region of cilia near the basal bodies,
whereas kinase-dead ICK mutant proteins accumulated in the distal part of bulged 
ciliary tips. Consistent with these observations in cultured cells, Ick knockout 
mouse embryos displayed elongated cilia and reduced Shh signaling during limb
digit patterning. Taken together, these results indicate that ICK plays a crucial
role in controlling ciliary length and that ciliary defects caused by a lack of
functional ICK leads to abnormal Shh signaling, resulting in congenital disorders
such as ECO syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4060650
PMID: 24853502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Hepatology. 2015 Jan;61(1):98-107. doi: 10.1002/hep.27235. Epub 2014 Aug 25.

Treatment response in the PIVENS trial is associated with decreased Hedgehog
pathway activity.

Guy CD(1), Suzuki A, Abdelmalek MF, Burchette JL, Diehl AM; NASH CRN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2015 Jan;61(1):15-7.
    Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1770-1.
    Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1770.

Hedgehog (Hh) ligand production by ballooned hepatocytes drives nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) progression in mice. The NIDDK-sponsored PIVENS trial
(NCT00063622) showed that vitamin E (VitE) improved NASH. We investigated whether
VitE treatment and improvement in NASH were associated with changes in Hh pathway
activity. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on both pre- and posttreatment
liver biopsies of 59 PIVENS patients randomized to VitE (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) or placebo
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>29). Sonic Hh (Shh) ligand-producing cells and Shh-responsive cells were
quantified. The latter was accomplished by triple IHC for gli2+ (marker of Hh
signaling), sox-9 (progenitor marker), and a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA;
myofibroblast marker). Ballooned hepatocytes were quantified by keratin 8/18 and 
ubiquitin (K8/18/Ub) staining. IHC results were correlated with primary clinical 
and histologic PIVENS data. Pretreatment clinical, histologic, and IHC parameters
did not differ significantly in the two treatment groups. Regardless of treatment
arm, the number of Shh+ hepatocytes correlated with K8/18/Ub foci (r(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.47,
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (r(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.15, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002).
Treatment-related changes in the numbers of Shh+ hepatocytes correlated with
changes in serum AST (partial r(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.75, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), hepatocyte ballooning
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004), the ductular reaction (i.e., numbers of gli2+/sox9+ cells; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03 
and a-SMA+ cells; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.10), and fibrosis stage (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). Treatment response
was associated with a greater decrease in Shh+ hepatocytes than nonresponse
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). The VitE group demonstrated a greater reduction in K8/18/Ub+ foci
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.08) and Shh+ hepatocytes (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) than the placebo group, effects that
became more significant after correction for baseline differences and multiple
linear regression analysis.CONCLUSION: During PIVENS, treatment response
correlated with loss of Shh+ hepatocytes and improvement in Hh-regulated
processes that promote NASH progression.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4241186
PMID: 24849310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2014 May 8;9(5):e96593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096593. eCollection 
2014.

Blocking signaling at the level of GLI regulates downstream gene expression and
inhibits proliferation of canine osteosarcoma cells.

Shahi MH(1), Holt R(1), Rebhun RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, University of California
Davis School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis, California, United States of America.

The Hedgehog-GLI signaling pathway is active in a variety of human malignancies
and is known to contribute to the growth and survival of human osteosarcoma
cells. In this study, we examined the expression and regulation of GLI
transcription factors in multiple canine osteosarcoma cell lines and analyzed the
effects of inhibiting GLI with GANT61, a GLI-specific inhibitor. Compared with
normal canine osteoblasts, real-time PCR showed that GLI1 and GLI2 were highly
expressed in two out of three cell lines and correlated with downstream target
gene expression of PTCH1and PAX6. Treatment of canine osteosarcoma cells with
GANT61 resulted in decreased expression of GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, and PAX6.
Furthermore, GANT61 inhibited proliferation and colony formation in all three
canine osteosarcoma cell lines. The finding that GLI signaling activity is
present and active in canine osteosarcoma cells suggests that spontaneously
arising osteosarcoma in dogs might serve as a good model for future preclinical
testing of GLI inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4014515
PMID: 24810746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biores Open Access. 2014 Apr 1;3(2):53-9. doi: 10.1089/biores.2014.0001.

Sonic hedgehog pathway contributes to gastric cancer cell growth and
proliferation.

Wan J(1), Zhou J(2), Zhao H(1), Wang M(1), Wei Z(1), Gao H(1), Wang Y(3), Cui
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University ,
Chongqing, China . (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Daping Hospital, Third Military
Medical University , PLA, Chongqing, China . (3)Department of Radiology, Fourth
Hospital of Hebei Medical University , Shijiazhuang, Hebei Province, China.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is commonly activated in
gastrointestinal cancer. However, our understanding of the Shh pathway in gastric
cancer remains limited. Here we examined the effects of cyclopamine, a specific
inhibitor of the Shh signaling pathway, on cell growth and proliferation in
gastric primary cancer cells GAM-016 and the MKN-45 cell line. The results showed
that the Shh signaling molecules SHH, PTCH, SMO, GLI1, and GLI2 were intact and
activated in both types of cells. Furthermore, we observed that cyclopamine
inhibited gastric cancer cell proliferation through cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. An in vivo study using NOD/SCID mouse xenografts demonstrated that
cyclopamine significantly prevented tumor growth and development. Our study
indicated that Shh signaling pathway could promote gastric cancer cell
proliferation and tumor development, and blocking this pathway may be a potential
strategy in gastric cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3995118
PMID: 24804165  [PubMed]


166. Dev Biol. 2014 Jul 15;391(2):182-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.04.012. Epub 2014 
Apr 26.

Rab23 regulates Nodal signaling in vertebrate left-right patterning independently
of the Hedgehog pathway.

Fuller K(1), O'Connell JT(1), Gordon J(2), Mauti O(1), Eggenschwiler J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
United States. (2)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602, United States. (3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens,
GA 30602, United States. Electronic address: jeggensc@uga.edu.

Asymmetric fluid flow in the node and Nodal signaling in the left lateral plate
mesoderm (LPM) drive left-right patterning of the mammalian body plan. However,
the mechanisms linking fluid flow to asymmetric gene expression in the LPM remain
unclear. Here we show that the small GTPase Rab23, known for its role in Hedgehog
signaling, plays a separate role in Nodal signaling and left-right patterning in 
the mouse embryo. Rab23 is not required for initial symmetry breaking in the
node, but it is required for expression of Nodal and Nodal target genes in the
LPM. Microinjection of Nodal protein and transfection of Nodal cDNA in the embryo
indicate that Rab23 is required for the production of functional Nodal signals,
rather than the response to them. Using gain- and loss-of function approaches, we
show that Rab23 plays a similar role in zebrafish, where it is required in the
teleost equivalent of the mouse node, Kupffer<U+05F3>s vesicle. Collectively, these data
suggest that Rab23 is an essential component of the mechanism that transmits
asymmetric patterning information from the node to the LPM.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24780629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Med Genet. 2014 Jun;51(6):413-8. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-102249. Epub 2014 
Apr 17.

Pathogenic mutations in GLI2 cause a specific phenotype that is distinct from
holoprosencephaly.

Bear KA(1), Solomon BD(2), Antonini S(3), Arnhold IJ(4), França MM(4), Gerkes
EH(5), Grange DK(6), Hadley DW(7), Jääskeläinen J(8), Paulo SS(3), Rump P(5),
Stratakis CA(9), Thompson EM(10), Willis M(11), Winder TL(12), Jorge AA(13),
Roessler E(7), Muenke M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA Department of Pediatrics, Tripler
Army Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. (2)Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA Division of Medical Genomics, Inova Translational Medicine
Institute, Inova Health System, Falls Church, Virginia, USA Department of
Pediatrics, Inova Children's Hospital, Inova Health System, Falls Church,
Virginia, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (4)Unidade de Endocrinologia do
Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e Genetica Molecular LIM/42, Disciplina
de Endocrinologia, Hospital das Clinicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Department of Genetics, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Washington University Schl Mdcn, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (7)Medical Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Eastern
Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. (9)Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (10)SA Pathology, South Australian
Clinical Genetics Service, Women's and Children's Hospital, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia Department of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
South Australia, Australia. (11)Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics,
Naval Medical Center, San Diego, California, USA. (12)Prevention Genetics,
Marshfield, Wisconsin, USA. (13)Unidade de Endocrinologia Genética, LIM/25,
Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Hospital das Clinicas da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in GLI2 have been associated with holoprosencephaly (HPE), 
a neuroanatomic anomaly resulting from incomplete cleavage of the developing
forebrain, and an HPE-like phenotype involving pituitary anomalies and
polydactyly.
OBJECTIVE: To characterise the genotypic and phenotypic findings in individuals
with GLI2 variants and clarify clinical findings in individuals with
loss-of-function mutations.
METHODS: Through the National Institutes of Health and collaborating centres,
~400 individuals with HPE spectrum disorders, endocrine disorders or craniofacial
anomalies were screened for GLI2 mutations. Results were combined with all
published cases. We compared the clinical and molecular features of individuals
with truncating mutations to individuals with variants of unknown significance
(defined as not resulting in protein truncation, reported in normal controls
and/or deemed unlikely to be pathogenic by functional prediction software).
RESULTS: 112 individuals with variants in GLI2 were identified, with 43 having
truncating mutations. Individuals with truncating mutations were more likely to
have both pituitary anomalies and polydactyly versus those with variants of
unknown significance (p<0.0001 by Fisher's exact test); only 1 of 43 had frank
HPE. These individuals were more likely to have recognised penetrance
(polydactyly or pituitary anomalies or both) than those without truncating
mutations (p=0.0036 by Fisher's exact test). A common facial phenotype was seen
in individuals (with midface hypoplasia, cleft lip/palate and hypotelorism) with 
truncating mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with truncating mutations in GLI2 typically present with
pituitary anomalies, polydactyly and subtle facial features rather than HPE. This
will be helpful in screening populations for GLI2 mutations and for counselling
affected patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: 98-HG-0249/04-HG-0093.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24744436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jul;27(7-8):777-81. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0449.

Holoprosencephaly: ZIC2 mutation in a case with panhypopituitarism.

Tasdemir S, Sahin I, Cayir A, Doneray H, Solomon BD, Muenke M, Yuce I, Tatar A.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common malformation of the brain,
results from failed or incomplete separation of the embryonic forebrain
(prosencephalon). HPE occurs in approximately 1 in 250 embryos and in about 1 in 
10,000 births. It is etiologically heterogeneous, and may be caused by
cytogenetic anomalies and teratogenic influences; it occurs as part of a
syndrome, or due to heterozygous mutations in 1 of over 10 HPE-associated genes. 
ZIC2 mutations are the second-most common cause of non-syndromic non-chromosomal 
HPE (after sonic hedgehog) and occur de novo in 74% of the affected probands.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to describe the first case of
ZIC2-related HPE with both anterior and posterior pituitary insufficiencies.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report about a 2-year-8-month-old boy who was born as a
second child in a non-consanguineous healthy Turkish family. He has the
characteristic ZIC2 phenotype: bitemporal narrowing, upslanting palpebral
fissures, large ears, short nose with anteverted nares and broad and deep
philtrum. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed alobar HPE. During laboratory
investigation, his blood sodium level was 158 mmol/L and the specific gravity of 
his urine was 1.002. Serum osmolarity was 336 mOsm/L and urine osmolality was 135
mOsm/kg. His FT4 was 0.8 ng/dL and TSH was 0.79 mLU/mL. Response to vasopressin
confirmed the diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus and TRH-stimulating test
supported the central hypothyroidism. A frameshift mutation
(NM_007129.2:c1091_1092 del, p.Gln364Leufs*2) in the ZIC2 gene was detected.
CONCLUSION: Pituitary insufficiency other than isolated diabetes insipidus is a
rare finding of HPE, and occurs most frequently in patients with GLI2 mutations
(the phenotype of which typically does not include frank neuroanatomic anomalies 
such as HPE); ours is the only described patient with a ZIC2 mutation and both
anterior and posterior pituitary dysfunction.

PMID: 24706429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Oct;25(10):2201-12. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013070735. Epub 2014
Apr 3.

Downregulating hedgehog signaling reduces renal cystogenic potential of mouse
models.

Tran PV(1), Talbott GC(2), Turbe-Doan A(2), Jacobs DT(3), Schonfeld MP(3), Silva 
LM(3), Chatterjee A(3), Prysak M(2), Allard BA(3), Beier DR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and the Kidney
Institute, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas; and
ptran@kumc.edu. (2)Genetics Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; (3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology 
and the Kidney Institute, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
Kansas; and. (4)Genetics Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts; Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative 
Medicine, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington.

Renal cystic diseases are a leading cause of renal failure. Mutations associated 
with renal cystic diseases reside in genes encoding proteins that localize to
primary cilia. These cystoproteins can disrupt ciliary structure or
cilia-mediated signaling, although molecular mechanisms connecting cilia function
to renal cystogenesis remain unclear. The ciliary gene, Thm1(Ttc21b), negatively 
regulates Hedgehog signaling and is most commonly mutated in ciliopathies. We
report that loss of murine Thm1 causes cystic kidney disease, with persistent
proliferation of renal cells, elevated cAMP levels, and enhanced expression of
Hedgehog signaling genes. Notably, the cAMP-mediated cystogenic potential of
Thm1-null kidney explants was reduced by genetically deleting Gli2, a major
transcriptional activator of the Hedgehog pathway, or by culturing with small
molecule Hedgehog inhibitors. These Hedgehog inhibitors acted independently of
protein kinase A and Wnt inhibitors. Furthermore, simultaneous deletion of Gli2
attenuated the renal cystic disease associated with deletion of Thm1. Finally,
transcripts of Hedgehog target genes increased in cystic kidneys of two other
orthologous mouse mutants, jck and Pkd1, and Hedgehog inhibitors reduced
cystogenesis in jck and Pkd1 cultured kidneys. Thus, enhanced Hedgehog activity
may have a general role in renal cystogenesis and thereby present a novel
therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4178433
PMID: 24700869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2014 Winter;44(1):99-103.

Heterotopic ossification in metastatic colorectal carcinoma: case report with
morphoproteomic insights into the histogenesis.

Huang RS(1), Brown RE, Buryanek J.

Author information: 
(1)M.D.; UT Health-Medical School at Houston, 6431 Fannin Street MSB 2.260B,
Houston, TX 77030; phone: 1-713 500 5362; fax: 1-713 500 0695; e mail:
jamie.buryanek@uth.tmc.edu.

A case of metastatic colorectal carcinoma with heterotopic ossification is
described. Objective Morphoproteomic analysis was performed to help define the
histogenesis of the heterotopic ossification in this context. Design
Immunohistochemical stains for Gli2, a-SMA, SPARC (osteonectin), and nestin were 
performed and the expression level (chromogenic signal intensity) and subcellular
compartmentalization of these protein analytes were assessed in the tumor cells
vis-à-vis the companionate stromal cells and osteoblasts in a morphoproteomic
application. Results This analysis revealed that the heterotopic ossification is 
more likely the result of pluripotent stromal cells that undergo differentiation 
to form osteoblasts rather than the tumor cells undergoing osseous metaplasia.
Conclusion Morphoproteomics provides evidence that the histogenesis of
heterotopic ossification in this case of metastatic colon cancer is from the
stromal cells in the tumoral microenvironment.

PMID: 24695482  [PubMed - in process]


171. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(4):633-41.

The GANT61, a GLI inhibitor, induces caspase-independent apoptosis of SK-N-LO
cells.

Matsumoto T(1), Tabata K, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Nihon University.

GANT61 is a small-molecule inhibitor of glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1)- and 
GLI2-mediated transcription at the nuclear level that exerts its effect by
preventing DNA binding. It has been demonstrated to induce cell death against
Ewing's sarcoma family tumor (ESFT) cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. The
most sensitive cell line was SK-N-LO, which expresses the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene.
SK-N-LO cells treated with GANT61 showed cellular and nuclear morphological
changes, including cell shrinkage, chromatin condensation and nuclear
fragmentation, in a concentration-dependent manner, as visualized by Hoechst
33342 staining. Furthermore, annexin V-propidium iodide (PI) double-staining
revealed a significant increase in the number of late apoptotic cells. GANT61
induced a significant decrease in the proportion of cells in the S phase.
Significant decrease of the protein levels of GLI2, survivin, cyclin A and
claspin, and significant increase of p21 expression was also observed in the
cells treated with GANT61. Moreover, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage
was observed, but no cleavage of caspase-3 or -7, or any change in the
expressions of Bcl-2 or p53 were observed. These findings suggest that GANT61
induces cell death of SK-N-LO cells in a caspase-independent manner, by
inhibiting DNA replication in the S phase.

PMID: 24694609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Endocrinology. 2014 Jun;155(6):2077-88. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-2108. Epub 2014 Apr 
2.

The sonic hedgehog-induced type 3 deiodinase facilitates tumorigenesis of basal
cell carcinoma by reducing Gli2 inactivation.

Luongo C(1), Ambrosio R, Salzano S, Dlugosz AA, Missero C, Dentice M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine Surgery (C.L., M.D.), University of Naples
Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy; Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico Fondazione Studio di Diagnostica Nucleare (R.A.), 80142 Naples,
Italy; Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and Oncology G.
Salvatore-Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (S.S.), 80131 Naples, Italy;
Department of Dermatology and Comprehensive Cancer Center (A.A.D.), University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; and Centro di Ingegneria Genetica
Biotecnologie Avanzate Scarl (C.M.), 80131 Naples, Italy.

Thyroid hormone (TH) is an important regulator of growth, development, and
metabolism. Most of the active TH T3 is generated by peripheral TH metabolism
mediated by the iodothyronine deiodinases. Type 3 deiodinase (D3) inactivates T3 
via specific deiodination reactions. It is an oncofetal protein frequently
expressed in neoplastic tissues and is a direct target of the sonic hedgehog
(Shh) pathway in basal cell carcinomas (BCCs). However, the molecular mechanisms 
triggered by T3 in BCC are still mostly unrevealed. Here, we demonstrate that D3 
action is critical in the proliferation and survival of BCC cells. D3 depletion
or T3 treatment induce apoptosis of BCC cells and attenuate Shh signaling. This
is achieved through a direct impairment of Gli2 protein stability by T3. T3
induces protein kinase A, which in turn destabilizes Gli2 protein via its
C-terminal degron. Finally, in a mouse model of BCC, T3-topical treatment
significantly reduces tumor growth. These results demonstrate the existence of a 
previously unrecognized cross talk between TH and Gli2 oncogene, providing
functional and mechanistic evidence of the involvement of TH metabolism in
Shh-induced cancer. TH-mediated Gli2 inactivation would be beneficial for
therapeutically purposes, because the inhibition of Shh-Gli2 signaling is an
attractive target for several anticancer drugs, currently in clinical trials.

PMID: 24693967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 2014 Sep 18;33(38):4697-708. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.71. Epub 2014 Mar
31.

SOX2 regulates self-renewal and tumorigenicity of human melanoma-initiating
cells.

Santini R(1), Pietrobono S(1), Pandolfi S(1), Montagnani V(1), D'Amico M(2),
Penachioni JY(1), Vinci MC(1), Borgognoni L(3), Stecca B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori (CRL-ITT), Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental and Clinical
Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (3)Plastic Surgery Unit, S.M. 
Annunziata Hospital-Regional Melanoma Referral Center, Istituto Toscano Tumori,
Florence, Italy.

Melanoma is one of the most aggressive types of human cancer, characterized by
enhanced heterogeneity and resistance to conventional therapy at advanced stages.
We and others have previously shown that HEDGEHOG-GLI (HH-GLI) signaling is
required for melanoma growth and for survival and expansion of
melanoma-initiating cells (MICs). Recent reports indicate that HH-GLI signaling
regulates a set of genes typically expressed in embryonic stem cells, including
SOX2 (sex-determining region Y (SRY)-Box2). Here we address the function of SOX2 
in human melanomas and MICs and its interaction with HH-GLI signaling. We find
that SOX2 is highly expressed in melanoma stem cells. Knockdown of SOX2 sharply
decreases self-renewal in melanoma spheres and in putative melanoma stem cells
with high aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH(high)). Conversely, ectopic
expression of SOX2 in melanoma cells enhances their self-renewal in vitro. SOX2
silencing also inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in melanoma cells. In
addition, depletion of SOX2 progressively abrogates tumor growth and leads to a
significant decrease in tumor-initiating capability of ALDH(high) MICs upon
xenotransplantation, suggesting that SOX2 is required for tumor initiation and
for continuous tumor growth. We show that SOX2 is regulated by HH signaling and
that the transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2, the downstream effectors of HH-GLI 
signaling, bind to the proximal promoter region of SOX2 in primary melanoma
cells. In functional studies, we find that SOX2 function is required for
HH-induced melanoma cell growth and MIC self-renewal in vitro. Thus SOX2 is a
critical factor for self-renewal and tumorigenicity of MICs and an important
mediator of HH-GLI signaling in melanoma. These findings could provide the basis 
for novel therapeutic strategies based on the inhibition of SOX2 for the
treatment of a subset of human melanomas.

PMCID: PMC4180644
PMID: 24681955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):455-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.02.007. Epub 2014 
Mar 20.

SPOP promotes tumorigenesis by acting as a key regulatory hub in kidney cancer.

Li G(1), Ci W(2), Karmakar S(3), Chen K(4), Dhar R(3), Fan Z(5), Guo Z(6), Zhang 
J(4), Ke Y(4), Wang L(1), Zhuang M(7), Hu S(8), Li X(9), Zhou L(9), Li X(10),
Calabrese MF(11), Watson ER(11), Prasad SM(12), Rinker-Schaeffer C(12), Eggener
SE(12), Stricker T(13), Tian Y(8), Schulman BA(14), Liu J(15), White KP(16).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)Laboratory of Disease
Genomics and Individualized Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (3)Institute for Genomics and Systems
Biology, University of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago, IL
60637, USA; Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (4)Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(5)Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China. (6)Key Laboratory
of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; Department of Urology, First Hospital
of Peking University, Beijing 100034, China. (7)Department of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(8)Laboratory of Animal Research Center, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (9)Department of Urology, First Hospital of
Peking University, Beijing 100034, China. (10)Department of Pathology, Peking
University Cancer Hospital, Beijing 100142, China. (11)Department of Structural
Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(12)Section of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (13)Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, University of Chicago
and Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago, IL 60637, USA; Department of Pathology,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (14)Department of Structural
Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA. (15)Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
Electronic address: liuj@big.ac.cn. (16)Institute for Genomics and Systems
Biology, University of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago, IL
60637, USA; Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA; Section on Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: kpwhite@uchicago.edu.

Hypoxic stress and hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) play important roles in a
wide range of tumors. We demonstrate that SPOP, which encodes an E3 ubiquitin
ligase component, is a direct transcriptional target of HIFs in clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Furthermore, hypoxia results in cytoplasmic accumulation 
of SPOP, which is sufficient to induce tumorigenesis. This tumorigenic activity
occurs through the ubiquitination and degradation of multiple regulators of
cellular proliferation and apoptosis, including the tumor suppressor PTEN, ERK
phosphatases, the proapoptotic molecule Daxx, and the Hedgehog pathway
transcription factor Gli2. Knockdown of SPOP specifically kills ccRCC cells,
indicating that it may be a promising therapeutic target. Collectively, our
results indicate that SPOP serves as a regulatory hub to promote ccRCC
tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4443692
PMID: 24656772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cancer Cell. 2014 Mar 17;25(3):393-405. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.02.004.

Genome sequencing of SHH medulloblastoma predicts genotype-related response to
smoothened inhibition.

Kool M(1), Jones DT(2), Jäger N(3), Northcott PA(2), Pugh TJ(4), Hovestadt V(5), 
Piro RM(3), Esparza LA(6), Markant SL(6), Remke M(7), Milde T(8), Bourdeaut F(9),
Ryzhova M(10), Sturm D(2), Pfaff E(2), Stark S(2), Hutter S(2), Seker-Cin H(2),
Johann P(2), Bender S(2), Schmidt C(2), Rausch T(11), Shih D(7), Reimand J(12),
Sieber L(2), Wittmann A(2), Linke L(2), Witt H(13), Weber UD(5), Zapatka M(5),
König R(14), Beroukhim R(15), Bergthold G(16), van Sluis P(17), Volckmann R(17), 
Koster J(17), Versteeg R(17), Schmidt S(18), Wolf S(18), Lawerenz C(19),
Bartholomae CC(20), von Kalle C(20), Unterberg A(20), Herold-Mende C(20), Hofer
S(21), Kulozik AE(8), von Deimling A(22), Scheurlen W(23), Felsberg J(24),
Reifenberger G(24), Hasselblatt M(25), Crawford JR(26), Grant GA(27), Jabado
N(28), Perry A(29), Cowdrey C(30), Croul S(31), Zadeh G(31), Korbel JO(11), Doz
F(32), Delattre O(9), Bader GD(12), McCabe MG(33), Collins VP(34), Kieran MW(35),
Cho YJ(36), Pomeroy SL(37), Witt O(38), Brors B(3), Taylor MD(7), Schüller U(39),
Korshunov A(40), Eils R(3), Wechsler-Reya RJ(6), Lichter P(5), Pfister SM(13);
ICGC PedBrain Tumor Project.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69121 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: m.kool@dkfz.de. (2)Division of
Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, 
Germany. (3)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02141, USA. (5)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (7)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain
Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada. 
(8)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University
Hospital Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (9)Institut Curie, 75005 Paris,
France; Institut Curie/INSERM U830, 75248 Paris, France. (10)Department of
Neuropathology, NN Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute, Moscow 125047, Russia.
(11)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada.
(13)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69121 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Immunology, University Hospital Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69121 Heidelberg, Germany; Integrated Research and Treatment Center, Center for
Sepsis Control and Care, Jena University Hospital, 07747 Jena, Germany; Leibniz
Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology,
Hans-Knöll-Institute (HKI), 07745 Jena, Germany. (15)Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (16)Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA; Department of Cancer
Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA; UMR 8203, CNRS
Vectorology and Anticancer Therapeutics, Gustave Roussy Cancer Institute,
University Paris XI, 94805 Villejuif Cedex, France. (17)Department of
Oncogenomics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, the Netherlands.
(18)Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
69121 Heidelberg, Germany. (19)Data Management Facility, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany. (20)Division of Translational Oncology,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor Diseases
(NCT), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany. (21)Department of Oncology, University Hospital
Zürich, 8006 Zürich, Switzerland. (22)Department of Neuropathology, University of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany. (23)Cnopf'sche
Kinderklinik, Nürnberg Children's Hospital, 90419 Nürnberg, Germany.
(24)Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany. (25)Institute for Neuropathology, University Hospital
Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany. (26)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurosciences,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093; Rady Children's Hospital,
San Diego, CA 92123, USA. (27)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA; 
Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(28)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University Health Centre
Research Institute, Montreal, QC H3H 1P3, Canada. (29)Departments of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94143, USA. (30)Departments of Pathology and Neurological Surgery, Brain Tumor
Research Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA. (31)Department of Neuropathology, The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain
Tumour Research Centre, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada. (32)Institut Curie, 75005
Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes, 75006 Paris, France. (33)Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester M13 9NT, UK. (34)Department of
Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK. (35)Pediatric Medical 
Neuro-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. (36)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (37)Boston Children's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (38)CCU Pediatric
Oncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany.
(39)Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität,
81377 München, Germany. (40)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Neuropathology, 
University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Clinical Cooperation Unit
Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Sep 17;33(18):1984-6.

Smoothened (SMO) inhibitors recently entered clinical trials for
sonic-hedgehog-driven medulloblastoma (SHH-MB). Clinical response is highly
variable. To understand the mechanism(s) of primary resistance and identify
pathways cooperating with aberrant SHH signaling, we sequenced and profiled a
large cohort of SHH-MBs (n = 133). SHH pathway mutations involved PTCH1 (across
all age groups), SUFU (infants, including germline), and SMO (adults). Children
>3 years old harbored an excess of downstream MYCN and GLI2 amplifications and
frequent TP53 mutations, often in the germline, all of which were rare in infants
and adults. Functional assays in different SHH-MB xenograft models demonstrated
that SHH-MBs harboring a PTCH1 mutation were responsive to SMO inhibition,
whereas tumors harboring an SUFU mutation or MYCN amplification were primarily
resistant.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4493053
PMID: 24651015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biomed Rep. 2013 Mar;1(2):325-329. Epub 2013 Jan 21.

Hedgehog signaling inhibitor cyclopamine induces apoptosis by decreasing Gli2 and
Bcl2 expression in human salivary pleomorphic adenoma cells.

Song M(1), Ou X(1), Xiao C(1), Xiao Z(2), Wei F(2), Hong Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Stomatology, First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai 200080, P.R. China. (2)Experimental Research Center, First
People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200080, P.R. China.

Pleomorphic adenoma is the most common benign neoplasm of the salivary gland. Few
studies are currently available on pleomorphic adenoma cell apoptosis. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effect of cyclopamine induction apoptosis in
human salivary pleomorphic adenoma (HSPA) cells and the impact on Gli2 and Bcl2
mRNA levels. Cells were quantified and cell morphology was visualized under
microscope. Flow cytometry was used to detect the apoptotic rate. Cyclopamine is 
considered an efficient blocker of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. Following
treatment with 10 µmol/l cyclopamine for 48 h, the number of cells were reduced, 
and nuclear pycnosis or fragmentation, as well as chromatospherite disfiguration 
apoptotic morphology were observed under microscope. One-way ANOVA test results
revealed a significantly greater decrease (P<0.01) of Gli2 and Bcl2 mRNA levels
in the cyclopamine-treated group as compared to the blank control group and
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)-treated group. Following treatment with 10 µmol/l
cyclopamine for 24 h, the apoptotic rate of the cyclopamine-treated group was
significantly higher than that of the blank control and DMSO-treated group
(P<0.01). Findings of this study showed that cyclopamine affected the mechanism
of HSPA cell apoptosis, which may be associated with the downregulation of Gli2
and Bcl2 mRNA expression levels and the activation of the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathways.

PMCID: PMC3917731
PMID: 24648943  [PubMed]


177. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Aug;51(2):273-83. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0127OC.

miR-326 is downstream of Sonic hedgehog signaling and regulates the expression of
Gli2 and smoothened.

Jiang Z(1), Cushing L, Ai X, Lü J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; and.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed and secreted from the embryonic lung epithelium
and acts on the adjacent mesenchymal cells via its receptor Patched
(Ptch)/Smoothened (Smo) and transcriptional effectors Gli proteins. Genetic
studies showed that the Shh pathway plays critical roles in mouse lung
development. However, little is known about microRNAs (miRNAs) downstream of Shh 
in embryonic lungs. Here we profiled miRNAs in embryonic lung cultures treated
with cyclopamine, a specific Smo antagonist or with Smo agonist by
next-generation of sequencing. We then performed functional screening to examine 
whether some of these miRNAs can modulate the induction of Gli-responsive
luciferase by Shh treatment. These analyses revealed that expression of miR-326
and its host gene, Arrestin ß1, is selectively enriched in embryonic lung
mesenchymal cells and is specifically influenced by Shh activity. Furthermore,
functional analyses showed that miR-326 acts as a negative modulator for Shh
signaling by directly targeting Smo and Gli2. Together, these findings suggest a 
novel miR-326-negative feedback loop in regulating the activity of Shh signaling.

PMCID: PMC4148035
PMID: 24617895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 19;9(2):e89448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089448. eCollection
2014.

The teratogenic effects of prenatal ethanol exposure are exacerbated by Sonic
Hedgehog or GLI2 haploinsufficiency in the mouse.

Kietzman HW(1), Everson JL(1), Sulik KK(1), Lipinski RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)The Bowles Center
for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, United States of America ; Department of Comparative Biosciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Disruption of the Hedgehog signaling pathway has been implicated as an important 
molecular mechanism in the pathogenesis of fetal alcohol syndrome. In severe
cases, the abnormalities of the face and brain that result from prenatal ethanol 
exposure fall within the spectrum of holoprosencephaly. Single allele mutations
in the Hh pathway genes Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and GLI2 cause holoprosencephaly
with extremely variable phenotypic penetrance in humans. Here, we tested whether 
mutations in these genes alter the frequency or severity of ethanol-induced
dysmorphology in a mouse model. Timed pregnancies were established by mating
Shh(+/-) or Gli2(+/-) male mice backcrossed to C57BL/6J strain, with wildtype
females. On gestational day 7, dams were treated with two i.p. doses of 2.9 g/kg 
ethanol (or vehicle alone), administered four hrs apart. Fetuses were then
genotyped and imaged, and the severity of facial dysmorphology was assessed.
Following ethanol exposure, mean dysmorphology scores were increased by 3.2- and 
6.6-fold in Shh(+/-) and Gli2(+/-) groups, respectively, relative to their
wildtype littermates. Importantly, a cohort of heterozygous fetuses exhibited
phenotypes not typically produced in this model but associated with severe
holoprosencephaly, including exencephaly, median cleft lip, otocephaly, and
proboscis. As expected, a correlation between the severity of facial
dysmorphology and medial forebrain deficiency was observed in affected animals.
While Shh(+/-) and Gli2(+/-) mice have been described as phenotypically normal,
these results illustrate a functional haploinsufficiency of both genes in
combination with ethanol exposure. By demonstrating an interaction between
specific genetic and environmental risk factors, this study provides important
insights into the multifactorial etiology and complex pathogenesis of fetal
alcohol syndrome and holoprosencephaly.

PMCID: PMC3929747
PMID: 24586787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Cell. 2014 Mar 10;28(5):483-96. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.021. Epub 2014 
Feb 27.

EFCAB7 and IQCE regulate hedgehog signaling by tethering the EVC-EVC2 complex to 
the base of primary cilia.

Pusapati GV(1), Hughes CE(1), Dorn KV(1), Zhang D(2), Sugianto P(1), Aravind
L(3), Rohatgi R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (2)National Center for Biotechnology
Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. (3)National Center for Biotechnology Information,
National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, 
USA. Electronic address: aravind@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. (4)Departments of Biochemistry
and Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Electronic address: rrohatgi@stanford.edu.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway depends on primary cilia in vertebrates, but the
signaling machinery within cilia remains incompletely defined. We report the
identification of a complex between two ciliary proteins, EFCAB7 and IQCE, which 
positively regulates the Hh pathway. The EFCAB7-IQCE module anchors the EVC-EVC2 
complex in a signaling microdomain at the base of cilia. EVC and EVC2 genes are
mutated in Ellis van Creveld and Weyers syndromes, characterized by impaired Hh
signaling in skeletal, cardiac, and orofacial tissues. EFCAB7 binds to a
C-terminal disordered region in EVC2 that is deleted in Weyers patients. EFCAB7
depletion mimics the Weyers cellular phenotype-the mislocalization of EVC-EVC2
within cilia and impaired activation of the transcription factor GLI2.
Evolutionary analysis suggests that emergence of these complexes might have been 
important for adaptation of an ancient organelle, the cilium, for an
animal-specific signaling network.VIDEO ABSTRACT:

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4027042
PMID: 24582806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Andrology. 2014 Mar;2(2):267-74. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00187.x.

Dynamic Hedgehog signalling pathway activity in germline stem cells.

Sahin Z(1), Szczepny A, McLaughlin EA, Meistrich ML, Zhou W, Ustunel I, Loveland 
KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Near East
University, Nicosia, Mersin-10, Turkey; Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Although the contribution of Hedgehog (Hh) signalling to stem cell development
and oncogenesis is well recognised, its importance for spermatogonial stem cells 
(SSCs) has not been established. Here we interrogate adult rat SSCs using an
established model in which only undifferentiated spermatogonial cells remain in
the testis at 15 weeks following irradiation, and spermatogonial differentiation 
is induced within 4 weeks by gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist
(GnRH-ant) administration. Synthesis of Hh pathway components in untreated adult 
rat testes was compared with that in irradiated testes prior to and after
GnRH-ant exposure using in situ hybridization. In adult testes with complete
spermatogenesis, the Desert Hedgehog ligand transcript, Dhh, was detected in
Sertoli cells, some spermatogonia and in spermatocytes by in situ hybridization. 
Spermatogenic cells were identified as sites of Hh signalling through detection
of transcripts encoding the Hh receptor, Ptc2 transcripts and proteins for the
key downstream target of Hh signalling, Gli1 and the Hh transcriptional
activator, Gli2. Remarkably, the undifferentiated spermatogonia present in
irradiated adult rat testes contained Dhh in addition to Ptc2, Gli1 and Gli2,
revealing the potential for an autocrine Hh signalling loop to sustain
undifferentiated spermatogonial cells. These transcripts became undetectable by
in situ hybridization following GnRH-ant induction of spermatogonial
differentiation, however, detection of Gli1 protein in spermatogonia in all
groups indicates that Hh signalling is sustained. This is the first evidence of
active Hh signalling in mammalian male germline stem cells, as has been
documented for some cancer stem cells.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMCID: PMC4119796
PMID: 24574096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e87038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087038. eCollection 
2014.

Expression of signaling components in embryonic eyelid epithelium.

Meng Q(1), Jin C(1), Chen Y(1), Chen J(1), Medvedovic M(1), Xia Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, College of Medicine, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e106783.

Closure of an epithelium opening is a critical morphogenetic event for
development. An excellent example for this process is the transient closure of
embryonic eyelid. Eyelid closure requires shape change and migration of
epithelial cells at the tip of the developing eyelids, and is dictated by
numerous signaling pathways. Here we evaluated gene expression in epithelial
cells isolated from the tip (leading edge, LE) and inner surface epithelium (IE) 
of the eyelid from E15.5 mouse fetuses by laser capture microdissection (LCM). We
showed that the LE and IE cells are different at E15.5, such that IE had higher
expression of muscle specific genes, while LE acquired epithelium identities.
Despite their distinct destinies, these cells were overall similar in expression 
of signaling components for the "eyelid closure pathways". However, while the LE 
cells had more abundant expression of Fgfr2, Erbb2, Shh, Ptch1 and 2, Smo and
Gli2, and Jag1 and Notch1, the IE cells had more abundant expression of Bmp5 and 
Bmpr1a. In addition, the LE cells had more abundant expression of adenomatosis
polyposis coli down-regulated 1 (Apcdd1), but the IE cells had high expression of
Dkk2. Our results suggest that the functionally distinct LE and IE cells have
also differential expression of signaling molecules that may contribute to the
cell-specific responses to morphogenetic signals. The expression pattern suggests
that the EGF, Shh and NOTCH pathways are preferentially active in LE cells, the
BMP pathways are effective in IE cells, and the Wnt pathway may be repressed in
LE and IE cells via different mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3911929
PMID: 24498290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar 20;32(9):886-96. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.50.9539. Epub 2014 
Feb 3.

Cytogenetic prognostication within medulloblastoma subgroups.

Shih DJ(1), Northcott PA, Remke M, Korshunov A, Ramaswamy V, Kool M, Luu B, Yao
Y, Wang X, Dubuc AM, Garzia L, Peacock J, Mack SC, Wu X, Rolider A, Morrissy AS, 
Cavalli FM, Jones DT, Zitterbart K, Faria CC, Schüller U, Kren L, Kumabe T,
Tominaga T, Shin Ra Y, Garami M, Hauser P, Chan JA, Robinson S, Bognár L, Klekner
A, Saad AG, Liau LM, Albrecht S, Fontebasso A, Cinalli G, De Antonellis P, Zollo 
M, Cooper MK, Thompson RC, Bailey S, Lindsey JC, Di Rocco C, Massimi L, Michiels 
EM, Scherer SW, Phillips JJ, Gupta N, Fan X, Muraszko KM, Vibhakar R, Eberhart
CG, Fouladi M, Lach B, Jung S, Wechsler-Reya RJ, Fèvre-Montange M, Jouvet A,
Jabado N, Pollack IF, Weiss WA, Lee JY, Cho BK, Kim SK, Wang KC, Leonard JR,
Rubin JB, de Torres C, Lavarino C, Mora J, Cho YJ, Tabori U, Olson JM, Gajjar A, 
Packer RJ, Rutkowski S, Pomeroy SL, French PJ, Kloosterhof NK, Kros JM, Van Meir 
EG, Clifford SC, Bourdeaut F, Delattre O, Doz FF, Hawkins CE, Malkin D,
Grajkowska WA, Perek-Polnik M, Bouffet E, Rutka JT, Pfister SM, Taylor MD.

Author information: 
(1)David J.H. Shih, Marc Remke, Vijay Ramaswamy, Betty Luu, Yuan Yao, Xin Wang,
Adrian M. Dubuc, Livia Garzia, John Peacock, Stephen C. Mack, Xiaochong Wu, Adi
Rolider, A. Sorana Morrissy, Florence M.G. Cavalli, Claudia C. Faria, Stephen W. 
Scherer, Uri Tabori, Cynthia E. Hawkins, David Malkin, Eric Bouffet, James T.
Rutka, and Michael D. Taylor, Hospital for Sick Children; David J.H. Shih, Marc
Remke, Vijay Ramaswamy, Yuan Yao, Xin Wang, Adrian M. Dubuc, John Peacock,
Stephen C. Mack, and Michael D. Taylor, University of Toronto, Toronto; Boleslaw 
Lach, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario; Jennifer A. Chan, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta; Steffen Albrecht, Adam Fontebasso, and Nada Jabado,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Paul A. Northcott, Andrey Korshunov,
Marcel Kool, David T.W. Jones, and Stefan M. Pfister, German Cancer Research
Center; Stefan M. Pfister, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg; Ulrich
Schüller, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich; Stefan Rutkowski, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; Karel Zitterbart, Masaryk
University School of Medicine; Karel Zitterbart and Leos Kren, University
Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic; Toshihiro Kumabe and Teiji Tominaga, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Young Shin Ra, University 
of Ulsan, Asan Medical Center; Ji-Yeoun Lee, Byung-Kyu Cho, Seung-Ki Kim, and
Kyu-Chang Wang, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, Seoul; Shin Jung, 
Chonnam National University Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Chonnam
National University Hwasun Hospital and Medical School, Chonnam, South Korea;
Peter Hauser and Miklós Garami, Semmelweis University, Budapest; László Bognár
and Almos Klekner, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Centre,
Debrecen, Hungary; Shenandoah Robinson, Boston Children's Hospital; Scott L.
Pomeroy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Ali G. Saad, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little

PURPOSE: Medulloblastoma comprises four distinct molecular subgroups: WNT, SHH,
Group 3, and Group 4. Current medulloblastoma protocols stratify patients based
on clinical features: patient age, metastatic stage, extent of resection, and
histologic variant. Stark prognostic and genetic differences among the four
subgroups suggest that subgroup-specific molecular biomarkers could improve
patient prognostication.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Molecular biomarkers were identified from a discovery set
of 673 medulloblastomas from 43 cities around the world. Combined risk
stratification models were designed based on clinical and cytogenetic biomarkers 
identified by multivariable Cox proportional hazards analyses. Identified
biomarkers were tested using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) on a
nonoverlapping medulloblastoma tissue microarray (n = 453), with subsequent
validation of the risk stratification models.
RESULTS: Subgroup information improves the predictive accuracy of a multivariable
survival model compared with clinical biomarkers alone. Most previously published
cytogenetic biomarkers are only prognostic within a single medulloblastoma
subgroup. Profiling six FISH biomarkers (GLI2, MYC, chromosome 11 [chr11], chr14,
17p, and 17q) on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues, we can reliably and
reproducibly identify very low-risk and very high-risk patients within SHH, Group
3, and Group 4 medulloblastomas.
CONCLUSION: Combining subgroup and cytogenetic biomarkers with established
clinical biomarkers substantially improves patient prognostication, even in the
context of heterogeneous clinical therapies. The prognostic significance of most 
molecular biomarkers is restricted to a specific subgroup. We have identified a
small panel of cytogenetic biomarkers that reliably identifies very high-risk and
very low-risk groups of patients, making it an excellent tool for selecting
patients for therapy intensification and therapy de-escalation in future clinical
trials.

PMCID: PMC3948094
PMID: 24493713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jan 30;5:e1028. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.535.

GLI2 induces genomic instability in human keratinocytes by inhibiting apoptosis.

Pantazi E(1), Gemenetzidis E(1), Trigiante G(1), Warnes G(2), Shan L(3), Mao
X(3), Ikram M(4), Teh MT(5), Lu YJ(3), Philpott MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(2)Imaging and Flow Cytometry Core Facilities, Blizard Institute, Barts and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK. (3)Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK. (4)Pathology Core Facilities, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Diagnostic and Oral Sciences, Blizard Institute, Barts and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK.

Abnormal Sonic Hedgehog signalling leads to increased transcriptional activation 
of its downstream effector, glioma 2 (GLI2), which is implicated in the
pathogenesis of a variety of human cancers. However, the mechanisms underlying
the tumorigenic role of GLI2 remain elusive. We demonstrate that overexpression
of GLI2-ß isoform, which lacks the N-terminal repressor domain (GLI2<U+0394>N) in human 
keratinocytes is sufficient to induce numerical and structural chromosomal
aberrations, including tetraploidy/aneuploidy and chromosomal translocations.
This is coupled with suppression of cell cycle regulators p21(WAF1/CIP1) and
14-3-3s, and strong induction of anti-apoptotic signalling, resulting in a
reduction in the ability to eliminate genomically abnormal cells. Overexpression 
of GLI2<U+0394>N also rendered human keratinocytes resistant to UVB-mediated apoptosis, 
whereas inhibition of B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) restored endogenous (genomic
instability (GIN)) and exogenous (UVB) DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Thus, we
propose that ectopic expression of GLI2 profoundly affects the genomic integrity 
of human epithelial cells and contributes to the survival of progenies with
genomic alterations by deregulating cell cycle proteins and disabling the
apoptotic mechanisms responsible for their elimination. This study reveals a
novel role for GLI2 in promoting GIN, a hallmark of human tumors, and identifies 
potential mechanisms that may provide new opportunities for the design of novel
forms of cancer therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4040660
PMID: 24481442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Sex Dev. 2014;8(4):166-77. doi: 10.1159/000357927. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

A dual role for SHH during phallus development in a marsupial.

Chew KY(1), Pask AJ, Hickford D, Shaw G, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Kangaroo Genomics, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Vic., Australia.

The mammalian phallus arises from identical primordia in both sexes and is
patterned in part by the key morphogen Sonic hedgehog (SHH). We have investigated
SHH and other morphogens during phallus development in the tammar wallaby. In
this marsupial, testis differentiation and androgen production occurs just after 
birth, but it takes a further 50-60 days before the phallus becomes sexually
dimorphic. One day before birth, SHH was expressed in both sexes in the urethral 
epithelium. In males, there was a marked upregulation of SHH, GLI2, and AR at day
50 postpartum, a time when testicular androgen production falls. SHH, GLI2, and
AR were downregulated in female pouch young treated with androstanediol from days
24-50, but not when treatments were begun at day 29, suggesting an early window
of androgen sensitivity. SHH, GLI2, and AR expression in the phallus of males
castrated at day 23 did not differ from controls, but there was an increase in
SHH and GLI2 and a decrease in FGF8 and BMP4 expression when the animals were
castrated at day 29. These results suggest that the early patterning by SHH is
androgen-independent followed by an androgen-dependent window of sensitivity and 
a sharp rise in SHH expression after androgen withdrawal at day 50.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24480851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Cell Sci. 2014 Apr 1;127(Pt 7):1500-10. doi: 10.1242/jcs.139253. Epub 2014 Jan 
24.

A central region of Gli2 regulates its localization to the primary cilium and
transcriptional activity.

Santos N(1), Reiter JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158-2324, USA.

Signaling through vertebrate Hedgehog (Hh) proteins depends on the primary
cilium. In response to Hh signals, the transcriptional activator of the pathway, 
Gli2, accumulates at the ciliary tip, raising the possibility that ciliary
localization is important for Gli2 activation. To test this hypothesis, we used
the Floxin system to create knock-in Gli2 alleles in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) 
to allow methodical testing of which domains and residues are essential for the
ciliary localization of Gli2. The Gli2 zinc fingers, transcriptional activation
domain, repressor domain, phosphorylation cluster and a Sufu binding motif were
each dispensable for ciliary localization. Mutating residues that are required
for Gli2 sumoylation and nuclear trafficking also did not abrogate ciliary
localization. By contrast, several other domains restricted Gli2 nuclear
localization, and a central region, distinct from previously characterized
domains, was required for ciliary localization. In addition to an inability to
localize to cilia, Gli2 lacking this central domain was unable to activate target
genes. Thus, our systematic analysis in ESCs reveals that distinct regions of
Gli2 regulate its nuclear and ciliary localization. The identification of a
domain essential for both ciliary localization and transcriptional activity
suggests that ciliary localization of Gli2 is required for its activation.

PMCID: PMC3970560
PMID: 24463817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Apr;28(3):229-33. doi: 10.1111/dote.12173. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Alternations in genes expression of pathway signaling in esophageal tissue with
atresia: results of expression microarray profiling.

Smigiel R(1), Lebioda A, Blaszczynski M, Korecka K, Czauderna P, Korlacki W,
Jakubiak A, Bednarczyk D, Maciejewski H, Wizinska P, Sasiadek MM, Patkowski D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.

Esophageal atresia (EA) is a congenital defect of the esophagus involving the
interruption of the esophagus with or without connection to the trachea
(tracheoesophageal fistula [TEF]). EA/TEF may occur as an isolated anomaly, may
be part of a complex of congenital defects (syndromic), or may develop within the
context of a known syndrome or association. The molecular mechanisms underlying
the development of EA are poorly understood. It is supposed that a combination of
multigenic factors and epigenetic modification of genes play a role in its
etiology. The aim of our work was to assess the human gene expression microarray 
study in esophageal tissue samples. Total RNA was extracted from 26 lower pouches
of esophageal tissue collected during thoracoscopic EA repair in neonates with
the isolated (IEA) and the syndromic form (SEA). We identified 787 downregulated 
and 841 upregulated transcripts between SEA and controls, and about 817
downregulated and 765 upregulated probes between IEA and controls. Fifty percent 
of these genes showed differential expression specific for either IEA or SEA.
Functional pathway analysis revealed substantial enrichment for Wnt and Sonic
hedgehog, as well as cytokine and chemokine signaling pathways. Moreover, we
performed reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction study in a group of SHH
and Wnt pathways genes with differential expression in microarray profiling to
confirm the microarray expression results. We verified the altered expression in 
SFRP2 gene from the Wnt pathway as well as SHH, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 from the
Sonic hedgehog pathway. The results suggest an important role of these pathways
and genes for EA/TEF etiology.

© 2014 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 24460849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Dent Res. 2014 Mar;93(3):281-7. doi: 10.1177/0022034513519649. Epub 2014 Jan
22.

TMJ degeneration in SAMP8 mice is accompanied by deranged Ihh signaling.

Ishizuka Y(1), Shibukawa Y, Nagayama M, Decker R, Kinumatsu T, Saito A, Pacifici 
M, Koyama E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Tokyo Dental College, Tokyo, Japan.

The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) functions as a load-bearing diarthrodial joint 
during mastication, and its continuous use and stress can lead to degeneration
over age. Using senescence-accelerated (SAMP8) mice that develop early
osteoarthritis-like changes in synovial joints at high frequency, we analyzed
possible molecular mechanisms of TMJ degeneration and tested whether and how
malocclusion may accelerate it. Condylar articular cartilage in young SAMP8 mice 
displayed early-onset osteoarthritic changes that included reductions in
superficial/chondroprogenitor cell number, proteoglycan/collagen content, and
Indian hedgehog (Ihh)-expressing chondrocytes. Following malocclusion induced by 
tooth milling, the SAMP8 condyles became morphologically defective, displayed
even lower proteoglycan levels, and underwent abnormal chondrocyte maturation
compared with malocclusion-treated condyles in wild-type mice. Malocclusion also 
induced faster progression of pathologic changes with increasing age in SAMP8
condyles as indicated by decreased PCNA-positive proliferating chondroprogenitors
and increased TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells. These changes were accompanied by
steeper reductions in Ihh signaling and by expression of matrix metalloproteinase
13 at the chondro-osseous junction in SAMP8 articular cartilage. In sum, we show 
for the first time that precocious TMJ degeneration in SAMP8 mice is accompanied 
by--and possibly attributable to--altered Ihh signaling and that occlusal
dysfunction accelerates progression toward degenerative TMJ disease in this
model.

PMCID: PMC3929979
PMID: 24453178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Jul;51(1):11-25. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0154OC.

Targeting the hedgehog-glioma-associated oncogene homolog pathway inhibits
bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis in mice.

Moshai EF(1), Wémeau-Stervinou L, Cigna N, Brayer S, Sommé JM, Crestani B,
Mailleux AA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 1152,
Paris, France.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis has been associated with the reactivation of
developmental pathways, notably the Hedgehog-Glioma-associated oncogene homolog
(GLI) pathway. In this study, we determined whether the Hedgehog pathway was
activated in bleomycin-induced lung injury in mice, and whether targeting the
Hedgehog-Gli pathway could decrease bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. After
intratracheal injection of bleomycin on Day 0, C57Bl6 mice received GDC-0449 (an 
inhibitor of Smoothened, the transducer of the pathway), or
2,2'-[[Dihydro-2-(4-pyridinyl)-1,3(2H,4H)-pyrimidinediyl]bis(methylene)]bis[N,N
dimethylbenzenamine (GANT61; an inhibitor of GLI transcription factors in the
nucleus), from Day 7 to Day 13. At Day 14, whole-lung homogenates were obtained
for morphological analysis, assessment of cell apoptosis and proliferation,
collagen quantification, and evaluation of profibrotic (transforming growth
factor-ß, connective tissue growth factor, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1,
vascular endothelial growth factor-A) and proinflammatory mediators (IL-1ß)
expression. We showed that the Hedgehog pathway was activated in
bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis on Day 14 after injury, with an increased lung
expression of the ligand, Sonic Hedgehog, and with increased messenger RNA
expression and nuclear localization of GLI1 and GLI2. Inhibition of Smoothened
with GDC-0449 did not influence the development of bleomycin-induced lung
fibrosis. By contrast, the inhibition of GLI activity with GANT61 decreased lung 
fibrosis and lung collagen accumulation, and promoted an antifibrotic and
anti-inflammatory environment. Our results identify the hedgehog-Gli pathway as a
profibrotic pathway in experimental fibrosis. Inhibition of the Hedgehog-Gli
pathway at the level of GLI transcriptional activity could be a therapeutic
option in fibrotic lung diseases.

PMID: 24450438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;20(6):1566-75. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2195.
Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Hedgehog-GLI signaling inhibition suppresses tumor growth in squamous lung
cancer.

Huang L(1), Walter V, Hayes DN, Onaitis M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Surgery, Duke University, Durham and
Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar;11(3):121.

PURPOSE: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) currently lacks effective targeted
therapies. Previous studies reported overexpression of Hedgehog (HH)-GLI
signaling components in LSCC. However, they addressed neither the tumor
heterogeneity nor the requirement for HH-GLI signaling. Here, we investigated the
role of HH-GLI signaling in LSCC, and studied the therapeutic potential of HH-GLI
suppression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression datasets of two independent LSCC patient
cohorts were analyzed to study the activation of HH-GLI signaling. Four human
LSCC cell lines were examined for HH-GLI signaling components. Cell proliferation
and apoptosis were assayed in these cells after blocking the HH-GLI pathway by
lentiviral-shRNA knockdown or small-molecule inhibitors. Xenografts in
immunodeficient mice were used to determine the in vivo efficacy of GLI inhibitor
GANT61.
RESULTS: In both cohorts, activation of HH-GLI signaling was significantly
associated with the classical subtype of LSCC. In cell lines, genetic knockdown
of Smoothened (SMO) produced minor effects on cell survival, whereas GLI2
knockdown significantly reduced proliferation and induced extensive apoptosis.
Consistently, the SMO inhibitor GDC-0449 resulted in limited cytotoxicity in LSCC
cells, whereas the GLI inhibitor GANT61 was very effective. Importantly, GANT61
demonstrated specific in vivo antitumor activity in xenograft models of GLI(+)
cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Our studies demonstrate an important role for GLI2 in LSCC, and
suggest GLI inhibition as a novel and potent strategy to treat a subset of
patients with LSCC.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4136748
PMID: 24423612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Apr;1843(4):703-14. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.01.003.
Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Protein kinase inhibitor SU6668 attenuates positive regulation of Gli proteins in
cancer and multipotent progenitor cells.

Piirsoo A(1), Kasak L(2), Kauts ML(3), Loog M(4), Tints K(5), Uusen P(5), Neuman 
T(3), Piirsoo M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Protobios LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Cellin Technologies LLC,
Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. Electronic address: alla.maloverjan@ttu.ee.
(2)Protobios LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Department of Gene
Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, Tallinn 12618,
Estonia. (3)Protobios LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. (4)Institute of
Technology, University of Tartu, Nooruse 1, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. (5)Cellin
Technologies LLC, Mäealuse 4, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. (6)Department of Gene
Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, Tallinn 12618,
Estonia.

Observations that Glioma-associated transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 (Gli1/2),
executers of the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway and targets of the
Transforming Growth Factor ß (TGF-ß) signaling axis, are involved in numerous
developmental and pathological processes unveil them as attractive pharmaceutical
targets. Unc-51-like serine/threonine kinase Ulk3 has been suggested to play
kinase activity dependent and independent roles in the control of Gli proteins in
the context of the Shh signaling pathway. This study aimed at investigating
whether the mechanism of generation of Gli1/2 transcriptional activators has
similarities regardless of the signaling cascade evoking their activation. We
also elucidate further the role of Ulk3 kinase in regulation of Gli1/2 proteins
and examine SU6668 as an inhibitor of Ulk3 catalytic activity and a compound
targeting Gli1/2 proteins in different cell-based experimental models. Here we
demonstrate that Ulk3 is required not only for maintenance of basal levels of
Gli1/2 proteins but also for TGF-ß or Shh dependent activation of endogenous
Gli1/2 proteins in human adipose tissue derived multipotent stromal cells (ASCs) 
and mouse immortalized progenitor cells, respectively. We show that cultured ASCs
possess the functional Shh signaling axis and differentiate towards osteoblasts
in response to Shh. Also, we demonstrate that similarly to Ulk3 RNAi, SU6668
prevents de novo expression of Gli1/2 proteins and antagonizes the Gli-dependent 
activation of the gene expression programs induced by either Shh or TGF-ß. Our
data suggest SU6668 as an efficient inhibitor of Ulk3 kinase allowing
manipulation of the Gli-dependent transcriptional outcome.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3946003
PMID: 24418624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cell Rep. 2014 Jan 16;6(1):168-81. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.003. Epub 2013
Dec 27.

Gli protein activity is controlled by multisite phosphorylation in vertebrate
Hedgehog signaling.

Niewiadomski P(1), Kong JH(2), Ahrends R(3), Ma Y(4), Humke EW(4), Khan S(4),
Teruel MN(5), Novitch BG(2), Rohatgi R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
p.niewiadomski@nencki.gov.pl. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Eli and Edythe Broad
Stem Cell Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA. (3)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Laboratory of Quantitative Systems
Analysis, Leibniz-Institute for Analytical Sciences (ISAS) e.V., 44227 Dortmund, 
Germany. (4)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (5)Department of Chemical and Systems
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: rrohatgi@stanford.edu.

Gli proteins are transcriptional effectors of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway in both
normal development and cancer. We describe a program of multisite phosphorylation
that regulates the conversion of Gli proteins into transcriptional activators. In
the absence of Hh ligands, Gli activity is restrained by the direct
phosphorylation of six conserved serine residues by protein kinase A (PKA), a
master negative regulator of the Hh pathway. Activation of signaling leads to a
global remodeling of the Gli phosphorylation landscape: the PKA target sites
become dephosphorylated, while a second cluster of sites undergoes
phosphorylation. The pattern of Gli phosphorylation can regulate Gli
transcriptional activity in a graded fashion, suggesting a phosphorylation-based 
mechanism for how a gradient of Hh signaling in a morphogenetic field can be
converted into a gradient of transcriptional activity.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3915062
PMID: 24373970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003955. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003955. Epub 2013 Dec
5.

Positive and negative regulation of Gli activity by Kif7 in the zebrafish embryo.

Maurya AK(1), Ben J, Zhao Z, Lee RT, Niah W, Ng AS, Iyu A, Yu W, Elworthy S, van 
Eeden FJ, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)ASTAR Institute of Molecular & Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore ; Department
of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

Loss of function mutations of Kif7, the vertebrate orthologue of the Drosophila
Hh pathway component Costal2, cause defects in the limbs and neural tubes of
mice, attributable to ectopic expression of Hh target genes. While this implies a
functional conservation of Cos2 and Kif7 between flies and vertebrates, the
association of Kif7 with the primary cilium, an organelle absent from most
Drosophila cells, suggests their mechanisms of action may have diverged. Here,
using mutant alleles induced by Zinc Finger Nuclease-mediated targeted
mutagenesis, we show that in zebrafish, Kif7 acts principally to suppress the
activity of the Gli1 transcription factor. Notably, we find that endogenous Kif7 
protein accumulates not only in the primary cilium, as previously observed in
mammalian cells, but also in cytoplasmic puncta that disperse in response to Hh
pathway activation. Moreover, we show that Drosophila Costal2 can substitute for 
Kif7, suggesting a conserved mode of action of the two proteins. We show that
Kif7 interacts with both Gli1 and Gli2a and suggest that it functions to
sequester Gli proteins in the cytoplasm, in a manner analogous to the regulation 
of Ci by Cos2 in Drosophila. We also show that zebrafish Kif7 potentiates Gli2a
activity by promoting its dissociation from the Suppressor of Fused (Sufu)
protein and present evidence that it mediates a Smo dependent modification of the
full length form of Gli2a. Surprisingly, the function of Kif7 in the zebrafish
embryo appears restricted principally to mesodermal derivatives, its inactivation
having little effect on neural tube patterning, even when Sufu protein levels are
depleted. Remarkably, zebrafish lacking all Kif7 function are viable, in contrast
to the peri-natal lethality of mouse kif7 mutants but similar to some
Acrocallosal or Joubert syndrome patients who are homozygous for loss of function
KIF7 alleles.

PMCID: PMC3854788
PMID: 24339784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nature. 2013 Dec 12;504(7479):311-4. doi: 10.1038/nature12833.

Primary cilia are specialized calcium signalling organelles.

Delling M(1), DeCaen PG(1), Doerner JF(2), Febvay S(2), Clapham DE(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston
Children's Hospital, 320 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2].
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's
Hospital, 320 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (3)1] Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital,
320 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Department of
Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;15(2):78.

Primary cilia are solitary, non-motile extensions of the centriole found on
nearly all nucleated eukaryotic cells between cell divisions. Only ~200-300<U+2009>nm in
diameter and a few micrometres long, they are separated from the cytoplasm by the
ciliary neck and basal body. Often called sensory cilia, they are thought to
receive chemical and mechanical stimuli and initiate specific cellular signal
transduction pathways. When activated by a ligand, hedgehog pathway proteins,
such as GLI2 and smoothened (SMO), translocate from the cell into the cilium.
Mutations in primary ciliary proteins are associated with severe developmental
defects. The ionic conditions, permeability of the primary cilia membrane, and
effectiveness of the diffusion barriers between the cilia and cell body are
unknown. Here we show that cilia are a unique calcium compartment regulated by a 
heteromeric TRP channel, PKD1L1-PKD2L1, in mice and humans. In contrast to the
hypothesis that polycystin (PKD) channels initiate changes in ciliary calcium
that are conducted into the cytoplasm, we show that changes in ciliary calcium
concentration occur without substantially altering global cytoplasmic calcium.
PKD1L1-PKD2L1 acts as a ciliary calcium channel controlling ciliary calcium
concentration and thereby modifying SMO-activated GLI2 translocation and GLI1
expression.

PMCID: PMC4112737
PMID: 24336288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2014 Jul;118(1):e19-23. doi:
10.1016/j.oooo.2013.09.015. Epub 2013 Dec 10.

Peripheral odontogenic keratocyst associated with nevoid basal cell carcinoma
syndrome: a case report.

Sakamoto K(1), Morita K(2), Shimada Y(3), Omura K(3), Izumo T(4), Yamaguchi A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. 
(2)Department of Advanced Molecular Diagnosis and Maxillofacial Surgery, Hard
Tissue Genome Research Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
Electronic address: keiichi.m.osur@tmd.ac.jp. (3)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 
Department of Oral Restitution, Division of Oral Health Sciences, Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo,
Japan; Global Center of Excellence (GCOE) Program, International Research Center 
for Molecular Science in Tooth and Bone Diseases, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Section of Diagnostic Oral Pathology, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Section of Oral Pathology, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan; Global Center of Excellence (GCOE) Program, 
International Research Center for Molecular Science in Tooth and Bone Diseases,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Peripheral odontogenic keratocyst (POKC) is a rare gingival cyst
showing histologic features identical to those of keratocystic odontogenic tumor.
A rare case of POKC associated with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) 
is presented.
STUDY DESIGN: A 24-year-old woman with NBCCS presented with a pigmented papule, 3
mm in size, involving the lingual gingiva of the right canine area of the
mandible. Based on a clinical diagnosis of benign pigmentation, an excisional
biopsy was performed, and a histopathologic diagnosis of POKC was rendered.
RESULTS: The lining cells were positive for the proteins GLI2, BCL2, keratin 8,
keratin 17, and mTOR. TP53 and Ber-EP4 were also weakly positive. Gene mutational
analysis on a buccal swab sample revealed 2 missense mutations in the PTCH1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: This case is a distinctive example of a genuine soft tissue
counterpart of keratocystic odontogenic tumor, in which an aberrant PTCH1-GLI
pathway played a considerable role in the pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24332158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):707-12. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2881. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway induces autophagy in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cells.

Xu Y(1), An Y(2), Wang X(3), Zha W(1), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, The First People's Hospital of Yancheng, Yancheng, Jiangsu, P.R.
China. (2)Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First People's Hospital of Changzhou,
Changzhou, Jiangsu, P.R. China. (3)Liver Transplantation Center, First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P.R. China.

The HH signaling pathway is a 'core' signal transduction pathway in pancreatic
cancer that promotes the tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancers via enhancing cell
proliferation, increasing invasion and metastasis and protecting against
apoptosis. In the present study, we found that HH signaling regulates autophagy
in pancreatic cancer cells. Activation of HH signaling inhibits autophagy, while 
inhibition of the HH pathway induces autophagy. Although the role of autophagy in
cell survival and apoptosis may depend on tumor type and the microenvironment,
our data clearly demonstrated that GANT61-induced autophagy contributed to
reduced viability and increased apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells both in vivo
and in vitro, and these effects were reversed by the autophagy inhibitor, 3-MA.
We propose that HH signaling by regulating autophagy plays an important role in
determining the cellular response to HH-targeted therapy in pancreatic cancer and
further investigation of the interaction between autophagy and HH signaling is
particularly important.

PMID: 24297612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2013 Nov 11;6(11):1429-50. doi: 10.3390/ph6111429.

Hedgehog pathway blockade inhibits melanoma cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

O'Reilly KE(1), de Miera EV, Segura MF, Friedman E, Poliseno L, Han SW, Zhong J, 
Zavadil J, Pavlick A, Hernando E, Osman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10016, USA. Iman.Osman@nyumc.org.

Previous reports have demonstrated a role for hedgehog signaling in melanoma
progression, prompting us to explore the therapeutic benefit of targeting this
pathway in melanoma. We profiled a panel of human melanoma cell lines and control
melanocytes for altered expression of hedgehog pathway members and determined the
consequences of both genetic and pharmacological inhibition of the hedgehog
pathway activator Smoothened (SMO) in melanoma, both in vitro and in vivo. We
also examined the relationship between altered expression of hedgehog pathway
mediators and survival in a well-characterized cohort of metastatic melanoma
patients with prospectively collected follow up information. Studies revealed
that over 40% of the melanoma cell lines examined harbored significantly elevated
levels of the hedgehog pathway mediators SMO, GLI2, and PTCH1 compared to
melanocytes (p < 0.05). SMO inhibition using siRNA and the small molecule
inhibitor, NVP-LDE-225, suppressed melanoma growth in vitro, particularly in
those cell lines with moderate SMO and GLI2 expression. NVP-LDE-225 also induced 
apoptosis in vitro and inhibited melanoma growth in a xenograft model. Gene
expression data also revealed evidence of compensatory up-regulation of two other
developmental pathways, Notch and WNT, in response to hedgehog pathway
inhibition. Pharmacological and genetic SMO inhibition also downregulated genes
involved in human embryonic stem cell pluripotency. Finally, increased SMO
expression and decreased expression of the hedgehog pathway repressor GLI3
correlated with shorter post recurrence survival in metastatic melanoma patients.
Our data demonstrate that hedgehog pathway inhibition might be a promising
targeted therapy in appropriately selected metastatic melanoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3854019
PMID: 24287465  [PubMed]


197. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 13;33(46):5370-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.480. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Distinct cellular origin and genetic requirement of Hedgehog-Gli in postnatal
rhabdomyosarcoma genesis.

Rajurkar M(1), Huang H(2), Cotton JL(1), Brooks JK(1), Sicklick J(3), McMahon
AP(4), Mao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA. (2)1] Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA [2] Department of Histology &
Embryology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, PR
China. (3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Moores Cancer Center, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology and 
Regenerative Medicine, Broad-CIRM Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell 
Research, WM Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Dysregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh)-Gli signaling pathway is implicated in a
variety of human cancers, including basal cell carcinoma (BCC), medulloblastoma
(MB) and embryonal rhabdhomyosarcoma (eRMS), three principle tumors associated
with human Gorlin syndrome. However, the cells of origin of these tumors,
including eRMS, remain poorly understood. In this study, we explore the cell
populations that give rise to Hh-related tumors by specifically activating
Smoothened (Smo) in both Hh-producing and -responsive cell lineages in postnatal 
mice. Interestingly, we find that unlike BCC and MB, eRMS originates from the
stem/progenitor populations that do not normally receive active Hh signaling.
Furthermore, we find that the myogenic lineage in postnatal mice is largely Hh
quiescent and that Pax7-expressing muscle satellite cells are not able to give
rise to eRMS upon Smo or Gli1/2 overactivation in vivo, suggesting that
Hh-induced skeletal muscle eRMS arises from Hh/Gli quiescent non-myogenic cells. 
In addition, using the Gli1 null allele and a Gli3 repressor allele, we reveal a 
specific genetic requirement for Gli proteins in Hh-induced eRMS formation and
provide molecular evidence for the involvement of Sox4/11 in eRMS cell survival
and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4309268
PMID: 24276242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2608. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3608.

Structural insight into the mutual recognition and regulation between Suppressor 
of Fused and Gli/Ci.

Zhang Y(1), Fu L, Qi X, Zhang Z, Xia Y, Jia J, Jiang J, Zhao Y, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China [2].

Hedgehog (Hh) signalling regulates embryonic development and adult tissue
homoeostasis. Mutations of its pathway components including Suppressor of Fused
(Sufu) and Gli/Ci predispose to cancers and congenital anomalies. The Sufu-Gli
protein complex occupies a central position in the vertebrate Hh signalling
pathway, especially in mammals. Here structures of full-length human and
Drosophila Sufu, the human Sufu-Gli complex, along with normal mode analysis and 
FRET measurement results, reveal that Sufu alternates between 'open' and 'closed'
conformations. The 'closed' form of Sufu is stabilized by Gli binding and
inhibited by Hh treatment, whereas the 'open' state of Sufu is promoted by
Gli-dissociation and Hh signalling. Mutations of critical interface residues
disrupt the Sufu-Gli complex and prevent Sufu from repressing Gli-mediated
transcription, tethering Gli in the cytoplasm and protecting Gli from the 26S
proteasome-mediated degradation. Our study thus provides mechanistic insight into
the mutual recognition and regulation between Sufu and Gli/Ci.

PMID: 24217340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mamm Genome. 2013 Dec;24(11-12):500-7. doi: 10.1007/s00335-013-9485-8. Epub 2013 
Nov 10.

Molecular characterization and genome-wide mutations in porcine anal atresia
candidate gene GLI2.

Jin Q(1), Wang C, Li X, Yu M, Zhao SH, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction of 
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, People's 
Republic of China.

Anal atresia (i.e., anorectal malformations) is a severe disorder that occurs
during the development of the distal hindgut in infants, swine, and many other
mammals and has an unclear genetic background. Recently, the Shh-responsive
transcription factor GLI2 has been shown as essential to the normal development
of the hindgut, and QTL studies in pigs revealed that this gene may be an
important candidate for anal atresia (AA). We used the pig as the model to study 
the contribution of GLI2 to AA. We revealed the genomic structure of the porcine 
GLI2 gene with 14 exons and obtained the porcine GLI2 mRNA sequence with a
4,656-bp ORF coding a 1,551-amino acid protein. We further scanned the
genome-wide mutations in this gene by direct sequencing using three genomic DNA
pools from the AA pigs, full-sibs of AA pigs, and unaffected pigs, respectively. 
Finally, 30 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and one intronic 9-nucleotide 
(nt) deletion were identified. Of these SNPs, 23 are intronic, 6 are synonymous, 
and 1 (446 G>A) in exon 8 is nonsynonymous (365Met >Ile). NCOI-RFLP of the 446
G>A polymorphism suggested that the predominant genotypes were all GG and AG in
the three pig groups. In addition, there was no significant difference among the 
three groups in allele frequencies, which demonstrated that this locus was not
associated with AA in pigs. However, the 12 SNPs encompassing exon 4 to exon 8
showed strong linkage disequilibrium in the AA pigs, which indicated that the
mutations somewhere in this region may contribute to AA in pigs. Therefore,
further investigation in this region is needed to elucidate the underlying
mutations involved in the porcine AA.

PMID: 24213835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2013;51(3):219-24. doi: 10.5603/FHC.2013.0031.

Sonic hedgehog pathway dysregulation in skin basal-cell carcinoma of a Polish
population.

Lesiak A(1), Sobolewska-Sztychny D, Danilewicz M, Rogowski-Tylman M,
Sysa-Jedrzejowska A, Sobjanek M, Olejniczak-Staruch I, Narbutt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology Medical University of Lodz. lesiak_ola@interia.pl.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway impairment plays a key role in the pathogenesis of
basal-cell carcinomas (BCC), the most frequent skin tumor among Caucasians. Shh, 
Smo, and Gli2 family proteins are necessary for adequate and controlled cell
proliferation. The aim of this study was to evaluate Shh, Smo, and Smo expression
in BCC skin biopsies taken from sun-exposed areas. 41 BCC skin biopsies and 22
healthy skin specimens (the control group) taken from the same areas served as
material for the study. All specimens were immunohistochemically stained with
monoclonal antibodies directed against the chosen proteins. Shh and Smo
expression (cytoplasmic pattern) were recorded semiquantitatively using a
four-grade score (0-3). Gli2 expression (nuclear pattern) was determined using an
image analysis system (semiautomatic function). The immunoexpression of the Shh
and Smo proteins significantly increased in the BCC group, as compared with the
normal controls (for Shh, the mean intensity was 1.67 in BCC vs. 1.17 in the
control group, p < 0.001; for Smo, the mean intensity was 1.46 in BCC vs. 0.99 in
the control group, p < 0.001). The staining for Gli2 in the BCC group was
completely negative, but indicated the presence of Gli2 in the control patients
(1.15 Gli2+ cells/100 cells). Sonic hedgehog pathway dysregulation may play an
important role in skin cancerogenesis leading to BCC development.

PMID: 24203628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Jan 2;55(1):43-54. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-12592.

Combinatorial hedgehog and mitogen signaling promotes the in vitro expansion but 
not retinal differentiation potential of retinal progenitor cells.

Ringuette R(1), Wang Y, Atkins M, Mears AJ, Yan K, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE: The in vitro expansion of multilineage competent primary neural
progenitor cells is typically limited. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is required in
vivo for the maintenance of stem cell (SC) and progenitor populations in the
central nervous system, including the retina. Here we investigated the impact of 
Hh signaling on in vitro expansion of perinatal mouse retinal progenitor cells
(RPCs).
METHODS: Perinatal mouse retinal cells were treated with combinations of Hh
agonist (Hh-Ag), epidermal growth factor (EGF)/fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) 
and the cultures were assayed for long-term growth, gene expression, and
dependence on Gli2. Differentiation was assessed in monolayer cultures, following
in vivo transplantation and in cellular reaggregates.
RESULTS: Using a combination of Hh-Ag, EGF, and FGF2, we were able to establish
long-term RPC cultures (termed Hh-RPCs). The ability of this combinatorial
signaling approach to block quiescence of these was not associated with altered
TP53/MDM2 levels or Hh-EGF cooperativity gene expression. Efficient Hh-RPC
expansion and monolayer culture establishment requires Gli2, as Hh-RPCs derived
from Gli2 knockout retinal tissue fail to generate cultures that can be passaged 
long-term in vitro. Hedgehog RPCs retain competence for neurogenic and gliogenic 
differentiation in vitro; however, they fail to engraft and differentiate into
retinal cell types following in vivo transplantation to the eye or in vitro when 
mixed with acutely dissociated perinatal retinal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that combining Hh and mitogen signaling is sufficient 
to promote the expansion of RPCs in vitro, but it is insufficient to maintain
competence of these cells for retinal differentiation.

PMID: 24194188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 30;33(44):17490-505. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2042-13.2013.

Titration of GLI3 repressor activity by sonic hedgehog signaling is critical for 
maintaining multiple adult neural stem cell and astrocyte functions.

Petrova R(1), Garcia AD, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10065, BCMB Graduate Program, Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, New York
10065, and Department of Biology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), a key regulator of embryonic neurogenesis, signals directly
to neural stem cells (NSCs) in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and to astrocytes in
the adult mouse forebrain. The specific mechanism by which the GLI2 and GLI3
transcriptional activators (GLI2(A) and GLI3(A)) and repressors (GLI2(R) and
GLI3(R)) carry out SHH signaling has not been addressed. We found that the
majority of slow-cycling NSCs express Gli2 and Gli3, whereas Gli1 is restricted
ventrally and all three genes are downregulated when NSCs transition into
proliferating progenitors. Surprisingly, whereas conditional ablation of Smo in
postnatal glial fibrillary acidic protein-expressing cells results in
cell-autonomous loss of NSCs and a progressive reduction in SVZ proliferation,
without an increase in glial cell production, removal of Gli2 or Gli3 does not
alter adult SVZ neurogenesis. Significantly, removing Gli3 in Smo conditional
mutants largely rescues neurogenesis and, conversely, expression of a
constitutive GLI3(R) in the absence of normal Gli2 and Gli3 abrogates
neurogenesis. Thus unattenuated GLI3(R) is a primary inhibitor of adult SVZ NSC
function. Ablation of Gli2 and Gli3 revealed a minor role for GLI2(R) and little 
requirement for GLI(A) function in stimulating SVZ neurogenesis. Moreover, we
found that similar rules of GLI activity apply to SHH signaling in regulating
SVZ-derived olfactory bulb interneurons and maintaining cortical astrocyte
function. Namely, fewer superficial olfactory bulb interneurons are generated in 
the absence of Gli2 and Gli3, whereas astrocyte partial gliosis results from an
increase in GLI3(R). Thus precise titration of GLI(R) levels by SHH is critical
to multiple functions of adult NSCs and astrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3812512
PMID: 24174682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 15;73(24):7313-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2008. Epub 
2013 Oct 28.

GLI1 interferes with the DNA mismatch repair system in pancreatic cancer through 
BHLHE41-mediated suppression of MLH1.

Inaguma S(1), Riku M, Hashimoto M, Murakami H, Saga S, Ikeda H, Kasai K.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School
of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

The mismatch repair (MMR) system is indispensable for the fidelity of DNA
replication, the impairment of which predisposes to the development and
progression of many types of cancers. To date, GLI1 transcription factor, a key
molecule of the Hedgehog signaling pathway, has been shown to regulate the
expression of several genes crucial for a variety of cancer cell properties in
many types of cancers, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), but
whether GLI1 could control the MMR system was not known. Here, we showed that
GLI1 and GLI2 indirectly suppressed the expression of MLH1 in PDAC cells. Through
GLI1 target gene screening, we found that GLI1 and GLI2 activated the expression 
of a basic helix-loop-helix type suppressor BHLHE41/DEC2/SHARP1 through a
GLI-binding site in the promoter. Consistent with a previous report that BHLHE41 
suppresses the MLH1 promoter activity, we found that the activation of GLI1 led
to the BHLHE41-dependent suppression of MLH1, and a double knockdown of GLI1 and 
GLI2 conversely increased the MLH1 protein in PDAC cells. Using TALEN-based
modification of the MLH1 gene, we further showed that GLI1 expression was indeed 
associated with an increased tolerance to a methylating agent, methylnitrosourea 
cooperatively with a lower copy number status of MLH1. Finally, GLI1 expression
was immunohistochemically related positively with BHLHE41 and inversely with MLH1
in PDAC cells and precancerous lesions of the pancreas. On the basis of these
results, we propose that GLI1 depresses the MMR activity and might contribute to 
the development and progression of PDAC.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24165159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cancer. 2014 Feb 15;120(4):537-47. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28439. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Involvement and targeted intervention of dysregulated Hedgehog signaling in
osteosarcoma.

Lo WW(1), Wunder JS, Dickson BC, Campbell V, McGovern K, Alman BA, Andrulis IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: During development, the Hedgehog pathway plays important roles
regulating the proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes, providing a
template for growing bone. In this study, the authors investigated the components
of dysregulated Hedgehog signaling as potential therapeutic targets for
osteosarcoma.
METHODS: Small-molecule agonists and antagonists that modulate the Hedgehog
pathway at different levels were used to investigate the mechanisms of
dysregulation and the efficacy of Hedgehog blockade in osteosarcoma cell lines.
The inhibitory effect of a small-molecule Smoothened (SMO) antagonist, IPI-926
(saridegib), also was examined in patient-derived xenograft models.
RESULTS: An inverse correlation was identified in osteosarcoma cell lines between
endogenous glioma-associated oncogene 2 (GLI2) levels and Hedgehog pathway
induction levels. Cells with high levels of GLI2 were sensitive to GLI
inhibition, but not SMO inhibition, suggesting that GLI2 overexpression may be a 
mechanism of ligand-independent activation. In contrast, cells that expressed
high levels of the Hedgehog ligand gene Indian hedgehog (IHH) and the target
genes patched 1 (PTCH1) and GLI1 were sensitive to modulation of both SMO and
GLI, suggesting ligand-dependent activation. In 2 xenograft models, active
autocrine and paracrine, ligand-dependent Hedgehog signaling was identified.
IPI-926 inhibited the Hedgehog signaling interactions between the tumor and the
stroma and demonstrated antitumor efficacy in 1 of 2 ligand-dependent models.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicate that both ligand-dependent and
ligand-independent Hedgehog dysregulation may be involved in osteosarcoma. It is 
the first report to demonstrate Hedgehog signaling crosstalk between the tumor
and the stroma in osteosarcoma. The inhibitory effect of IPI-926 warrants
additional research and raises the possibility of using Hedgehog pathway
inhibitors as targeted therapeutics to improve treatment for osteosarcoma.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24151134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 1;20(1):100-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1184. Epub
2013 Oct 22.

Genes upregulated in prostate cancer reactive stroma promote prostate cancer
progression in vivo.

Dakhova O(1), Rowley D, Ittmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Pathology and Immunology and Molecular
and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine; and Michael E. DeBakey
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas.

PURPOSE: Marked reactive stroma formation is associated with poor outcome in
clinically localized prostate cancer. We have previously identified genes with
diverse functions that are upregulated in reactive stroma. This study tests the
hypothesis that expression of these genes in stromal cells enhances prostate
cancer growth in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of reactive stroma genes in prostate stromal 
cell lines was evaluated by reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR and qRT-PCR. Genes
were knocked down using stable expression of short-hairpin RNAs (shRNA) and the
impact on tumorigenesis assessed using the differential reactive stroma (DRS)
system, in which prostate stromal cell lines are mixed with LNCaP prostate cancer
cells and growth as subcutaneous xenografts assessed.
RESULTS: Nine of 10 reactive stroma genes tested were expressed in one or more
prostate stromal cell lines. Gene knockdown of c-Kit, Wnt10B, Bmi1, Gli2, or COMP
all resulted in decreased tumorigenesis in the DRS model. In all tumors analyzed,
angiogenesis was decreased and there were variable effects on proliferation and
apoptosis in the LNCaP cells. Wnt10B has been associated with stem/progenitor
cell phenotype in other tissue types. Using a RT-PCR array, we detected
downregulation of multiple genes involved in stem/progenitor cell biology such as
OCT4 and LIF as well as cytokines such as VEGFA, BDNF, and CSF2 in cells with
Wnt10B knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show that genes upregulated in prostate
cancer-reactive stroma promote progression when expressed in prostate stromal
cells. Moreover, these data indicate that the DRS model recapitulates key aspects
of cancer cell/reactive stroma interactions in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3947312
PMID: 24150235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Genomics. 2013 Nov-Dec;102(5-6):456-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2013.09.004. Epub
2013 Oct 8.

Gene expression profiling reveals the heterogeneous transcriptional activity of
Oct3/4 and its possible interaction with Gli2 in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Li Y(1), Drnevich J(2), Akraiko T(2), Band M(2), Li D(3), Wang F(3), Matoba R(4),
Tanaka TS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA; Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (2)The W.M. Keck Center for Comparative 
and Functional Genomics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
61801, USA. (3)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA; Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
(4)DNA Chip Research Inc., Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (5)Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801,
USA; Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre
Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA; Department of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. Electronic
address: Tetsuya.Tanaka.9@nd.edu.

We examined the transcriptional activity of Oct3/4 (Pou5f1) in mouse embryonic
stem cells (mESCs) maintained under standard culture conditions to gain a better 
understanding of self-renewal in mESCs. First, we built an expression vector in
which the Oct3/4 promoter drives the monocistronic transcription of Venus and a
puromycin-resistant gene via the foot-and-mouth disease virus self-cleaving
peptide T2A. Then, a genetically-engineered mESC line with the stable integration
of this vector was isolated and cultured in the presence or absence of puromycin.
The cultures were subsequently subjected to Illumina expression microarray
analysis. We identified approximately 4600 probes with statistically significant 
differential expression. The genes involved in nucleic acid synthesis were
overrepresented in the probe set associated with mESCs maintained in the presence
of puromycin. In contrast, the genes involved in cell differentiation were
overrepresented in the probe set associated with mESCs maintained in the absence 
of puromycin. Therefore, it is suggested with these data that the transcriptional
activity of Oct3/4 fluctuates in mESCs and that Oct3/4 plays an essential role in
sustaining the basal transcriptional activities required for cell duplication in 
populations with equal differentiation potential. Heterogeneity in the
transcriptional activity of Oct3/4 was dynamic. Interestingly, we found that
genes involved in the hedgehog signaling pathway showed unique expression
profiles in mESCs and validated this observation by RT-PCR analysis. The
expression of Gli2, Ptch1 and Smo was consistently detected in other types of
pluripotent stem cells examined in this study. Furthermore, the Gli2 protein was 
heterogeneously detected in mESC nuclei by immunofluorescence microscopy and this
result correlated with the detection of the Oct3/4 protein. Finally, forced
activation of Gli2 in mESCs increased their proliferation rate. Collectively, it 
is suggested with these results that Gli2 may play a novel role in the
self-renewal of pluripotent stem cells.

© 2013.

PMID: 24121003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(10):e1003850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003850. Epub 2013 Oct
3.

Evolutionary change within a bipotential switch shaped the sperm/oocyte decision 
in hermaphroditic nematodes.

Guo Y(1), Chen X, Ellis RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Rowan-SOM and the UMDNJ-SOM, B303 Science
Center, Stratford, New Jersey, United States of America.

A subset of transcription factors like Gli2 and Oct1 are bipotential--they can
activate or repress the same target, in response to changing signals from
upstream genes. Some previous studies implied that the sex-determination protein 
TRA-1 might also be bipotential; here we confirm this hypothesis by identifying a
co-factor, and use it to explore how the structure of a bipotential switch
changes during evolution. First, null mutants reveal that C. briggsae TRR-1 is
required for spermatogenesis, RNA interference implies that it works as part of
the Tip60 Histone Acetyl Transferase complex, and RT-PCR data show that it
promotes the expression of Cbr-fog-3, a gene needed for spermatogenesis. Second, 
epistasis tests reveal that TRR-1 works through TRA-1, both to activate Cbr-fog-3
and to control the sperm/oocyte decision. Since previous studies showed that
TRA-1 can repress fog-3 as well, these observations demonstrate that it is
bipotential. Third, TRR-1 also regulates the development of the male tail. Since 
Cbr-tra-2 Cbr-trr-1 double mutants resemble Cbr-tra-1 null mutants, these two
regulatory branches control all tra-1 activity. Fourth, striking differences in
the relationship between these two branches of the switch have arisen during
recent evolution. C. briggsae trr-1 null mutants prevent hermaphrodite
spermatogenesis, but not Cbr-fem null mutants, which disrupt the other half of
the switch. On the other hand, C. elegans fem null mutants prevent
spermatogenesis, but not Cel-trr-1 mutants. However, synthetic interactions
confirm that both halves of the switch exist in each species. Thus, the
relationship between the two halves of a bipotential switch can shift rapidly
during evolution, so that the same phenotype is produce by alternative,
complementary mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3789826
PMID: 24098152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 25;8(9):e75253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075253. eCollection
2013.

Hedgehog signaling regulates telomerase reverse transcriptase in human cancer
cells.

Mazumdar T(1), Sandhu R, Qadan M, DeVecchio J, Magloire V, Agyeman A, Li B,
Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is critical for normal embryonic development,
tissue patterning and cell differentiation. Aberrant HH signaling is involved in 
multiple human cancers. HH signaling involves a multi-protein cascade activating 
the GLI proteins that transcriptionally regulate HH target genes. We have
previously reported that HH signaling is essential for human colon cancer cell
survival and inhibition of this signal induces DNA damage and extensive cell
death. Here we report that the HH/GLI axis regulates human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), which determines the replication potential of cancer
cells. Suppression of GLI1/GLI2 functions by a C-terminus truncated GLI3
repressor mutant (GLI3R), or by GANT61, a pharmacological inhibitor of GLI1/GLI2,
reduced hTERT protein expression in human colon cancer, prostate cancer and
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines. Expression of an N-terminus deleted
constitutively active mutant of GLI2 (GLI2<U+0394>N) increased hTERT mRNA and protein
expression and hTERT promoter driven luciferase activity in human colon cancer
cells while GANT61 inhibited hTERT mRNA expression and hTERT promoter driven
luciferase activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with GLI1 or GLI2 antibodies
precipitated fragments of the hTERT promoter in human colon cancer cells, which
was reduced upon exposure to GANT61. In contrast, expression of GLI1 or GLI2<U+0394>N in
non-malignant 293T cells failed to alter the levels of hTERT mRNA and protein, or
hTERT promoter driven luciferase activity. Further, expression of GLI2<U+0394>N
increased the telomerase enzyme activity, which was reduced by GANT61
administration in human colon cancer, prostate cancer, and GBM cells. These
results identify hTERT as a direct target of the HH signaling pathway, and reveal
a previously unknown role of the HH/GLI axis in regulating the replication
potential of cancer cells. These findings are of significance in understanding
the important regulatory mechanisms that determine the functions of HH/GLI
signaling in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3783395
PMID: 24086482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Hepatol Int. 2013 Oct;7(4):1065-74. doi: 10.1007/s12072-013-9461-0. Epub 2013 Jul
27.

Hedgehog signaling influences gender-specific response of liver to radiation in
mice.

Wang S(1), Lee K(1), Hyun J(1), Lee Y(1), Kim Y(2), Jung Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Pusan National University, Biology Building
(302), 63-2 Pusandaehak-ro, Kumjeong-gu, Pusan, 609-735, Korea. (2)Department of 
Emergency Medical Technology, Kyungil University, Gyeongsan, Korea. (3)Department
of Biological Sciences, Pusan National University, Biology Building (302), 63-2
Pusandaehak-ro, Kumjeong-gu, Pusan, 609-735, Korea. y.jung@pusan.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: It is unclear why the response to radiation in the female liver is
different from that of the male liver. Hedgehog (Hh) that remains latent in
healthy adult livers is activated in the injured liver and promotes the
proliferation of progenitors and myofibroblastic hepatic stellate cells, leading 
to hepatic fibrosis.
OBJECTIVE: These findings have led to the hypothesis that the gender-specific
expression of Hh signaling could affect the different response of the female
liver to radiation.
METHODS: Male and female mice irradiated with a single dose of 6 Gy were killed
at 1 week post irradiation, and the livers were collected for biochemical
analysis.
RESULTS: A greater accumulation of fatty hepatocytes and apoptotic cells was
observed in irradiated female mice. Sox-9 and pancytokeratin-positive cells were 
expanded in the livers of irradiated female, but not male, mice. The expression
of the Hh ligand, Sonic Hh, Hh receptor, Smoothened, and Hh-target gene, Gli2,
showed a greater increase in the liver of radiation-treated female. The levels of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-stimulating factor, transforming
growth factor-ß, collagen a1, and N-cadherin were upregulated, while the EMT
inhibitor, bmp7, was downregulated in the damaged liver of females compared to
controls. In addition, increased fibrosis was seen in the injured livers of
female mice. No significant changes in Hh expression and EMT were detected in the
irradiated male mice.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated that the increased expression of Hh
signaling contributed to the different repair process in the irradiated female
mice by promoting proliferation of progenitor and EMT process.

PMID: 26202036  [PubMed]


210. Mod Pathol. 2014 Apr;27(4):580-93. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.154. Epub 2013 Sep
27.

Characterization of gene expression and activated signaling pathways in
solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm of pancreas.

Park M(1), Kim M(2), Hwang D(2), Park M(1), Kim WK(1), Kim SK(1), Shin J(3), Park
ES(4), Kang CM(5), Paik YK(6), Kim H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and BK21 for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)School of Interdisciplinary Bioscience and 
Bio engineering, Pohang University, Pohang, Korea. (3)BRI, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea. (4)Medical Convergence Research Institute, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of Surgery,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of
Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University,
Seoul, Korea.

Solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm is an uncommon pancreatic tumor with distinct
clinicopathologic features. Solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms are characterized by 
mutations in exon 3 of CTNNB1. However, little is known about the gene and
microRNA expression profiles of solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms. Thus, we sought 
to characterize solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm-specific gene expression and
identify the signaling pathways activated in these tumors. Comparisons of gene
expression in solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm to pancreatic ductal carcinomas,
neuroendocrine tumors, and non-neoplastic pancreatic tissues identified
solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm-specific mRNA and microRNA profiles. By analyzing 
1686 (1119 upregulated and 567 downregulated) genes differentially expressed in
solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm, we found that the Wnt/ß-catenin, Hedgehog, and
androgen receptor signaling pathways, as well as genes involved in epithelial
mesenchymal transition, are activated in solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms. We
validated these results experimentally by assessing the expression of ß-catenin, 
WIF-1, GLI2, androgen receptor, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related
markers with western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Our analysis also
revealed 17 microRNAs, especially the miR-200 family and miR-192/215, closely
associated with the upregulated genes associated with the three pathways
activated in solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm and epithelial mesenchymal
transition. Our results provide insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying 
solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm tumorigenesis and its characteristic less
epithelial cell differentiation than the other common pancreatic tumors.

PMID: 24072181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 16;8(9):e74141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074141. eCollection
2013.

Potential role of Hedgehog pathway in liver response to radiation.

Wang S(1), Lee Y, Kim J, Hyun J, Lee K, Kim Y, Jung Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Pusan National University, Pusan, Korea.

Radiation-induced fibrosis constitutes a major problem that is commonly observed 
in the patients undergoing radiotherapy; therefore, understanding its
pathophysiological mechanism is important. The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway induces the 
proliferation of progenitors and myofibroblastic hepatic stellate cells (MF-HSCs)
and promotes the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thereby regulating
the repair response in the damaged liver. We examined the response of normal
liver to radiation injury. Male mice were sacrificed at 6 weeks and 10 weeks
after exposure to a single dose of 6 Gy and the livers were collected for
biochemical analysis. Irradiated (IR) and control mice were compared for
progenitors, fibrosis, Hh pathway, and EMT at 6 and 10 weeks post irradiation.
Fatty hepatocytes were observed and the expressions of Hh ligand, Indian Hh. were
greater in the livers at 6 weeks, whereas expression of another Hh ligand, Sonic 
Hh, increased at 10 weeks post irradiation. Both Smoothened, Hh receptor, and
Gli2, Hh-target gene, were up-regulated at 6 and 10 weeks after irradiation.
Accumulation of progenitors (CD44, Pan-cytokeratin, and Sox9) was significant in 
IR livers at 6 and 10 weeks. RNA analysis showed enhanced expression of the
EMT-stimulating factor, tgf-ß, in the IR livers at 6 weeks and the upregulation
of mesenchymal markers (a-SMA, collagen, N-cadherin, and s100a4), but
down-regulation of EMT inhibitors, in IR mouse livers at 6 and 10 weeks.
Increased fibrosis was observed in IR mouse livers at 10 weeks. Treatment of mice
with Hh inhibitor, GDC-0449, suppressed Hh activity and block the proliferation
of hepatic progenitor and expression of EMT-stimulating genes in irradiated mice.
Therefore, those results demonstrated that the Hh pathway increased in response
to liver injury by radiation and promoted a compensatory proliferation of MF-HSCs
and progenitors, thereby regulating liver remodeling.

PMCID: PMC3774612
PMID: 24066108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e75317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075317. eCollection
2013.

Hedgehog/GLI signaling activates suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) in
epidermal and neural tumor cells.

Laner-Plamberger S(1), Wolff F, Kaser-Eichberger A, Swierczynski S,
Hauser-Kronberger C, Frischauf AM, Eichberger T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria ;
Department of Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital 
of Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria ; Spinal Cord
Injury & Tissue Regeneration Center Salzburg (SCI-TReCS), Paracelsus Medical
University (PMU), Salzburg, Austria.

Sustained hedgehog (Hh) signaling mediated by the GLI transcription factors is
implicated in many types of cancer. Identification of Hh/GLI target genes
modulating the activity of other pathways involved in tumor development promise
to open new ways for better understanding of tumor development and maintenance.
Here we show that SOCS1 is a direct target of Hh/GLI signaling in human
keratinocytes and medulloblastoma cells. SOCS1 is a potent inhibitor of
interferon gamma (IFN-y)/STAT1 signaling. IFN-<U+0443>/STAT1 signaling can induce cell
cycle arrest, apoptosis and anti-tumor immunity. The transcription factors GLI1
and GLI2 activate the SOCS1 promoter, which contains five putative GLI binding
sites, and GLI2 binding to the promoter was shown by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Consistent with a role of GLI in SOCS1 regulation, STAT1
phosphorylation is reduced in cells with active Hh/GLI signaling and IFN-<U+0443>/STAT1 
target gene activation is decreased. Furthermore, IFN-<U+0443> signaling is restored by 
shRNA mediated knock down of SOCS1. Here, we identify SOCS1 as a novel Hh/GLI
target gene, indicating a negative role of Hh/GLI pathway in IFN-y/STAT1
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3769249
PMID: 24058673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):7-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.09.006. Epub 2013 Sep
10.

Pax3 synergizes with Gli2 and Zic1 in transactivating the Myf5 epaxial somite
enhancer.

Himeda CL(1), Barro MV, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)The Departments of Cell and Developmental Biology and Neurology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Both Glis, the downstream effectors of hedgehog signaling, and Zic transcription 
factors are required for Myf5 expression in the epaxial somite. Here we
demonstrate a novel synergistic interaction between members of both families and 
Pax3, a paired-domain transcription factor that is essential for both myogenesis 
and neural crest development. We show that Pax3 synergizes with both Gli2 and
Zic1 in transactivating the Myf5 epaxial somite (ES) enhancer in concert with the
Myf5 promoter. This synergy is dependent on conserved functional domains of the
proteins, as well as on a novel homeodomain motif in the Myf5 promoter and the
essential Gli motif in the ES enhancer. Importantly, overexpression of Zic1 and
Pax3 in the 10T1/2 mesodermal cell model results in enrichment of these factors
at the endogenous Myf5 locus and induction of Myf5 expression. In our previous
work, we showed that by enhancing nuclear translocation of Gli factors, Zics
provide spatiotemporal patterning for Gli family members in the epaxial induction
of Myf5 expression. Our current study indicates a complementary mechanism in
which association with DNA-bound Pax3 strengthens the ability of both Zic1 and
Gli2 to transactivate Myf5 in the epaxial somite.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3845690
PMID: 24036067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 May 21;93(19):1490-3.

[The role of SHH pathway in PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation].

[Article in Chinese]

Li FH(1), Zhao Y, Wang XH, Shi D, Fu QN, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To discuss the role of sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway in PDGF-induced
vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation.
METHOD: Human vein VSMC were cultured in vitro. Laser confocal microscopy and
Western blot were used to detect the expression of SHH pathway related proteins. 
The cell proliferation was evaluated by Ki-67 staining and BrdU incorporation
after treatment by siRNA of Gli2 or shh pathway inhibitor cyclopamine.
RESULTS: The results of laser confocal microscopy and Western blot showed that
SHH pathway protein which including shh, Patched1 and Gli2 were activated in the 
PDGF-induced VSMC proliferation.BrdU incorporation assay and Ki-67 staining
showed that the cell proliferation which induced by PDGF was inhibited by
Gli2-siRNA and cyclopamine which can both block SHH pathway.
CONCLUSION: SHH pathway play an important role in PDGF-induced VSMC
proliferation.

PMID: 24029575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jan 15;23(2):115-23. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0162. Epub 2013
Oct 8.

Morphological differences of primary cilia between human induced pluripotent stem
cells and their parental somatic cells.

Nathwani BB(1), Miller CH, Yang TL, Solimano JL, Liao JC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Columbia University , New York, New
York.

Human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) reprogramming possesses enormous
potential in stem cell research and disease modeling. Chemical and mechanical
signaling has been implicated in the maintenance of pluripotency of hiPSCs, as
well as their differentiation pathways toward various lineages. Primary cilia
have been shown to play a critical role in mechanochemical signaling across a
wide spectrum of cell types. The functions of primary cilia in hiPSCs and their
characteristic changes during the reprogramming process remain largely vague.
This work focused on understanding how reprogramming affects the mechanical
characteristics of primary cilia. Using immunofluorescence imaging assays, we
validated the presence of primary cilia on reprogrammed cells. These reprogrammed
cells had high expression levels of pluripotency markers, Nanog and Cripto, shown
by quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays. We also found high expression
of hedgehog signaling proteins Patched1 (Ptch1), Smoothened (Smo), Gli1, and Gli2
in reprogrammed cells. Stimulation of the hedgehog pathway resulted in the
concerted movement of Ptch1 out of the cilia and Smo into the cilia, implying
that the cilia on iPSCs contain functioning hedgehog machinery. The mean length
of primary cilia in reprogrammed cells was shorter than those of parental human
fibroblasts. Morphometric analyses revealed that reprogramming resulted in an
increase in the curvature of primary cilia from ~0.015 to 0.064<U+2009>µm(-1),
indicating an underlying approximately fourfold decrease in their rigidity, and a
decrease in length of primary cilia from ~2.38 to ~1.45<U+2009>µm. Furthermore,
reprogramming resulted in fewer primary cilia displaying kinked geometries.

PMID: 24007236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013 Apr;22(2):15-23. doi: 10.1292/cpe.22.15. Epub 2013 
Apr 26.

Molecular and Clinical Findings in Patients with LHX4 and OTX2 Mutations.

Tajima T(1), Ishizu K, Nakamura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Hokkaido,
Japan.

The pituitary gland produces hormones that play important roles in both the
development and homeostasis of the body. Ontogeny of the anterior and posterior
pituitary is orchestrated by inputs from neighboring tissues, cellular signaling 
molecules and transcription factors. Disruption of expression or function of
these factors has been implicated in the etiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1F1, 
LHX3, LHX4, OTX2, SOX2, SOX3 and GLI2. This review focuses on summarizing most
recent mutations in LHX4 and OTX2 responsible for pituitary hormone deficiency.
In both genetic defects of LHX4 and OTX2, there is high variability in clinical
manifestations even in the same family. In addition, there is no clear
phenotype-genotype correlation. These findings indicate that the other genetic
and/or environmental factors influence the phenotype. In addition, the
variability might reflect a plasticity during pituitary development and
maintenance. Over the past two decades, a genetic basis for pituitary hormone
deficiency and the mechanism of pituitary development have been clarified. It
should be kept in mind that this review is not comprehensive, and defects of
other transcriptional factors have been described in patients with CPHD.
Furthermore, the causes in many patients with CPHD have not yet been determined. 
Therefore, continuing efforts for the clarification of the etiology are
necessary.

PMCID: PMC3756183
PMID: 23990694  [PubMed]


217. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 15;382(2):400-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.017. Epub 2013 
Aug 26.

The PCP protein Vangl2 regulates migration of hindbrain motor neurons by acting
in floor plate cells, and independently of cilia function.

Sittaramane V(1), Pan X, Glasco DM, Huang P, Gurung S, Bock A, Li S, Wang H,
Kawakami K, Matise MP, Chandrasekhar A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, and Bond Life Sciences Center, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Vangl2, a core component of the Planar Cell Polarity pathway, is necessary for
the caudal migration of Facial Branchiomotor (FBM) neurons in the vertebrate
hindbrain. Studies in zebrafish suggest that vangl2 functions largely non-cell
autonomously to regulate FBM neuron migration out of rhombomere 4 (r4), but the
cell-type within which it acts is not known. Here, we demonstrate that vangl2
functions largely in floor plate cells to regulate caudal neuronal migration.
Furthermore, FBM neurons fail to migrate caudally in the mouse Gli2 mutant that
lacks the floor plate, suggesting an evolutionarily conserved role for this cell 
type in neuronal migration. Although hindbrain floor plate cilia are disorganized
in vangl2 mutant embryos, cilia appear to be dispensable for neuronal migration. 
Notably, Vangl2 is enriched in the basolateral, but not apical, membranes of
floor plate cells. Taken together, our data suggest strongly that Vangl2
regulates FBM neuron migration by acting in floor plate cells, independently of
cilia function.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3864009
PMID: 23988578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Hepatol. 2014 Jan;60(1):143-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.08.012. Epub 2013 Aug 
23.

The intrahepatic signalling niche of hedgehog is defined by primary cilia
positive cells during chronic liver injury.

Grzelak CA(1), Martelotto LG(2), Sigglekow ND(1), Patkunanathan B(1), Ajami K(1),
Calabro SR(1), Dwyer BJ(3), Tirnitz-Parker JE(3), Watkins DN(4), Warner FJ(1),
Shackel NA(5), McCaughan GW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Injury and Cancer, Centenary Institute, Camperdown, NSW, Australia.
(2)Centre for Cancer Research, Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia; Department of Pathology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)School of Biomedical
Sciences, Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute, Curtin University,
Bentley, WA, Australia. (4)Centre for Cancer Research, Monash Institute of
Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (5)Liver Injury and
Cancer, Centenary Institute, Camperdown, NSW, Australia; A. W. Morrow
Gastroenterology and Liver Centre, R.P.A.H., Camperdown, NSW, Australia; Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (6)Liver Injury and
Cancer, Centenary Institute, Camperdown, NSW, Australia; A. W. Morrow
Gastroenterology and Liver Centre, R.P.A.H., Camperdown, NSW, Australia; Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address:
g.mccaughan@centenary.org.au.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2014 Dec;61(6):1451-2.
    J Hepatol. 2014 Dec;61(6):1449-50.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In vertebrates, canonical Hedgehog (Hh) pathway activation
requires Smoothened (SMO) translocation to the primary cilium (Pc), followed by a
GLI-mediated transcriptional response. In addition, a similar gene regulation
occurs in response to growth factors/cytokines, although independently of SMO
signalling. The Hh pathway plays a critical role in liver fibrosis/regeneration, 
however, the mechanism of activation in chronic liver injury is poorly
understood. This study aimed to characterise Hh pathway activation upon
thioacetamide (TAA)-induced chronic liver injury in vivo by defining
Hh-responsive cells, namely cells harbouring Pc and Pc-localised SMO.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice (wild-type or Ptc1(+/-)) were TAA-treated. Liver injury and
Hh ligand/pathway mRNA and protein expression were assessed in vivo. SMO/GLI
manipulation and SMO-dependent/independent activation of GLI-mediated
transcriptional response in Pc-positive (Pc(+)) cells were studied in vitro.
RESULTS: In vivo, Hh activation was progressively induced following TAA. At the
epithelial-mesenchymal interface, injured hepatocytes produced Hh ligands.
Progenitors, myofibroblasts, leukocytes and hepatocytes were GLI2(+). Pc(+) cells
increased following TAA, but only EpCAM(+)/GLI2(+) progenitors were Pc(+)/SMO(+).
In vitro, SMO knockdown/hGli3-R overexpression reduced proliferation/viability in
Pc(+) progenitors, whilst increased proliferation occurred with hGli1
overexpression. HGF induced GLI transcriptional activity independently of Pc/SMO.
Ptc1(+/-) mice exhibited increased progenitor, myofibroblast and fibrosis
responses.
CONCLUSIONS: In chronic liver injury, Pc(+) progenitors receive Hh ligand signals
and process it through Pc/SMO-dependent activation of GLI-mediated
transcriptional response. Pc/SMO-independent GLI activation likely occurs in
Pc(-)/GLI2(+) cells. Increased fibrosis in Hh gain-of-function mice likely occurs
by primary progenitor expansion/proliferation and secondary fibrotic
myofibroblast expansion, in close contact with progenitors.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23978713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 7;8(8):e70995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070995. eCollection 
2013.

Integrated genotypic analysis of hedgehog-related genes identifies subgroups of
keratocystic odontogenic tumor with distinct clinicopathological features.

Shimada Y(1), Katsube K, Kabasawa Y, Morita K, Omura K, Yamaguchi A, Sakamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Department of Oral Restitution,
Division of Oral Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Keratocystic odontogenic tumor (KCOT) arises as part of Gorlin syndrome (GS) or
as a sporadic lesion. Gene mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the
hedgehog receptor PTCH1 plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of KCOT.
However, some KCOT cases lack evidence for gene alteration of PTCH1, suggesting
that other genes in the hedgehog pathway may be affected. PTCH2 and SUFU
participate in the occurrence of GS-associated tumors, but their roles in KCOT
development are unknown. To elucidate the roles of these genes, we enrolled 36
KCOT patients in a study to sequence their entire coding regions of PTCH1, PTCH2 
and SUFU. LOH and immunohistochemical expression of these genes, as well as the
downstream targets of hedgehog signaling, were examined using surgically-excised 
KCOT tissues. PTCH1 mutations, including four novel ones, were found in 9
hereditary KCOT patients, but not in sporadic KCOT patients. A pathogenic
mutation of PTCH2 or SUFU was not found in any patients. LOH at PTCH1 and SUFU
loci correlated with the presence of epithelial budding. KCOT harboring a
germline mutation (Type 1) showed nuclear localization of GLI2 and frequent
histological findings such as budding and epithelial islands, as well as the
highest recurrence rate. KCOT with LOH but without a germline mutation (Type 2)
less frequently showed these histological features, and the recurrence rate was
lower. KCOT with neither germline mutation nor LOH (Type 3) consisted of two
subgroups, Type 3A and 3B, which were characterized by nuclear and cytoplasmic
GLI2 localization, respectively. Type 3B rarely exhibited budding and recurrence,
behaving as the most amicable entity. The expression patterns of CCND1 and BCL2
tended to correlate with these subgroups. Our data indicates a significant role
of PTCH1 and SUFU in the pathogenesis of KCOT, and the genotype-oriented
subgroups constitute entities with different potential aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3737235
PMID: 23951062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 6;438(4):607-12. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.008. Epub 2013 Aug 11.

Arsenic-induced cutaneous hyperplastic lesions are associated with the
dysregulation of Yap, a Hippo signaling-related protein.

Li C(1), Srivastava RK, Elmets CA, Afaq F, Athar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Skin Diseases Research Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35205, USA.

Arsenic exposure in humans causes a number of toxic manifestations in the skin
including cutaneous neoplasm. However, the mechanism of these alterations remains
elusive. Here, we provide novel observations that arsenic induced Hippo signaling
pathway in the murine skin. This pathway plays crucial roles in determining organ
size during the embryonic development and if aberrantly activated in adults,
contributes to the pathogenesis of epithelial neoplasm. Arsenic treatment
enhanced phosphorylation-dependent activation of LATS1 kinase and other Hippo
signaling regulatory proteins Sav1 and MOB1. Phospho-LATS kinase is known to
catalyze the inactivation of a transcriptional co-activator, Yap. However, in
arsenic-treated epidermis, we did not observed its inactivation. Thus, as
expected, unphosphorylated-Yap was translocated to the nucleus in arsenic-treated
epidermis. Yap by binding to the transcription factors TEADs induces
transcription of its target genes. Consistently, an up-regulation of
Yap-dependent target genes Cyr61, Gli2, Ankrd1 and Ctgf was observed in the skin 
of arsenic-treated mice. Phosphorylated Yap is important in regulating tight and 
adherens junctions through its binding to aCatenin. We found disruption of these 
junctions in the arsenic-treated mouse skin despite an increase in aCatenin.
These data provide evidence that arsenic-induced canonical Hippo signaling
pathway and Yap-mediated disruption of tight and adherens junctions are
independently regulated. These effects together may contribute to the
carcinogenic effects of arsenic in the skin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23942117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e69132. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069132. Print 2013.

Structural and logical analysis of a comprehensive hedgehog signaling pathway to 
identify alternative drug targets for glioma, colon and pancreatic cancer.

Chowdhury S(1), Pradhan RN, Sarkar RR.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering and Process Development, CSIR-National Chemical
Laboratory, Pune, Maharashtra, India.

Hedgehog is an evolutionarily conserved developmental pathway, widely implicated 
in controlling various cellular responses such as cellular proliferation and stem
cell renewal in human and other organisms, through external stimuli. Aberrant
activation of this pathway in human adult stem cell line may cause different
types of cancers. Hence, targeting this pathway in cancer therapy has become
indispensable, but the non availability of detailed molecular interactions,
complex regulations by extra- and intra-cellular proteins and cross talks with
other pathways pose a serious challenge to get a coherent understanding of this
signaling pathway for making therapeutic strategy. This motivated us to perform a
computational study of the pathway and to identify probable drug targets. In this
work, from available databases and literature, we reconstructed a complete
hedgehog pathway which reports the largest number of molecules and interactions
to date. Using recently developed computational techniques, we further performed 
structural and logical analysis of this pathway. In structural analysis, the
connectivity and centrality parameters were calculated to identify the important 
proteins from the network. To capture the regulations of the molecules, we
developed a master Boolean model of all the interactions between the proteins and
created different cancer scenarios, such as Glioma, Colon and Pancreatic. We
performed perturbation analysis on these cancer conditions to identify the
important and minimal combinations of proteins that can be used as drug targets. 
From our study we observed the under expressions of various oncoproteins in
Hedgehog pathway while perturbing at a time the combinations of the proteins
GLI1, GLI2 and SMO in Glioma; SMO, HFU, ULK3 and RAS in Colon cancer; SMO, HFU,
ULK3, RAS and ERK12 in Pancreatic cancer. This reconstructed Hedgehog signaling
pathway and the computational analysis for identifying new combinatory drug
targets will be useful for future in-vitro and in-vivo analysis to control
different cancers.

PMCID: PMC3720582
PMID: 23935937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 1;382(1):82-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.07.022. Epub 2013
Aug 2.

Multiple Shh signaling centers participate in fungiform papilla and taste bud
formation and maintenance.

Liu HX(1), Ermilov A, Grachtchouk M, Li L, Gumucio DL, Dlugosz AA, Mistretta CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, School of Dentistry, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The adult fungiform taste papilla is a complex of specialized cell types residing
in the stratified squamous tongue epithelium. This unique sensory organ includes 
taste buds, papilla epithelium and lateral walls that extend into underlying
connective tissue to surround a core of lamina propria cells. Fungiform papillae 
must contain long-lived, sustaining or stem cells and short-lived, maintaining or
transit amplifying cells that support the papilla and specialized taste buds. Shh
signaling has established roles in supporting fungiform induction, development
and patterning. However, for a full understanding of how Shh transduced signals
act in tongue, papilla and taste bud formation and maintenance, it is necessary
to know where and when the Shh ligand and pathway components are positioned. We
used immunostaining, in situ hybridization and mouse reporter strains for Shh,
Ptch1, Gli1 and Gli2-expression and proliferation markers to identify cells that 
participate in hedgehog signaling. Whereas there is a progressive restriction in 
location of Shh ligand-expressing cells, from placode and apical papilla cells to
taste bud cells only, a surrounding population of Ptch1 and Gli1 responding cells
is maintained in signaling centers throughout papilla and taste bud development
and differentiation. The Shh signaling targets are in regions of active cell
proliferation. Using genetic-inducible lineage tracing for Gli1-expression, we
found that Shh-responding cells contribute not only to maintenance of filiform
and fungiform papillae, but also to taste buds. A requirement for normal Shh
signaling in fungiform papilla, taste bud and filiform papilla maintenance was
shown by Gli2 constitutive activation. We identified proliferation niches where
Shh signaling is active and suggest that epithelial and mesenchymal compartments 
harbor potential stem and/or progenitor cell zones. In all, we report a set of
hedgehog signaling centers that regulate development and maintenance of taste
organs, the fungiform papilla and taste bud, and surrounding lingual cells. Shh
signaling has roles in forming and maintaining fungiform papillae and taste buds,
most likely via stage-specific autocrine and/or paracrine mechanisms, and by
engaging epithelial/mesenchymal interactions.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3968530
PMID: 23916850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Sep 5;93(3):515-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.06.022. Epub
2013 Aug 1.

Short-rib polydactyly and Jeune syndromes are caused by mutations in WDR60.

McInerney-Leo AM(1), Schmidts M, Cortés CR, Leo PJ, Gener B, Courtney AD,
Gardiner B, Harris JA, Lu Y, Marshall M; UK10K Consortium, Scambler PJ, Beales
PL, Brown MA, Zankl A, Mitchison HM, Duncan EL, Wicking C.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research
Institute, Level 7, 37 Kent Street, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102, Australia.

Short-rib polydactyly syndromes (SRPS I-V) are a group of lethal congenital
disorders characterized by shortening of the ribs and long bones, polydactyly,
and a range of extraskeletal phenotypes. A number of other disorders in this
grouping, including Jeune and Ellis-van Creveld syndromes, have an overlapping
but generally milder phenotype. Collectively, these short-rib dysplasias (with or
without polydactyly) share a common underlying defect in primary cilium function 
and form a subset of the ciliopathy disease spectrum. By using whole-exome
capture and massive parallel sequencing of DNA from an affected Australian
individual with SRPS type III, we detected two novel heterozygous mutations in
WDR60, a relatively uncharacterized gene. These mutations segregated
appropriately in the unaffected parents and another affected family member,
confirming compound heterozygosity, and both were predicted to have a damaging
effect on the protein. Analysis of an additional 54 skeletal ciliopathy exomes
identified compound heterozygous mutations in WDR60 in a Spanish individual with 
Jeune syndrome of relatively mild presentation. Of note, these two families share
one novel WDR60 missense mutation, although haplotype analysis suggested no
shared ancestry. We further show that WDR60 localizes at the base of the primary 
cilium in wild-type human chondrocytes, and analysis of fibroblasts from affected
individuals revealed a defect in ciliogenesis and aberrant accumulation of the
GLI2 transcription factor at the centrosome or basal body in the absence of an
obvious axoneme. These findings show that WDR60 mutations can cause skeletal
ciliopathies and suggest a role for WDR60 in ciliogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3769922
PMID: 23910462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2013 Nov;26(6):861-73. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12149. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

GLI2 cooperates with ZEB1 for transcriptional repression of CDH1 expression in
human melanoma cells.

Perrot CY(1), Gilbert C, Marsaud V, Postigo A, Javelaud D, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Team 'TGF-ß and Oncogenesis', Orsay, France; INSERM U1021,
Orsay, France; CNRS UMR 3347, Orsay, France.

In melanoma cells, high expression of the transcription factor GLI2 is associated
with increased invasive potential and loss of E-cadherin expression, an event
reminiscent of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Herein, we provide
evidence that GLI2 represses E-cadherin gene (CDH1) expression in melanoma cells 
via distinct mechanisms, enhancing transcription of the EMT-activator ZEB1 and
cooperative repression of CDH1 gene transcription via direct binding of both GLI2
and ZEB1 to two closely positioned Kruppel-like factor-binding sites within the
CDH1 promoter. GLI2 silencing rescued CDH1 expression except in melanoma cell
lines in which the CDH1 promoter was hypermethylated. Proximity ligation assays
identified GLI2-ZEB1 complexes in melanoma cell nuclei, proportional to
endogenous GLI2 and ZEB1 expression, and whose accumulation was enhanced by the
classical EMT inducer TGF-ß. These data identify GLI2 as a critical modulator of 
the cadherin switch in melanoma, a molecular process that is critical for
metastatic spread of the disease.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23890107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Neurosci. 2013 Jul 24;33(30):12528-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0536-13.2013.

Transgenic overexpression of Sox17 promotes oligodendrocyte development and
attenuates demyelination.

Ming X(1), Chew LJ, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that Sox17 regulates cell cycle exit and
differentiation in oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Here we investigated its
function in white matter (WM) development and adult injury with a newly generated
transgenic mouse overexpressing Sox17 in the oligodendrocyte lineage under the
CNPase promoter. Sox17 overexpression in CNP-Sox17 mice sequentially promoted
postnatal oligodendrogenesis, increasing NG2 progenitor cells from postnatal day 
(P) 15, then O4+ and CC1+ cells at P30 and P120, respectively. Total Olig2+
oligodendrocyte lineage cells first decreased between P8 and P22 through
Sox17-mediated increase in apoptotic cell death, and thereafter significantly
exceeded WT levels from P30 when cell death had ceased. CNP-Sox17 mice showed
increased Gli2 protein levels and Gli2+ cells in WM, indicating that Sox17
promotes the generation of oligodendrocyte lineage cells through Hedgehog
signaling. Sox17 overexpression prevented cell loss after lysolecithin-induced
demyelination by increasing Olig2+ and CC1+ cells in response to injury.
Furthermore, Sox17 overexpression abolished the injury-induced increase in
TCF7L2/TCF4+ cells, and protected oligodendrocytes from apoptosis by preventing
decreases in Gli2 and Bcl-2 expression that were observed in WT lesions. Our
study thus reveals a biphasic effect of Sox17 overexpression on cell survival and
oligodendrocyte formation in the developing WM, and that its potentiation of
oligodendrocyte survival in the adult confers resistance to injury and myelin
loss. This study demonstrates that overexpression of this transcription factor
might be a viable protective strategy to mitigate the consequences of
demyelination in the adult WM.

PMCID: PMC3721852
PMID: 23884956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. EMBO Rep. 2013 Sep;14(9):837-44. doi: 10.1038/embor.2013.110. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Interaction of smoothened with integrin-linked kinase in primary cilia mediates
Hedgehog signalling.

Barakat B(1), Yu L, Lo C, Vu D, De Luca E, Cain JE, Martelotto LG, Dedhar S,
Sadler AJ, Wang D, Watkins DN, Hannigan GE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research.

Erratum in
    EMBO Rep. 2013 Oct;14(10):945. Martellotto, Luciano G [corrected to Martelotto,
Luciano G].

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(6):871-2.

Here we report that ILK localizes in the mouse primary cilium, a sensory
organelle required for signalling by the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway. Genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of ILK blocks ciliary accumulation of the Hh pathway
effector smoothened (Smo) and suppresses the induction of Gli transcription
factor mRNAs by SHh. Conditional deletion of ILK or Smo also inhibits SHh-driven 
activation of Gli2 in the embryonic mouse cerebellum. ILK regulation of Hh
signalling probably requires the physical interaction of ILK and Smo in the
cilium, and we also show selective cilia-associated interaction of ILK with
ß-arrestin, a known mediator of Smo-dependent signalling.

PMCID: PMC3790053
PMID: 23877428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cell Signal. 2013 Nov;25(11):2222-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.07.012. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

Interaction of PACAP with Sonic hedgehog reveals complex regulation of the
hedgehog pathway by PKA.

Niewiadomski P(1), Zhujiang A, Youssef M, Waschek JA.

Author information: 
(1)Intellectual Development and Disabilities Research Center, The David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for proliferation of cerebellar
granule cell progenitors (cGCPs) and its aberrant activation causes a cerebellar 
cancer medulloblastoma. Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide
(PACAP) inhibits Shh-driven proliferation of cGCPs and acts as tumor suppressor
in murine medulloblastoma. We show that PACAP blocks canonical Shh signaling by a
mechanism that involves activation of protein kinase A (PKA) and inhibition of
the translocation of the Shh-dependent transcription factor Gli2 into the primary
cilium. PKA is shown to play an essential role in inhibiting gene transcription
in the absence of Shh, but global PKA activity levels are found to be a poor
predictor of the degree of Shh pathway activation. We propose that the core Shh
pathway regulates a small compartmentalized pool of PKA in the vicinity of
primary cilia. GPCRs that affect global PKA activity levels, such as the PACAP
receptor, cooperate with the canonical Shh signal to regulate Gli protein
phosphorylation by PKA. This interaction serves to fine-tune the transcriptional 
and physiological function of the Shh pathway.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3768265
PMID: 23872071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell Rep. 2013 Jul 25;4(2):340-51. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.06.037. Epub 2013
Jul 18.

Indian hedgehog controls proliferation and differentiation in skin tumorigenesis 
and protects against malignant progression.

Kakanj P(1), Reuter K, Séquaris G, Wodtke C, Schettina P, Frances D, Zouboulis
CC, Lanske B, Niemann C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne CMMC, University of Cologne, 50931
Cologne, Germany.

Mutations in the hedgehog pathway drive the formation of tumors in many different
organs, including the development of basal cell carcinoma in the skin. However,
little is known about the role of epidermal Indian hedgehog (Ihh) in skin
physiology. Using mouse genetics, we identified overlapping and distinct
functions of Ihh in different models of epidermal tumorigenesis. Epidermal
deletion of Ihh resulted in increased formation of benign squamous papilloma.
Strikingly, Ihh-deficient mice showed an increase in malignant squamous cell
carcinoma and developed lung and lymph node metastases. In a sebaceous gland
tumor model, Ihh deficiency inhibited tumor cell differentiation. More
mechanistically, IHH stimulated cell proliferation by activating the
transcription factor GLI2 in human keratinocytes and human tumors. Thus, our
results uncover important functions for Ihh signaling in controlling
proliferation, differentiation, malignant progression, and metastasis of
epithelial cancer, establishing Ihh as a gatekeeper for controlling the grade of 
tumor malignancy.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23871669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Acta Haematol. 2013;130(4):260-7. doi: 10.1159/000351603. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Arsenic trioxide inhibits the Hedgehog pathway which is aberrantly activated in
acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Yang D(1), Cao F, Ye X, Zhao H, Liu X, Li Y, Shi C, Wang H, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Health Ministry Key Lab of Cell Transplantation, Heilongjiang Institute of
Hematology and Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Dysregulated Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated in
several human malignancies. Hh signaling inhibitors are predicted to have a
minimal effect when the Smoothened receptor is mutated. Implications that Gli
proteins are molecular targets of arsenic trioxide (ATO) action prompted us to
investigate the expression of Hh signaling in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) 
and the influence of ATO on the Hh signaling pathway in APL.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
and Western blot were employed to analyze the expression of Hh pathway components
and the influence of ATO on the Hh signaling pathway in APL.
RESULTS: The expression of Hh pathway components was significantly upregulated in
APL. In newly diagnosed APL patients, Gli2 expression was significantly
positively correlated with Gli1 (R = 0.57, p < 0.001) and Smo (R = 0.56, p <
0.001) and the expression of Hh pathway components was significantly higher in
the high WBC group (p < 0.05). ATO can significantly downregulate the expression 
of Hh pathway components in vitro and in vivo (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The Hh pathway is aberrantly activated in APL and associated with a
bad prognostic factor. ATO can effectively inhibit the expression of the Hh
pathway. The obtained data give the first clinical evidence for the application
of ATO in tumors exhibiting an aberrantly activated Hh pathway.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23867347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Lung. 2013 Oct;191(5):511-21. doi: 10.1007/s00408-013-9490-4. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Expression of Bmi1, FoxF1, Nanog, and <U+03B3>-catenin in relation to hedgehog signaling
pathway in human non-small-cell lung cancer.

Gialmanidis IP(1), Bravou V, Petrou I, Kourea H, Mathioudakis A, Lilis I,
Papadaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Patras, 26500, Rio
Patras, Greece, gialmanidis_nikea@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog signaling is known to be involved in both lung organogenesis
and lung carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to examine potential
downstream targets of the hedgehog signaling pathway in non-small-cell lung
cancer.
METHODS: Protein expression of Bmi1, FoxF1, Nanog, and <U+03B3>-catenin was examined by 
immunohistochemistry in 80 non-small-cell lung cancer samples. Correlations with 
the previously immunohistochemically recovered results for sonic hedgehog, Ptch1,
Smo, Gli1, and Gli2 in the same cohort of tumors as well as the
clinicopathological characteristics of the tumors were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Bmi1 was expressed in 78/80 (97.5 %) cases of non-small-cell lung cancer
and correlated with male gender and expression of Gli1. Positive expression of
FoxF1 was found in 62/80 (77.5 %) cases. Expression of FoxF1 correlated with
lymph node metastases, Bmi1, and hedgehog pathway activation. Overexpression of
Nanog was also noted in 74/80 (92.5 %) tumors and correlated with Bmi1.
Cytoplasmic accumulation of <U+03B3>-catenin was observed in 85 % (68/80) of the tumors 
and correlated with the expression of Bmi1, FoxF1, and Nanog.
CONCLUSION: Several developmental pathways seem to be implicated in
non-small-cell lung cancer. It is also suggested that Bmi1 and FoxF1 may
cooperate with hedgehog signaling in non-small-cell lung carcinogenesis.

PMID: 23864317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 8;8(7):e69466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069466. Print 2013.

Arsenic trioxide prevents osteosarcoma growth by inhibition of GLI transcription 
via DNA damage accumulation.

Nakamura S(1), Nagano S, Nagao H, Ishidou Y, Yokouchi M, Abematsu M, Yamamoto T, 
Komiya S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.

The Hedgehog pathway is activated in various types of malignancies. We previously
reported that inhibition of SMO or GLI prevents osteosarcoma growth in vitro and 
in vivo. Recently, it has been reported that arsenic trioxide (ATO) inhibits
cancer growth by blocking GLI transcription. In this study, we analyzed the
function of ATO in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. Real-time PCR showed that
ATO decreased the expression of Hedgehog target genes, including PTCH1, GLI1, and
GLI2, in human osteosarcoma cell lines. WST-1 assay and colony formation assay
revealed that ATO prevented osteosarcoma growth. These findings show that ATO
prevents GLI transcription and osteosarcoma growth in vitro. Flow cytometric
analysis showed that ATO promoted apoptotic cell death. Comet assay showed that
ATO treatment increased accumulation of DNA damage. Western blot analysis showed 
that ATO treatment increased the expression of <U+03B3>H2AX, cleaved PARP, and cleaved
caspase-3. In addition, ATO treatment decreased the expression of Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL. These findings suggest that ATO treatment promoted apoptotic cell death
caused by accumulation of DNA damage. In contrast, Sonic Hedgehog treatment
decreased the expression of <U+03B3>H2AX induced by cisplatin treatment. ATO re-induced 
the accumulation of DNA damage attenuated by Sonic Hedgehog treatment. These
findings suggest that ATO inhibits the activation of Hedgehog signaling and
promotes apoptotic cell death in osteosarcoma cells by accumulation of DNA
damage. Finally, examination of mouse xenograft models showed that ATO
administration prevented the growth of osteosarcoma in nude mice. Because ATO is 
an FDA-approved drug for treatment of leukemia, our findings suggest that ATO is 
a new therapeutic option for treatment of patients with osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3704531
PMID: 23861973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):695-702. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2010. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Anti-apoptotic role of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in the proliferation 
of ameloblastoma.

Kanda S(1), Mitsuyasu T, Nakao Y, Kawano S, Goto Y, Matsubara R, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial
Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is crucial to growth and patterning during
organogenesis. Aberrant activation of the SHH signaling pathway can result in
tumor formation. We examined the expression of SHH signaling molecules and
investigated the involvement of the SHH pathway in the proliferation of
ameloblastoma, the most common benign tumor of the jaws. We used
immunohistochemistry on ameloblastoma specimens and immunocytochemistry and
reverse transcription-PCR on the ameloblastoma cell line AM-1. We also used the
inhibitors of SHH signaling, SHH neutralizing antibody and cyclopamine, to assess
the effects of SHH on the proliferation of AM-1 cells. We detected expression of 
SHH, patched, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 in the ameloblastoma specimens and AM-1 cells. 
The proliferation of these cells was significantly inhibited in the presence of
SHH neutralizing antibody or cyclopamine; this was confirmed by BrdU
incorporation assays. Furthermore, in the presence of SHH neutralizing antibody, 
nuclear translocation of GLI1 and GLI2 was abolished, apoptosis was induced,
BCL-2 expression decreased and BAX expression increased. Our results suggest that
the SHH signaling pathway is constitutively active in ameloblastoma and plays an 
anti-apoptotic role in the proliferation of ameloblastoma cells through autocrine
loop stimulation.

PMCID: PMC3787891
PMID: 23835807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 24;8(6):e66685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066685. Print 2013.

Mutational analysis of hedgehog signaling pathway genes in human malignant
mesothelioma.

Lim CB(1), Prêle CM, Cheah HM, Cheng YY, Klebe S, Reid G, Watkins DN, Baltic S,
Thompson PJ, Mutsaers SE.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Institute of Western Australia and Centre for Asthma, Allergy and
Respiratory Research, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is critical for embryonic
development and adult homeostasis. Recent studies have identified regulatory
roles for this pathway in certain cancers with mutations in the HH pathway genes.
The extent to which mutations of the HH pathway genes are involved in the
pathogenesis of malignant mesothelioma (MMe) is unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Real-time PCR analysis of HH pathway genes PTCH1,
GLI1 and GLI2 were performed on 7 human MMe cell lines. Exon sequencing of 13 HH 
pathway genes was also performed in cell lines and human MMe tumors. In silico
programs were used to predict the likelihood that an amino-acid substitution
would have a functional effect. GLI1, GLI2 and PTCH1 were highly expressed in MMe
cells, indicative of active HH signaling. PTCH1, SMO and SUFU mutations were
found in 2 of 11 MMe cell lines examined. A non-synonymous missense SUFU mutation
(p.T411M) was identified in LO68 cells. In silico characterization of the SUFU
mutant suggested that the p.T411M mutation might alter protein function. However,
we were unable to demonstrate any functional effect of this mutation on Gli
activity. Deletion of exons of the PTCH1 gene was found in JU77 cells, resulting 
in loss of one of two extracellular loops implicated in HH ligand binding and the
intracellular C-terminal domain. A 3-bp insertion (69_70insCTG) in SMO,
predicting an additional leucine residue in the signal peptide segment of SMO
protein was also identified in LO68 cells and a MMe tumour.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We identified the first novel mutations in PTCH1, SUFU 
and SMO associated with MMe. Although HH pathway mutations are relatively rare in
MMe, these data suggest a possible role for dysfunctional HH pathway in the
pathogenesis of a subgroup of MMe and help rationalize the exploration of HH
pathway inhibitors for MMe therapy.

PMCID: PMC3691204
PMID: 23826113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Neoplasia. 2013 Jul;15(7):712-9.

Targeting stem cell behavior in desmoid tumors (aggressive fibromatosis) by
inhibiting hedgehog signaling.

Ghanbari-Azarnier R(1), Sato S, Wei Q, Al-Jazrawe M, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Desmoid tumor (also called aggressive fibromatosis) is a lesion of mesenchymal
origin that can occur as a sporadic tumor or a manifestation of the preneoplastic
syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis caused by a mutation in adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC). This tumor type is characterized by the stabilization of
ß-catenin and activation of Tcf-mediated transcription. Cell transplantation data
suggest that desmoid tumors are derived from mesenchymal progenitor cells (MSCs).
As such, modulating cell signaling pathways that regulate MSC differentiation or 
proliferation, such as hedgehog (Hh) signaling, could alter the tumor phenotype. 
Here, we found that Hh signaling is activated in human and murine desmoid tumors.
Inhibiting Hh signaling in human cell cultures decreased cell proliferation and
ß-catenin protein levels. Apc(+)/Apc(1638N) mice, which develop desmoid tumors,
develop smaller and fewer tumors when Hh signaling was inhibited either
genetically (by crossing Apc(+)/Apc(1638N) mice with mice lacking one copy of a
Hh-activated transcription factor, Gli2 (+/-) mice) or using a pharmacologic
inhibitor. Both in mice and in human tumor cell cultures, ß-catenin and
Hh-mediated signaling positively regulate each other's activity. These data show 
that targeting a pathway that regulates MSC differentiation influences desmoid
tumor behavior, providing functional evidence supporting the notion that these
tumors are derived from mesenchymal progenitors. It also suggests Hh blockade as 
a therapeutic approach for this tumor type.

PMCID: PMC3689234
PMID: 23814483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Oncogene. 2014 May 8;33(19):2432-40. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.199. Epub 2013 Jun 24.

The oncogenic GLI transcription factors facilitate keratinocyte survival and
transformation upon exposure to genotoxic agents.

Harrison W(1), Cochrane B(2), Neill G(1), Philpott M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. (2)Safety
and Environmental Assurance Centre, Unilever, Colworth Science Park, Bedford, UK.

Ultraviolet B (UVB) light is the principal aetiological factor associated with
non-melanoma skin cancer, the most prevalent group of malignancies in the
Caucasian population. Exposure to environmental chemicals has also been shown to 
promote skin carcinogenesis and, as for UVB, this is associated with the
acquisition of genomic DNA damage. Cells respond to DNA damage by inducing cell
cycle arrest to facilitate DNA repair, although apoptosis will occur if the
damage is excessive. Oncogenes may drive carcinogenesis by disrupting the
balanced control of cell cycle progression, DNA repair and apoptosis, allowing
for the propagation of cells with damaged DNA. The transcription factors GLI1 and
GLI2 have been implicated in both the initiation and progression of several
cancers, including basal cell carcinoma. Here we show that GLI1 and an active
mutant of GLI2 (<U+0394>NGLI2) promote apoptotic resistance in N/TERT human
keratinocytes upon exposure to UVB and the DNA-alkylating chemicals such as
methyl methanesulphonate (MMS) and N-ethyl-N-nitrosurea. Compared with control
and untreated N/TERT-GLI1 and -GLI2 cells, those that survived genotoxic insult
formed significantly more colonies in soft agar and were significantly more
invasive when grown in three-dimensional organotypic collagen gel cultures.
Indeed, surviving N/TERT-GLI1 and -GLI2 cells expressed higher levels of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers Snail and vimentin, and a
subpopulation of MMS-treated cells displayed an elongated fibroblast-like
morphology with decreased levels of E-cadherin. Finally, whereas Bcl2 was
strongly increased in N/TERT-GLI2 cells, the level of induction was weak in
N/TERT-GLI1 cells, indicating that GLI1 may activate anti-apoptotic mechanisms(s)
independently of Bcl2. In summary, our results show that GLI1 and GLI2 facilitate
the propagation of cells with damaged DNA, and thus their expression may be
naturally higher in cells that form the earliest precursor tumour lesions.

PMID: 23792444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 6;8(6):e65718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065718. Print 2013.

Gli2 acetylation at lysine 757 regulates hedgehog-dependent transcriptional
output by preventing its promoter occupancy.

Coni S(1), Antonucci L, D'Amico D, Di Magno L, Infante P, De Smaele E, Giannini
G, Di Marcotullio L, Screpanti I, Gulino A, Canettieri G.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7277, Inserm 1091, Institut de Biologie Valrose (iBV), Centre de
Biochimie, Nice, France.

The morphogenic Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates postnatal cerebellar
development and its aberrant activation leads to medulloblastoma. The
transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 are the activators of Hh pathway and their
function is finely controlled by different covalent modifications, such as
phosphorylation and ubiquitination. We show here that Gli2 is endogenously
acetylated and that this modification represents a key regulatory step for
Hedgehog signaling. The histone acetyltransferase (HAT) coactivator p300, but not
other HATs, acetylates Gli2 at the conserved lysine K757 thus inhibiting Hh
target gene expression. By generating a specific anti acetyl-Gli2(Lys757)
antisera we demonstrated that Gli2 acetylation is readily detectable at
endogenous levels and is attenuated by Hh agonists. Moreover, Gli2 K757R mutant
activity is higher than wild type Gli2 and is no longer enhanced by Hh agonists, 
indicating that acetylation represents an additional level of control for signal 
dependent activation. Consistently, in sections of developing mouse cerebella
Gli2 acetylation correlates with the activation status of Hedgehog signaling.
Mechanistically, acetylation at K757 prevents Gli2 entry into chromatin.
Together, these data illustrate a novel mechanism of regulation of the Hh
signaling whereby, in concert with Gli1, Gli2 acetylation functions as a key
transcriptional checkpoint in the control of morphogen-dependent processes.

PMCID: PMC3675076
PMID: 23762415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Urol. 2013 Nov;190(5):1884-92. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.05.061. Epub 2013 May
30.

Hypospadias and genes related to genital tubercle and early urethral development.

Carmichael SL(1), Ma C, Choudhry S, Lammer EJ, Witte JS, Shaw GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, California. Electronic address: scarmichael@stanford.edu.

PURPOSE: We determined whether variants in genes associated with genital tubercle
(the anlage for the penis) and early urethral development were associated with
hypospadias in humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined 293 relatively common tag single nucleotide
polymorphisms in BMP4, BMP7, FGF8, FGF10, FGFR2, HOXA13, HOXD13, HOXA4, HOXB6,
SRY, WT1, WTAP, SHH, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3. The analysis included 624 cases (81
mild, 319 moderate, 209 severe, 15 undetermined severity) and 844 population
based nonmalformed male controls born in California from 1990 to 2003.
RESULTS: There were 28 single nucleotide polymorphisms for which any of the
comparisons (ie overall or for a specific severity) had a p value of less than
0.01. The homozygous variant genotypes for 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms in
BMP7 were associated with at least a twofold increased risk of hypospadias
regardless of severity. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms for FGF10 were
associated with threefold to fourfold increased risks, regardless of severity.
For 4 of them the results were restricted to whites. For GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3
there were 12 associated single nucleotide polymorphisms but results were
inconsistent by severity and race/ethnicity. For SHH 1 single nucleotide
polymorphism was associated with a 2.4-fold increased risk of moderate
hypospadias. For WT1 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms were associated with
approximately a twofold increased risk, primarily for severe hypospadias.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms in
several genes that contribute to genital tubercle and early urethral development 
are associated with hypospadias risk.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4103581
PMID: 23727413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cancer Lett. 2013 Sep 1;337(2):210-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.05.009. Epub
2013 May 16.

Ellagic acid inhibits human pancreatic cancer growth in Balb c nude mice.

Zhao M(1), Tang SN, Marsh JL, Shankar S, Srivastava RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Ellagic acid (EA) is a polyphenol found in several plants and fruits. The
objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which EA
inhibits pancreatic cancer growth in Balb C nude mice. PANC-1 cells were injected
subcutaneously into Balb c nude mice, and tumor-bearing mice were treated with
EA. The expression of Akt, Shh and Notch and their target gene products were
measured by the immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. Treatment of
PANC-1 xenografted mice with EA resulted in significant inhibition in tumor
growth which was associated with suppression of cell proliferation and caspase-3 
activation, and induction of PARP cleavage. EA inhibited the expression of Bcl-2,
cyclin D1, CDK2, and CDK6, and induced the expression of Bax in tumor tissues
compared to untreated control group. EA inhibited the markers of angiogenesis
(COX-2, HIF1a, VEGF, VEGFR, IL-6 and IL-8), and metastasis (MMP-2 and MMP-9) in
tumor tissues. Furthermore, treatment of mice with EA caused a significant
inhibition in phospho-Akt, Gli1, Gli2, Notch1, Notch3, and Hey1. EA also reversed
epithelial to mesenchymal transition by up-regulating E-cadherin and inhibiting
the expression of Snail, MMP-2 and MMP-9. These data suggest that EA can inhibit 
pancreatic cancer growth, angiogenesis and metastasis by suppressing Akt, Shh and
Notch pathways. In view of the fact that EA could effectively inhibit human
pancreatic cancer growth by suppressing Akt, Shh and Notch pathways, our findings
suggest that the use of EA would be beneficial for the management of pancreatic
cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. PLoS One. 2013 May 3;8(5):e63353. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063353. Print 2013.

Regulation of hedgehog signaling by Myc-interacting zinc finger protein 1, Miz1.

Lu J(1), Chen M, Ren XR, Wang J, Lyerly HK, Barak L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Smoothened (Smo) mediated Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an essential role in
regulating embryonic development and postnatal tissue homeostasis. Aberrant
activation of the Hh pathway contributes to the formation and progression of
various cancers. In vertebrates, however, key regulatory mechanisms responsible
for transducing signals from Smo to the nucleus remain to be delineated. Here, we
report the identification of Myc-interacting Zinc finger protein 1 (Miz1) as a
Smo and Gli2 binding protein that positively regulates Hh signaling.
Overexpression of Miz1 increases Gli luciferase reporter activity, whereas
knockdown of endogenous Miz1 has the opposite effect. Activation of Smo induces
translocation of Miz1 to the primary cilia together with Smo and Gli2.
Furthermore, Miz1 is localized to the nucleus upon Hh activation in a
Smo-dependent manner, and loss of Miz1 prevents the nuclear translocation of
Gli2. More importantly, silencing Miz1 expression inhibits cell proliferation in 
vitro and the growth of Hh-driven medulloblastoma tumors allografted in SCID
mice. Taken together, these results identify Miz1 as a novel regulator in the Hh 
pathway that plays an important role in mediating Smo-dependent oncogenic
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3643979
PMID: 23671675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063226. Print 2013.

Gli1 mediates lung cancer cell proliferation and Sonic Hedgehog-dependent
mesenchymal cell activation.

Bermudez O(1), Hennen E, Koch I, Lindner M, Eickelberg O.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Pneumology Center, University Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Non-Small-Cell-Lung-Cancer (NSCLC) represents approximately 85% of all lung
cancers and remains poorly understood. While signaling pathways operative during 
organ development, including Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and associated Gli
transcription factors (Gli1-3), have recently been found to be reactivated in
NSCLC, their functional role remains unclear. Here, we hypothesized that
Shh/Gli1-3 could mediate NSCLC autonomous proliferation and epithelial/stromal
signaling in the tumoral tissue. In this context, we have investigated the
activity of Shh/Gli1-3 signaling in NSCLC in both, cancer and stromal cells. We
report here that inhibition of Shh signaling induces a significant decrease in
the proliferation of NSCLC cells. This effect is mediated by Gli1 and Gli2, but
not Gli3, through regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin D2 expression. While
exogenous Shh was unable to induce signaling in either A549 lung adenocarcinoma
or H520 lung squamous carcinoma cells, both cells were found to secrete Shh
ligand, which induced fibroblast proliferation, survival, migration, invasion,
and collagen synthesis. Furthermore, Shh secreted by NSCLC mediates the
production of proangiogenic and metastatic factors in lung fibroblasts. Our
results thus provide evidence that Shh plays an important role in mediating
epithelial/mesenchymal crosstalk in NSCLC. While autonomous Gli activity controls
NSCLC proliferation, increased Shh expression by NSCLC is associated with
fibroblast activation in tumor-associated stroma. Our study highlights the
relevance of studying stromal-associated cells in the context of NSCLC regarding 
new prognosis and therapeutic options.

PMCID: PMC3646741
PMID: 23667589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nutr Cancer. 2013;65(4):590-9. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2013.770043.

Multitargeting and antimetastatic potentials of silibinin in human HepG-2 and
PLC/PRF/5 hepatoma cells.

Ghasemi R(1), Ghaffari SH, Momeny M, Pirouzpanah S, Yousefi M, Malehmir M,
Alimoghaddam K, Ghavamzadeh A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation Research Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common sort of primary liver
malignancy with poor prognosis. This study aimed at examining the effects of
silibinin (a putative antimetastatic agent) on some transcriptional markers
mechanistically related to HCC recurrence and metastasis in HepG-2 [hepatitis B
virus (HBV)-negative and P53 intact) and PLC/PRF/5 (HBV-positive and P53 mutated)
cells. The expression of 27 genes in response to silibinin was evaluated by
real-time RT-PCR. The MMP gelatinolytic assay and microculture tetrazolium test
(MTT) were tested. Silibinin was capable of suppressing the transcriptional
levels of ANGPT2, ATP6L, CAP2, CCR6, CCR7, CLDN-10, cortactin, CXCR4, GLI2, HK2, 
ID1, KIAA0101, mortalin, PAK1, RHOA, SPINK1, and STMN1 as well as the enzymatic
activity of MMP-2 but promoted the transcripts of CREB3L3, DDX3X, and PROX1 in
both cells. Some significant differences between the cells in response to
silibinin were detected that might be related to the differences of the cells in 
terms of HBV infection and/or P53 mutation, suggesting the possible influence of 
silibinin on HCC through biological functions of these 2 prognostic factors. In
conclusion, our findings suggest that silibinin could potentially function as a
multitargeting antimetastatic agent and might provide new insights for HCC
therapy particularly for HBV-related and/or P53-mutated HCCs.

PMID: 23659451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17589-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.467498. Epub
2013 May 3.

Specific requirement of Gli transcription factors in Hedgehog-mediated intestinal
development.

Huang H(1), Cotton JL, Wang Y, Rajurkar M, Zhu LJ, Lewis BC, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is involved in multiple aspects of embryonic gut
development, including mesenchymal growth and smooth muscle differentiation. The 
Gli family transcription factors is thought to collectively mediate Hh signaling 
in mammals. However, the function of different Gli proteins in gut development
remains uncharacterized. Here, we genetically dissect the contribution of Gli
transcriptional activation and de-repression in intestinal growth and patterning.
We find that removal of the Gli3 repressor is dispensable for intestinal
development and does not play a major role in Hh-controlled gut development.
However, Gli2 activation is able to fully rescue the Smoothened (Smo)-null
intestinal phenotype, suggesting that the Gli2 transcription factor is the main
effector for Hh signaling in the intestine. To understand further the molecular
mechanism underlying Hh/Gli function in the developing gut, we identify a subset 
of small leucine-rich glycoproteins (SLRPs) that may function downstream of Hh
signaling in the mesenchyme. We show that osteoglycin, a SLRP, inhibits
Hh-induced differentiation toward the smooth muscle lineage in C3H10T1/2
pluripotent mesenchymal cells. Taken together, our study reveals, for the first
time, the distinct roles of Gli proteins in intestine development and suggests
SLRPs as novel regulators of smooth muscle cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3682558
PMID: 23645682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Neural Dev. 2013 Apr 26;8:8. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-8-8.

Temporal and spatial requirements of Smoothened in ventral midbrain neuronal
development.

Tang M(1), Luo SX, Tang V, Huang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have indicated that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) regulates
the expansion of dopaminergic (DA) progenitors and the subsequent generation of
mature DA neurons. This prevailing view has been based primarily on in vitro
culture results, and the exact in vivo function of Shh signaling in the
patterning and neurogenesis of the ventral midbrain (vMB) remains unclear.
METHODS: We characterized the transcriptional codes for the vMB progenitor
domains, and correlated them with the expression patterns of Shh signaling
effectors, including Shh, Smoothened, Patched, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3.
RESULTS: While Shh and its downstream effectors showed robust expression in the
neurogenic niche for DA progenitors at embryonic day (E)8 to E8.5, their
expression shifted to the lateral domains from E9.5 to E12.5. Consistent with
this dynamic change, conditional mutants with region-specific removal of the Shh 
receptor Smoothened in the vMB progenitors (Shh-Cre;Smo(fl/fl)) showed a
transient reduction in DA progenitors and DA neurons at E10.5, but had more
profound defects in neurons derived from the more lateral domains, including
those in the red nucleus, oculomotor nucleus, and raphe nuclei. Conversely,
constitutive activation of Smoothened signaling in vMB (Shh-Cre;SmoM2) showed
transient expansion of the same progenitor population. To further characterize
the nature of Shh-Smoothened signaling in vMB, we examined the BAT-GAL reporter
and the expression of Wnt1 in vMB, and found that the antagonistic effects of Shh
and Wnt signaling critically regulate the development of DA progenitors and DA
neurons.
CONCLUSION: These results highlight previously unrecognized effects of
Shh-Smoothened signaling in the region-specific neurogenesis within the vMB.

PMCID: PMC3680293
PMID: 23618354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e61034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061034. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

The hedgehog receptor patched1 in T cells is dispensable for adaptive immunity in
mice.

Michel KD(1), Uhmann A, Dressel R, van den Brandt J, Hahn H, Reichardt HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Immunology, University of Göttingen
Medical School, Göttingen, Germany.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling modulates T cell development and function but its exact
role remains a matter of debate. To further address this issue we made use of
conditional knock-out mice in which the Hh receptor Patched1 (Ptch) is
inactivated in the T cell lineage. Thymocyte development was moderately
compromised by the deletion of Ptch as characterized by reduced numbers of CD4
and CD8 single-positive cells. In contrast, peripheral T cells were not affected.
Proliferation and IFN<U+03B3> secretion by Ptch-deficient T cells were indistinguishable
from controls irrespectively of whether we used strong or suboptimal conditions
for stimulation. Analysis of CTL and Treg cell functions did not reveal any
differences between both genotypes, and T cell apoptosis induced by
glucocorticoids or <U+03B3>-irradiation was also similar. Surprisingly, absence of Ptch 
did not lead to an activation of canonic Hh signaling in peripheral T cells as
indicated by unaltered expression levels of Gli1 and Gli2. To test whether we
could uncover any role of Ptch in T cells in vivo we subjected the mutant mice to
three different disease models, namely allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
mimicking graft-versus-host disease, allergic airway inflammation as a model of
asthma and growth of adoptively transferred melanoma cells as a means to test
tumor surveillance by the immune system. Nonetheless, we were neither able to
demonstrate any difference in the disease courses nor in any pathogenic parameter
in these three models of adaptive immunity. We therefore conclude that the Hh
receptor Ptch is dispensable for T cell function in vitro as well as in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3620050
PMID: 23577186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Oncogenesis. 2013 Apr 8;2:e42. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.5.

NVP-LDE-225 (Erismodegib) inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and human
prostate cancer stem cell growth in NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice by regulating Bmi-1 
and microRNA-128.

Nanta R(1), Kumar D, Meeker D, Rodova M, Van Veldhuizen PJ, Shankar S, Srivastava
RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS, USA.

Prostate cancer stem cells (CSCs) are defined by their extensive self-renewal,
differentiation and tumor initiation properties. It is now clear that CSCs are
involved in tumor growth and recurrence, and resistance to conventional
treatments. The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway has a crucial role in stemness and
tumorigenesis. Thus, the strategy that suppresses stemness and consequently
tumorigenic potential of CSCs could be considered for the management of prostate 
cancer. The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms, by
which NVP-LDE-225/Erismodegib (smoothened inhibitor) regulates stem cell
characteristics and tumor growth in prostate cancer. The effects of NVP-LDE-225
on CSC's viability, sphere formation, apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and tumor growth in NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice were examined.
NVP-LDE-225 inhibited cell viability and spheroid formation, and induced
apoptosis by activation of caspase-3 and cleavage of poly-ADP ribose polymerase
(PARP). NVP-LDE-225 induced expression of Bax and Bak, and inhibited the
expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, XIAP, cIAP1, cIAP2 and survivin. NVP-LDE-225
inhibited Gli transcriptional activity, Gli-DNA interaction and the expression of
Gli1, Gli2, Patched1 and Patched-2 in prostate CSCs. Interestingly, NVP-LDE-225
induced PDCD4 and apoptosis and inhibited cell viability by suppressing miR-21.
Furthermore, NVP-LDE-225 inhibited pluripotency-maintaining factors Nanog, Oct-4,
c-Myc and Sox-2. The inhibition of Bmi-1 by NVP-LDE-225 was regulated by
upregulation of miR-128. NVP-LDE-225 suppressed EMT by upregulating E-cadherin
and inhibiting N-cadherin, Snail, Slug and Zeb1 by regulating the miR-200 family.
Finally, NVP-LDE-225 inhibited CSC tumor growth, which was associated with the
suppression of Gli1, Gli2, Patched-1, Patched-2, Cyclin D1, Bmi-1 and PCNA and
cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP in tumor tissues derived from NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null 
mice. Overall, our findings suggest that inhibition of the Shh signaling pathway 
could therefore be a novel therapeutic option in treating prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3641359
PMID: 23567619  [PubMed]


246. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 8;13:11. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-11.

Expression of SHH signaling molecules in the developing human primary dentition.

Hu X(1), Zhang S, Chen G, Lin C, Huang Z, Chen Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology, College of Life
Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Our current knowledge on tooth development derives primarily from
studies in mice. Very little is known about gene expression and function during
human odontogenesis. Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling has been demonstrated to play
crucial roles in the development of multiple organs in mice, including the tooth.
However, if SHH signaling molecules are expressed and function in the developing 
human embryonic tooth remain unknown.
RESULTS: We conducted microarray assay to reveal the expression profile of SHH
signaling pathway molecules. We then used in situ hybridization to validate and
reveal spatial and temporal expression patterns of a number of selected
molecules, including SHH, PTC1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, in the developing
human embryonic tooth germs, and compared them with that in mice. We found that
all these genes exhibit similar but slightly distinct expression patterns in the 
human and mouse tooth germ at the cap and bell stages.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the operation of active SHH signaling in the
developing human tooth and suggest a conserved function of SHH signaling pathway 
during human odontogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3639830
PMID: 23566240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Int J Cancer. 2013 Oct 15;133(8):1955-66. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28193. Epub 2013 May
6.

TAK-441, a novel investigational smoothened antagonist, delays
castration-resistant progression in prostate cancer by disrupting paracrine
hedgehog signaling.

Ibuki N(1), Ghaffari M, Pandey M, Iu I, Fazli L, Kashiwagi M, Tojo H, Nakanishi
O, Gleave ME, Cox ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is a highly conserved intercellular and intracellular
communication mechanism that governs organogenesis and is dysregulated in cancers
of numerous tissues, including prostate. Up-regulated expression of the Hh
ligands, Sonic (Shh) and Desert (Dhh), has been reported in androgen-deprived and
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In a cohort of therapy naive, short-
and long-term neoadjuvant hormone therapy-treated (NHT), and CRPC specimens, we
observed elevated Dhh expression predominantly in long-term NHT specimens and
elevated Shh expression predominantly in CRPC specimens. Together with previously
demonstrated reciprocal signaling between Shh-producing prostate cancer (PCa)
cells and urogenital mesenchymal fibroblasts, these results suggest that
castration-induced Hh expression promotes CRPC progression through reciprocal
paracrine signaling within the tumor microenvironment. We tested whether the
orally available Smoothened (Smo) antagonist, TAK-441, could impair
castration-resistant progression of LNCaP PCa xenografts by disrupting paracrine 
Hh signaling. Although TAK-441 or cyclopamine did not affect androgen
withdrawal-induced Shh up-regulation or viability of LNCaP cells,
castration-resistant progression of LNCaP xenografts was significantly delayed in
animals treated with TAK-441. In TAK-441-treated xenografts, expression of murine
orthologs of the Hh-activated genes, Gli1, Gli2 and Ptch1, was substantially
suppressed, while expression of the corresponding human orthologs was unaffected.
As androgen-deprived LNCaP cells up-regulate Shh expression, but are not
sensitive to Smo antagonists, these studies indicate that TAK-441 leads to
delayed castration-resistant progression of LNCaP xenografts by disrupting
paracrine Hh signaling with the tumor stroma. Thus, paracrine Hh signaling may
offer unique opportunities for prognostic biomarker development, drug targeting
and therapeutic response monitoring of PCa progression.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23564295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent. 2013 Dec;14(6):405-10. doi: 10.1007/s40368-013-0010-2.
Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Candidate gene studies in hypodontia suggest role for FGF3.

Vieira AR(1), D'Souza RN, Mues G, Deeley K, Hsin HY, Küchler EC, Meira R, Patir
A, Tannure PN, Lips A, Costa MC, Granjeiro JM, Seymen F, Modesto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, 614 Salk Hall, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, USA, arv11@pitt.edu.

INTRODUCTION: The majority of tooth agenesis cases are mild (hypodontia) and
typically not associated with the gene mutations linked to oligodontia. From
this, we hypothesise that most cases of tooth agenesis fit a polygenic mode of
inheritance, where several genes with small effects cause a variety of varying
phenotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we looked at 18 not typically studied genes
in this condition, to ascertain their contribution to hypodontia. Our study
subjects consisted of 167 patients with hypodontia and their parents from two
cohorts (one from Brazil and one from Turkey). An additional 465 DNA samples (93 
cases with hypodontia and 372 controls without family history for tooth agenesis 
or oral clefts) from Brazil were also available for this study. Ninety-three
single nucleotide polymorphisms that maximally represent the linkage
disequilibrium structure of the genes for the 18 genes were selected and
genotyped using Taqman chemistry. Chi square was used to test if genotype
distributions were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and 24 markers that were in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and had allele frequencies higher than 5 % in a panel 
of 50 CEPH samples were further tested. Association between hypodontia and
genetic variants was tested with the transmission disequilibrium test within the 
programme Family-Based Association Test (FBAT) and by using Chi square and
Fisher's exact tests. Alpha at a level of 0.05 was used to report results.
RESULTS: Results suggest possible associations between several genes and
hypodontia in the three populations. In the Turkish cohort (n = 51
parent-affected child trios) the most significant results were as follows: FGF3
rs1893047, p = 0.08; GLI3 rs929387, p = 0.03; GLI3 haplotype rs929387-rs846266,
p = 0.002; and PAX9 rs2073242, p = 0.03. In the Brazilian cohort (n = 116
parent-affected child trios), the results were as follows: DLX1 rs788173,
p = 0.07; FGF3 rs12574452, p = 0.03; GLI2 rs1992901, p = 0.03; and PITX2
rs2595110, p = 0.01. The second Brazilian cohort also suggested that FGF3
(rs12574452, p = 0.01) is associated with hypodontia and added EDAR (rs17269487, 
p = 0.04), LHX6 (rs989798, p = 0.02), and MSX1 (rs12532, p = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that several genes are potentially associated
with hypodontia and their individual contributions may be modest. Hence, these
cases may not be explained by inactivating mutations such as many oligodontia
cases segregating in a Mendelian fashion but rather are influenced by one or more
susceptibility alleles in multiple small effect genes.

PMCID: PMC3732557
PMID: 23549991  [PubMed - in process]


249. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 10;288(19):13278-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.457010. Epub
2013 Mar 24.

Regulation of the bone-restricted IFITM-like (Bril) gene transcription by Sp and 
Gli family members and CpG methylation.

Kasaai B(1), Gaumond MH, Moffatt P.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1A6, Canada.

BACKGROUND: BRIL is a bone-specific membrane protein that is involved in
osteogenesis imperfecta type V.
RESULTS: Bril transcription is activated by Sp1, Sp3, OSX, and GLI2 and by CpG
demethylation.
CONCLUSION: Regulation of Bril involves trans-acting factors integrating at
conserved promoter elements and epigenetic modifications.
SIGNIFICANCE: Identification of the mechanisms governing Bril transcription is
important to understand its role in skeletal biology. Bril encodes a small
membrane protein present in osteoblasts. In humans, a single recurrent mutation
in the 5'-UTR of BRIL causes osteogenesis imperfecta type V. The exact function
of BRIL and the mechanism by which it contributes to disease are still unknown.
The goal of the current study was to characterize the mechanisms governing Bril
transcription in humans, rats, and mice. In the three species, as detected by
luciferase reporter assays in UMR106 cells, we found that most of the base-line
regulatory activity was localized within ~250 bp upstream of the coding ATG.
Co-transfection experiments indicated that Sp1 and Sp3 were potent inducers of
the promoter activity, through the binding of several GC-rich boxes. Osterix was 
a weak activator but acted cooperatively with Sp1 and GLI2 to synergistically
induce the BRIL promoter. GLI2, a mediator of hedgehog signaling pathway, was
also a potent activator of BRIL through a single GLI binding site.
Correspondingly, agonists of the hedgehog pathway (purmorphamine and Indian
hedgehog) in MC3T3 osteoblasts led to increased BRIL levels. The BRIL promoter
activity was also found to be negatively modulated through two different
mechanisms. First, the ZFP354C zinc finger protein repressed basal and
Sp1-induced activity. Second, CpG methylation of the promoter region correlated
with an inactive state and prevented Sp1 activation. The data provide the very
first analyses of the cis- and trans-acting factors regulating Bril
transcription. They revealed key roles for the Sp members and GLI2 that possibly 
cooperate to activate Bril when the promoter becomes demethylated.

PMCID: PMC3650367
PMID: 23530031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Hepatology. 2013 Sep;58(3):995-1010. doi: 10.1002/hep.26394. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Hedgehog signaling pathway regulates autophagy in human hepatocellular carcinoma 
cells.

Wang Y(1), Han C, Lu L, Magliato S, Wu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays an important role in embryonic development and in
the regulation of a variety of cellular functions. Aberrant activation of Hh
signaling has been implicated in several human cancers including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). In this study we examined the pathobiological functions and
molecular mechanisms of the Hh signaling pathway in HCC cells. Treatment of
cultured human HCC cells (Huh7, Hep3B, and HepG2) with the Hh signaling ligand
(recombinant Shh) or agonist, SAG and purmorphamine, prevented the induction of
autophagy. In contrast, GANT61 (a small molecule inhibitor of Gli1 and Gli2)
induced autophagy, as determined by immunoblotting for microtubule-associated
protein light chain 3 (LC3) and p62, GFP-LC3 puncta, monodansylcadaverine (MDC)
staining, and transmission electron microscopy. Hh inhibition-induced autophagy
was associated with up-regulation of Bnip3, as determined by immunoblotting and
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay. Knockdown of Bnip3 by RNAi
impaired GANT61-induced autophagy. Additionally, Hh inhibition-induced autophagy 
was associated with Bnip3-mediated displacement of Bcl-2 from Beclin-1, as
determined by immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation assays. Furthermore,
inhibition of Hh signaling increased HCC cell apoptosis and decreased cell
viability, as determined by caspase and WST-1 assays. Pharmacological or genetic 
inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine (3-MA) or Beclin-1 small interfering
RNA (siRNA) partially suppressed GANT61-induced cell apoptosis and cytotoxicity. 
In a tumor xenograft model using SCID mice inoculated with Huh7 cells,
administration of GANT61 inhibited tumor formation and decreased tumor volume;
this effect was partially blocked by the autophagy inhibitor, 3-MA.CONCLUSION:
These findings provide novel evidence that Hh inhibition induces autophagy
through up-regulation of Bnip3 and that this mechanism contributes to apoptosis. 
Therefore, the status of autophagy is a key factor that determines the
therapeutic response to Hh-targeted therapies.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3706478
PMID: 23504944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 15;19(8):2014-24. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0349.
Epub 2013 Mar 14.

The prognostic significance and therapeutic potential of hedgehog signaling in
intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma.

Tang L(1), Tan YX, Jiang BG, Pan YF, Li SX, Yang GZ, Wang M, Wang Q, Zhang J,
Zhou WP, Dong LW, Wang HY.

Author information: 
(1)International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
P.R. China.

PURPOSE: The correlation of the hedgehog signaling pathway with the progression, 
prognosis, and therapeutics of intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma (ICC) has
not been well documented. The study aimed to investigate the expression,
prognostic significance, and therapeutic value of hedgehog components in ICC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Two independent cohorts of 200 patients with ICC were
enrolled. By real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry assay, hedgehog components
expression was evaluated. The prognostic values of hedgehog proteins were
identified and verified. Cyclopamine or siRNA-targeting Gli was used to block the
hedgehog signaling. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were observed by CCK8, cell 
cycle, and annexin V staining assays. In vivo murine tumor model was used to
evaluate the role of hedgehog in ICC.
RESULTS: In ICC tissues, the Gli1 nuclear immune-intensity was associated with
intrahepatic metastasis and the expression of Gli2 was associated with
intrahepatic metastasis, venous invasion, and Unio Internationale Contra Cancrum 
(UICC) pT characteristics. In survival analysis, high Gli1 or Gli2 expressers had
an unfavorable overall survival (OS) prognosis and a shorter disease-free
survival (DFS) than those with low expression. In multivariate analysis, Gli1
expression was found to be an independent prognostic factor of OS, which was
validated by another independent cohort. Furthermore, blocking the hedgehog
signaling by cyclopamine or siRNA-targeting Gli1 resulted in apoptosis and growth
inhibition in ICC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows, for the first time, activation of hedgehog pathway
associated with the progression and metastasis in ICC, which may provide
prognostic and therapeutic values for this tumor.

PMID: 23493353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57346. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057346. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Gli as a novel therapeutic target in malignant pleural mesothelioma.

Li H(1), Lui N, Cheng T, Tseng HH, Yue D, Giroux-Leprieur E, Do HT, Sheng Q, Jin 
JQ, Luh TW, Jablons DM, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Program, Department of Surgery, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly aggressive tumor with poor
prognosis. Current treatment is rarely curative, thus novel meaningful therapies 
are urgently needed. Inhibition of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling at the cell membrane
level in several cancers has shown anti-cancer activity in recent clinical
studies. Evidence of Hh-independent Gli activation suggests Gli as a more potent 
therapeutic target. The current study is aimed to evaluate the potential of Gli
as a therapeutic target to treat MPM. The expression profiles of Gli factors and 
other Hh signaling components were characterized in 46 MPM patient tissue samples
by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Cultured cell lines were employed to
investigate the requirement of Gli activation in tumor cell growth by inhibiting 
Gli through siRNA or a novel small molecule Gli inhibitor (Gli-I). A xenograft
model was used to evaluate Gli-I in vivo. In addition, a side by side comparison 
between Gli and Smoothened (Smo) inhibition was conducted in vitro using siRNA
and small molecule inhibitors. Our study reported aberrant Gli1 and Gli2
activation in a large majority of tissues. Inhibition of Gli by siRNAs or Gli-I
suppressed cell growth dramatically both in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of Gli 
exhibited better cytotoxicity than that of Smo by siRNA and small molecule
inhibitors vismodegib and cyclopamine. Combination of Gli-I and pemetrexed, as
well as Gli-I and vismodegib demonstrated synergistic effects in suppression of
MPM proliferation in vitro. In summary, Gli activation plays a critical role in
MPM. Inhibition of Gli function holds strong potential to become a novel,
clinically effective approach to treat MPM.

PMCID: PMC3590216
PMID: 23483902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Jun;15(6):691-706. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not011. Epub 2013 Mar
12.

NPV-LDE-225 (Erismodegib) inhibits epithelial mesenchymal transition and
self-renewal of glioblastoma initiating cells by regulating miR-21, miR-128, and 
miR-200.

Fu J(1), Rodova M, Nanta R, Meeker D, Van Veldhuizen PJ, Srivastava RK, Shankar
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common form of primary brain
tumor, often characterized by poor survival. Glioblastoma initiating cells (GICs)
regulate self-renewal, differentiation, and tumor initiation properties and are
involved in tumor growth, recurrence, and resistance to conventional treatments. 
The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is essential for normal development
and embryonic morphogenesis. The objectives of this study were to examine the
molecular mechanisms by which GIC characteristics are regulated by NPV-LDE-225
(Smoothened inhibitor;
(2,2'-[[dihydro-2-(4-pyridinyl)-1,3(2H,4H)-pyrimidinediyl]bis(methylene)]bis[N,N-
dimethylbenzenamine).
METHODS: Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by XTT and annexin
V-propidium iodide assay, respectively. Gli translocation and transcriptional
activities were measured by immunofluorescence and luciferase assay,
respectively. Gene and protein expressions were measured by quantitative
real-time PCR and Western blot analyses, respectively.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: NPV-LDE-225 inhibited cell viability, neurosphere
formation, and Gli transcriptional activity and induced apoptosis by activation
of caspase-3 and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. NPV-LDE-225 increased
the expression of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-R1/DR4, TRAIL-R2/DR5, and Fas and decreased the expression of platelet
derived growth factor receptor-a and Bcl2, and these effects were abrogated by
Gli1 plus Gli2 short hairpin RNAs. NPV-LDE-225 enhanced the therapeutic potential
of FasL and TRAIL by upregulating Fas and DR4/5, respectively. Interestingly,
NPV-LDE-225 induced expression of programmed cell death 4 and apoptosis and
inhibited cell viability by suppressing micro RNA (miR)-21. Furthermore,
NPV-LDE-225 inhibited pluripotency-maintaining factors Nanog, Oct4, Sox2, and
cMyc. The inhibition of Bmi1 by NPV-LDE-225 was regulated by induction of
miR-128. Finally, NPV-LDE-225 suppressed epithelial-mesenchymal transition by
upregulating E-cadherin and inhibiting N-cadherin, Snail, Slug, and Zeb1 through 
modulating the miR-200 family. Our data highlight the importance of the SHH
pathway for self-renewal and early metastasis of GICs.

PMCID: PMC3661095
PMID: 23482671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057501. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

ß-catenin is essential for efficient in vitro premyogenic mesoderm formation but 
can be partially compensated by retinoic acid signalling.

Wong J(1), Mehta V, Voronova A, Coutu J, Ryan T, Shelton M, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Previous studies have shown that P19 cells expressing a dominant negative
ß-catenin mutant (ß-cat/EnR) cannot undergo myogenic differentiation in the
presence or absence of muscle-inducing levels of retinoic acid (RA). While RA
could upregulate premyogenic mesoderm expression, including Pax3/7 and Meox1,
only Pax3/7 and Gli2 could be upregulated by RA in the presence of ß-cat/EnR.
However, the use of a dominant negative construct that cannot be compensated by
other factors is limiting due to the possibility of negative chromatin
remodelling overriding compensatory mechanisms. In this study, we set out to
determine if ß-catenin function is essential for myogenesis with and without RA, 
by creating P19 cells with reduced ß-catenin transcriptional activity using an
shRNA approach, termed P19[shß-cat] cells. The loss of ß-catenin resulted in a
reduction of skeletal myogenesis in the absence of RA as early as premyogenic
mesoderm, with the loss of Pax3/7, Eya2, Six1, Meox1, Gli2, Foxc1/2, and Sox7
transcript levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified an association of
ß-catenin with the promoter region of the Sox7 gene. Differentiation of
P19[shß-cat] cells in the presence of RA resulted in the upregulation or lack of 
repression of all of the precursor genes, on day 5 and/or 9, with the exception
of Foxc2. However, expression of Sox7, Gli2, the myogenic regulatory factors and 
terminal differentiation markers remained inhibited on day 9 and overall skeletal
myogenesis was reduced. Thus, ß-catenin is essential for in vitro formation of
premyogenic mesoderm, leading to skeletal myogenesis. RA can at least partially
compensate for the loss of ß-catenin in the expression of many myogenic precursor
genes, but not for myoblast gene expression or overall myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3583846
PMID: 23460868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dis Esophagus. 2013 Sep-Oct;26(7):678-81. doi: 10.1111/dote.12036. Epub 2013 Feb 
26.

Normal exon copy number of the GLI2 and GLI3 genes in patients with esophageal
atresia.

Bednarczyk D(1), Smigiel R, Patkowski D, Laczmanska I, Lebioda A, Laczmanski L,
Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.

Esophageal atresia (EA) is a congenital developmental defect of the alimentary
tract concerning the interruption of the esophagus with or without connection to 
the trachea. The incidence of EA is 1 in 3000-3500 of live-born infants, and
occurs in both isolated and syndromic (in combination with abnormalities in other
organ systems) forms. The molecular mechanisms underlying the development of EA
are poorly understood. Knockout studies in mice indicate that genes like Sonic
hedgehog, Gli2, and Gli3 play a role in the etiology of EA. These facts led us to
hypothesize that Sonic hedgehog-GLI gene rearrangements are associated with EA in
humans. To test this hypothesis, we screened patients with isolated and syndromic
EA for GLI2 and/or GLI3 microrearrangements using methods to estimate the copy
number (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification, real-time polymerase
chain reaction). To our best knowledge this is the first study assessing copy
number of GLI2 and GLI3 genes in patients with EA.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the International Society for Diseases of the 
Esophagus.

PMID: 23442119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 5;288(14):9924-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.409342. Epub 2013 
Feb 19.

Hedgehog-Gli activators direct osteo-chondrogenic function of bone morphogenetic 
protein toward osteogenesis in the perichondrium.

Hojo H(1), Ohba S, Taniguchi K, Shirai M, Yano F, Saito T, Ikeda T, Nakajima K,
Komiyama Y, Nakagata N, Suzuki K, Mishina Y, Yamada M, Konno T, Takato T,
Kawaguchi H, Kambara H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Specification of progenitors into the osteoblast lineage is an essential event
for skeletogenesis. During endochondral ossification, cells in the perichondrium 
give rise to osteoblast precursors. Hedgehog (Hh) and bone morphogenetic protein 
(BMP) are suggested to regulate the commitment of these cells. However,
properties of perichondrial cells and regulatory mechanisms of the specification 
process are still poorly understood. Here, we investigated the machineries by
combining a novel organ culture system and single-cell expression analysis with
mouse genetics and biochemical analyses. In a metatarsal organ culture
reproducing bone collar formation, activation of BMP signaling enhanced the bone 
collar formation cooperatively with Hh input, whereas the signaling induced
ectopic chondrocyte formation in the perichondrium without Hh input. Similar
phenotypes were also observed in compound mutant mice, where signaling activities
of Hh and BMP were genetically manipulated. Single-cell quantitative RT-PCR
analyses showed heterogeneity of perichondrial cells in terms of natural
characteristics and responsiveness to Hh input. In vitro analyses revealed that
Hh signaling suppressed BMP-induced chondrogenic differentiation; Gli1 inhibited 
the expression of Sox5, Sox6, and Sox9 (SRY box-containing gene 9) as well as
transactivation by Sox9. Indeed, ectopic expression of chondrocyte maker genes
were observed in the perichondrium of metatarsals in Gli1(-/-) fetuses, and the
phenotype was more severe in Gli1(-/-);Gli2(-/-) newborns. These data suggest
that Hh-Gli activators alter the function of BMP to specify perichondrial cells
into osteoblasts; the timing of Hh input and its target populations are critical 
for BMP function.

PMCID: PMC3617292
PMID: 23423383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Thyroid. 2013 Sep;23(9):1119-26. doi: 10.1089/thy.2012.0474.

Hedgehog signaling in human medullary thyroid carcinoma: a novel signaling
pathway.

Bohinc B(1), Michelotti G, Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Duke University Medical
Center , Durham, North Carolina.

BACKGROUND: Locally or widely metastatic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is
difficult to treat, and therapeutic options are limited. Recently, kinase
inhibitors have shown partial efficacy in this cancer, but there is a continued
need for the development of novel therapeutics. Within this context, the Hedgehog
(Hh) pathway has been implicated in several types of human tumors, and early
clinical trials with Hh antagonists have validated Hh as a novel therapeutic
target. For the first time, we evaluated Hh pathway activity in MTC, and examined
the effect of Hh pathway perturbation in highly characterized MTC cell lines.
METHODS: We examined immunohistochemical expression of the Hh signaling mediators
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and Glioblastoma (Gli)2 in paraffin-embedded normal versus
histologically characterized human MTC tissue. We examined pharmacologic
disruption of Hh signaling in vitro using two established MTC cell lines (TT and 
MZ-CRC-1). Hh signaling was either pharmacologically activated (SAG) or inhibited
(GDC-0449) in MTC cell lines; Hh activity was assessed by quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction, Western blot analysis, and quantification of cellular 
growth and apoptotic activity.
RESULTS: Our data showed increased expression of Hh signaling factors in human
MTC compared to normal tissue. In vitro, activation of the Hh pathway resulted in
increased expression of key Hh signaling components Smoothened (Smo) and Gli2.
Conversely, inhibition of the Hh pathway decreased expression of these genes,
leading to significantly reduced cellular growth and increased apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Hedgehog signaling components are markedly upregulated in MTC. Hh
pathway inhibitors have potential as novel therapeutic options in patients with
metastatic and/or surgically unresectable MTC.

PMCID: PMC3770247
PMID: 23410206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Mar;98(3):E567-75. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-3224. Epub 
2013 Feb 13.

Functional characterization of a heterozygous GLI2 missense mutation in patients 
with multiple pituitary hormone deficiency.

Flemming GM(1), Klammt J, Ambler G, Bao Y, Blum WF, Cowell C, Donaghue K, Howard 
N, Kumar A, Sanchez J, Stobbe H, Pfäffle RW.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, D-04103 Leipzig,
Germany.

CONTEXT: The GLI2 transcription factor is a major effector protein of the sonic
hedgehog pathway and suggested to play a key role in pituitary development.
Genomic GLI2 aberrations that mainly result in truncated proteins have been
reported to cause holoprosencephaly or holoprosencephaly-like features, sometimes
associated with hypopituitarism.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to determine the frequency of GLI2 mutations in
patients with multiple pituitary hormone deficiency (MPHD).
DESIGN: Patients were selected from participants in the Genetics and
Neuroendocrinology of Short Stature International Study (GeNeSIS) program.
Patients with mutations within established candidate genes were excluded.
PATIENTS: A total of 165 patients with MPHD defined as GH deficiency and at least
1 additional pituitary hormone deficiency were studied regardless of the presence
of extrapituitary clinical manifestations.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Prevalence of GLI2 variations in MPHD patients was
assessed and detailed phenotypic characterization is given. Transcriptional
activity of identified GLI2 variants was evaluated by functional reporter assays.
RESULTS: In 5 subjects, 4 heterozygous missense variants were identified, of
which 2 are unpublished so far. One variant, p.R516P, results in vitro in a
complete loss of protein function. In addition to GH deficiency, the carrier of
the mutation demonstrates deficiency of thyrotrope and gonadotrope function, a
maldescended posterior pituitary lobe, and polydactyly, but no midline defects.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we show that heterozygous amino acid
substitutions within GLI2 may lead to MPHD with mild extrapituitary findings. The
phenotype of GLI2 mutations is variable, and penetrance is incomplete. GLI2
mutations are associated with anterior pituitary hypoplasia, and frequently,
ectopy of the posterior lobe occurs.

PMCID: PMC3590478
PMID: 23408573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jun;34(6):1382-92. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt041. Epub 2013 Feb
6.

Kif3a is necessary for initiation and maintenance of medulloblastoma.

Barakat MT(1), Humke EW, Scott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Developmental Biology, Genetics, and Bioengineering, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Clark Center
West W252, 318 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5439, USA.

Medulloblastoma (MB) cells arise from granule neuron precursors (GNPs) that have 
lost growth control. During normal development, GNPs divide in response to Sonic 
hedgehog (SHH), a ligand that binds to the patched (PTCH) receptor on GNPs. If
one copy of the Ptch gene is lost, as in human Gorlin's syndrome and in Ptch(+/-)
mice, MBs may form. Proper transduction of the SHH signal critically depends on
primary cilia. Loss of primary cilia results in improper signal reception and
failure to properly activate SHH target genes. KIF3a, part of a kinesin motor, is
required for formation of primary cilia. Here, we use tamoxifen-induced ablation 
of Kif3a in GNPs of postnatal Ptch(+/-) mouse cerebella to show that KIF3a is
necessary for MB formation. To investigate the importance of primary cilia in
established tumors, we deleted Kif3a from cultured cells and from tumor cell
grafts. The loss of Kif3a from established tumors led to their growth arrest and 
regression. MBs behave as if they are addicted to the presence of primary cilia. 
These results underscore the potential utility of agents that disrupt cilia for
the treatment of Hh pathway-related MBs.

PMCID: PMC3670253
PMID: 23389290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55134. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055134. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Constitutive activation of Gli2 impairs bone formation in postnatal growing mice.

Joeng KS(1), Long F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) signaling is indispensable for osteoblast differentiation
during endochondral bone development in the mouse embryo. We have previously
shown that the Gli2 transcription activator critically mediates Ihh function in
osteoblastogenesis. To explore the possibility that activation of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling may enhance bone formation, we generated mice that expressed a
constitutively active form of Gli2 in the Osx-lineage cells. Unexpectedly, these 
mice exhibited severe osteopenia due to a marked decrease in osteoblast number
and function, although bone resorption was not affected. Quantitative analyses of
the molecular markers indicated that osteoblast differentiation was impaired in
the mutant mouse. However, the osteoblast-lineage cells isolated from these mice 
exhibited more robust osteoblast differentiation than normal in vitro. Similarly,
pharmacological stimulation of Hh signaling enhanced osteoblast differentiation
from Osx-expressing cells isolated from the wild-type mouse. Thus, even though Hh
signaling directly promotes osteoblast differentiation in vitro, constitutive
activation of this pathway impairs bone formation in vivo, perhaps through an
indirect mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3559391
PMID: 23383082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Target Oncol. 2013 Dec;8(4):271-80. doi: 10.1007/s11523-013-0253-1. Epub 2013 Feb
1.

Gastric cancer (GC) patients with hedgehog pathway activation: PTCH1 and GLI2 as 
independent prognostic factors.

Lee SJ(1), Do IG, Lee J, Kim KM, Jang J, Sohn I, Kang WK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, South Korea.

Activation of sonic hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway has been implicated in
aggressiveness and progression of gastrointestinal tumors. We planned this study 
to identify a subgroup of gastric cancer (GC) patients with HH activation and to 
assess the effect of a HH inhibitor in HH activated GC in vitro. We surveyed HH
pathway activation among 512 GC specimens for protein expression of various
target genes involved in HH pathway: Indian hedgehog (IHH), patched-1 (PTCH1),
smoothened (SMO), GLI2, and FOXA2. We analyzed the correlations between the
expression of these factors and clinicopathological features and prognosis. In
vitro, ten gastric cancer cell lines were screened for anti-tumoractivity of an
HH inhibitor, GDC-0449. Among the 512 specimens, 105 (20.0 %), 83 (16.3 %), 130
(25.5 %), 61 (12.0 %), and 206 (40.8 %) were positive for IHH, PTCH1, GLI2, SMO, 
and FOXA2 expression, respectively. PTCH1 expression was more frequently observed
in well- or moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, intestinal type and
low stage GC. GLI2 was correlated with lymphovascular invasion and intestinal
type GC. A high-stage and negative PTCH1 staining were identified as unfavorable 
independent risk factors for overall survival in multivariate analysis
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, 0.045, respectively). For IHH, SMO, and FOXA2, there was no
statistical difference in clinicopathologic variables and survival outcome. An HH
inhibitor had particularly potent effects on GC cell lines with SMO mRNA
overexpression. This is the largest report to analyze the hedgehog pathway in GC.
PTCH1 overexpression was an independent prognostic factor for survival and SMO
overexpression which was found in 12.0 % of GC patients might be the potential
predictive marker of HH inhibitor.

PMID: 23371028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. World J Surg Oncol. 2013 Jan 29;11:25. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-11-25.

Expression of glioma-associated oncogene 2 (Gli 2) is correlated with poor
prognosis in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma undergoing hepatectomy.

Zhang D(1), Cao L, Li Y, Lu H, Yang X, Xue P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical College, No, 250, East Changgang Road, Guangzhou 510260, China.

BACKGROUND: Our previous studies showed that glioma-associated oncogene (Gli)2
plays an important role in the proliferation and apoptosis resistance of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. The aim of this study was to explore the
clinical significance of Gli2 expression in HCC.
METHODS: Expression of Gli2 protein was detected in samples from 68 paired HCC
samples, the corresponding paraneoplastic liver tissues, and 20 normal liver
tissues using immunohistochemistry. Correlation of the immunohistochemistry
results with clinicopathologic parameters, prognosis, and the expression of
E-cadherin, N-cadherin, and vimentin were analyzed.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining showed high levels of Gli2 protein
expression in HCC, compared with paraneoplastic and normal liver tissues (P <
0.05). This high expression level of Gli2 was significantly associated with tumor
differentiation, encapsulation, vascular invasion, early recurrence, and
intra-hepatic metastasis (P < 0.05). There was a significantly negative
correlation between Gli2 and E-cadherin expression (r = -0.302, P < 0.05) and a
significantly positive correlation between expression of Gli2 and expression of
vimentin (r = -0.468, P < 0.05) and N-cadherin (r = -0.505, P < 0.05).
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that patients with overexpressed Gli2 had
significantly shorter overall survival and disease-free survival times (P <
0.05). Multivariate analysis suggested that the level of Gli2 expression was an
independent prognostic factor for HCC.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of Gli2 is high in HCC tissue, and is associated with
poor prognosis in patients with HCC after hepatectomy.

PMCID: PMC3565946
PMID: 23356443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Mar 10;319(5):623-32. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.12.028. Epub
2013 Jan 16.

IFT80 is essential for chondrocyte differentiation by regulating Hedgehog and Wnt
signaling pathways.

Wang C(1), Yuan X, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Partial mutation of intraflagellar transport 80 (IFT80) in humans causes Jeune
asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (JATD) and short-rib polydactyly (SRP) syndrome
type III. These diseases are autosomal recessive chondrodysplasias that share
clinical similarities, including shortened long bones and constricted thoracic
cage. However, the role and mechanism of IFT80 in the regulation of chondrocyte
differentiation and function remain largely unknown. We hypothesize that IFT80 is
required for the formation and function of cilia and plays a critical role in
chondrogenic differentiation by regulating Hedgehog (Hh) and Wingless (Wnt)
signaling pathways. To test this hypothesis, we first analyzed the IFT80
expression pattern and found that IFT80 was predominantly expressed in growth
plate chondrocytes and during chondrogenic differentiation. Silencing IFT80
impaired cilia formation and chondrogenic differentiation in mouse bone marrow
derived stromal cells (BMSCs), and decreased the expression of chondrocyte marker
genes--collagen II and aggrecan. Additionally, silencing IFT80 down-regulated Hh 
signaling activity whereas up-regulated Wnt signaling activity. The
overexpression of Gli2 in IFT80-silenced cells promoted chondrogenesis and
recovered the chondrogenic deficiency from IFT80 silencing. Overall, our results 
demonstrate that IFT80 is essential for chondrocyte differentiation by regulating
the Hh and Wnt signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3908790
PMID: 23333501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053830. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Insights into the genetic architecture of early stage age-related macular
degeneration: a genome-wide association study meta-analysis.

Holliday EG(1), Smith AV, Cornes BK, Buitendijk GH, Jensen RA, Sim X, Aspelund T,
Aung T, Baird PN, Boerwinkle E, Cheng CY, van Duijn CM, Eiriksdottir G, Gudnason 
V, Harris T, Hewitt AW, Inouye M, Jonasson F, Klein BE, Launer L, Li X, Liew G,
Lumley T, McElduff P, McKnight B, Mitchell P, Psaty BM, Rochtchina E, Rotter JI, 
Scott RJ, Tay W, Taylor K, Teo YY, Uitterlinden AG, Viswanathan A, Xie S;
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2, Vingerling JR, Klaver CC, Tai ES,
Siscovick D, Klein R, Cotch MF, Wong TY, Attia J, Wang JJ.

Collaborators: Donnelly P, Barroso I, Blackwell JM, Bramon E, Brown MA, Casas JP,
Corvin A, Deloukas P, Duncanson A, Jankowski J, Markus HS, Mathew CG, Palmer CN, 
Plomin R, Rautanen A, Sawcer SJ, Trembath RC, Viswanathan AC, Wood NW, Spencer C,
Band G, Bellenguez C, Freeman C, Hellenthal G, Giannoulatou E, Pirinen M, Pearson
R, Strange A, Su Z, Vukcevic D, Donnelly P, Langford C, Hunt SE, Edkins S,
Gwilliam R, Blackburn H, Bumpstead SJ, Dronov S, Gillman M, Gray E, Hammond N,
Jayakumar A, McCann OT, Liddle J, Potter SC, Ravindrarajah R, Ricketts M, Waller 
M, Weston P, Widaa S, Whittaker P, Barroso I, Deloukas P, Mathew C, Blackwell JM,
Brown MA, Corvin A, Spencer CC.

Genetic factors explain a majority of risk variance for age-related macular
degeneration (AMD). While genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for late AMD
implicate genes in complement, inflammatory and lipid pathways, the genetic
architecture of early AMD has been relatively under studied. We conducted a GWAS 
meta-analysis of early AMD, including 4,089 individuals with prevalent signs of
early AMD (soft drusen and/or retinal pigment epithelial changes) and 20,453
individuals without these signs. For various published late AMD risk loci, we
also compared effect sizes between early and late AMD using an additional 484
individuals with prevalent late AMD. GWAS meta-analysis confirmed previously
reported association of variants at the complement factor H (CFH) (peak
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.5×10(-31)) and age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2)
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.3×10(-24)) loci, and suggested Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphisms
(rs2075650; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.1×10(-6)) associated with early AMD. Other possible loci that
did not reach GWAS significance included variants in the zinc finger protein gene
GLI3 (rs2049622; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.9×10(-6)) and upstream of GLI2 (rs6721654;
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.5×10(-6)), encoding retinal Sonic hedgehog signalling regulators, and in
the tyrosinase (TYR) gene (rs621313; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.5×10(-6)), involved in melanin
biosynthesis. For a range of published, late AMD risk loci, estimated effect
sizes were significantly lower for early than late AMD. This study confirms the
involvement of multiple established AMD risk variants in early AMD, but suggests 
weaker genetic effects on the risk of early AMD relative to late AMD. Several
biological processes were suggested to be potentially specific for early AMD,
including pathways regulating RPE cell melanin content and signalling pathways
potentially involved in retinal regeneration, generating hypotheses for further
investigation.

PMCID: PMC3543264
PMID: 23326517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053675. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Analysis of the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway in normal and abnormal bladder
development.

DeSouza KR(1), Saha M, Carpenter AR, Scott M, McHugh KM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Human Genetics, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
kristin.desouza@nationwidechildrens.org

In this study, we examined the expression of Sonic Hedgehog, Patched, Gli1, Gli2,
Gli3 and Myocardin in the developing bladders of male and female normal and
megabladder (mgb-/-) mutant mice at embryonic days 12 through 16 by in situ
hybridization. This analysis indicated that each member of the Sonic Hedgehog
signaling pathway as well as Myocardin displayed distinct temporal and spatial
patterns of expression during normal bladder development. In contrast, mgb-/-
bladders showed both temporal and spatial changes in the expression of Patched,
Gli1 and Gli3 as well as a complete lack of Myocardin expression. These changes
occurred primarily in the outer mesenchyme of developing mgb-/- bladders
consistent with the development of an amuscular bladder phenotype in these
animals. These results provide the first comprehensive analysis of the Sonic
Hedgehog signaling pathway during normal bladder development and provide strong
evidence that this key signaling cascade is critical in establishing radial
patterning in the developing bladder. In addition, the lack of detrusor smooth
muscle development observed in mgb-/- mice is associated with bladder-specific
temporospatial changes in Sonic Hedgehog signaling coupled with a lack of
Myocardin expression that appears to result in altered patterning of the outer
mesenchyme and poor initiation and differentiation of smooth muscle cells within 
this region of the developing bladder.

PMCID: PMC3538723
PMID: 23308271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2012 Aug;9(4):706-9.

GLI2 mutations as a cause of hypopituitarism.

Cohen LE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Boston Children's Hospital Division of Endocrinology, 300 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. laurie.cohen@childrens.harvard.edu

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is important in pituitary and
craniofacial development. Gli2 is a transcription factor that mediates Shh
signaling. Mutations in GLI2 have been found in association with
holoprosencephaly (HPE) and HPE-like phenotype, with and without pituitary
hormone deficiencies; as well as in patients with pituitary dysfunction with and 
without HPE craniofacial features. Polydactyly is a common associated finding.

PMID: 23304807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Hepatology. 2013 May;57(5):1814-25. doi: 10.1002/hep.26230. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Hedgehog pathway and pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Swiderska-Syn M(1), Suzuki A, Guy CD, Schwimmer JB, Abdelmalek MF, Lavine JE,
Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

It is unclear why the histology of pediatric and adult nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) sometimes differs. In adults, severity of portal inflammation and
fibrosis correlate with Hedgehog pathway activity. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling
regulates organogenesis, but is silent in adult livers until injury reinduces Hh 
ligand production. During adolescence, liver development is completed and
children's livers normally lose cells that produce and/or respond to Hh ligands. 
We postulated that fatty liver injury interferes with this process by increasing 
Hh ligand production, and theorized that hepatic responses to Hh ligands might
differ among children according to age, gender, and/or puberty status. Using
unstained liver biopsy slides from 56 children with NAFLD, we performed
immunohistochemistry to assess Hh pathway activation and correlated the results
with clinical information obtained at biopsy. Fibrosis stage generally correlated
with Hh pathway activity, as demonstrated by the numbers of Hh-ligand-producing
cells (P < 0.0001) and Hh-responsive (glioma-associated oncogene 2-positive
[Gli2]) cells (P = 0.0013). The numbers of Gli2(+) cells also correlated with
portal inflammation grade (P = 0.0012). Two distinct zonal patterns of Hh-ligand 
production, portal/periportal versus lobular, were observed. Higher
portal/periportal Hh-ligand production was associated with male gender. Male
gender and prepuberty were also associated with ductular proliferation (P <
0.05), increased numbers of portal Gli2(+) cells (P < 0.017) and portal
fibrosis.CONCLUSION: The portal/periportal (progenitor) compartment of
prepubescent male livers exhibits high Hh pathway activity. This may explain the 
unique histologic features of pediatric NAFLD because Hh signaling promotes the
fibroductular response.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3637920
PMID: 23300059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jan 14;23(1):23-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.11.017. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

Itraconazole and arsenic trioxide inhibit Hedgehog pathway activation and tumor
growth associated with acquired resistance to smoothened antagonists.

Kim J(1), Aftab BT, Tang JY, Kim D, Lee AH, Rezaee M, Kim J, Chen B, King EM,
Borodovsky A, Riggins GJ, Epstein EH Jr, Beachy PA, Rudin CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jan 14;23(1):3-5.

Recognition of the multiple roles of Hedgehog signaling in cancer has prompted
intensive efforts to develop targeted pathway inhibitors. Leading inhibitors in
clinical development act by binding to a common site within Smoothened, a
critical pathway component. Acquired Smoothened mutations, including SMO(D477G), 
confer resistance to these inhibitors. Here, we report that itraconazole and
arsenic trioxide, two agents in clinical use that inhibit Hedgehog signaling by
mechanisms distinct from that of current Smoothened antagonists, retain
inhibitory activity in vitro in the context of all reported resistance-conferring
Smoothened mutants and GLI2 overexpression. Itraconazole and arsenic trioxide,
alone or in combination, inhibit the growth of medulloblastoma and basal cell
carcinoma in vivo, and prolong survival of mice with intracranial drug-resistant 
SMO(D477G) medulloblastoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3548977
PMID: 23291299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):4389-404. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.400184. Epub 2012 
Dec 24.

Hedgehog signaling regulates MyoD expression and activity.

Voronova A(1), Coyne E, Al Madhoun A, Fair JV, Bosiljcic N, St-Louis C, Li G,
Thurig S, Wallace VA, Wiper-Bergeron N, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Dasman Diabetes
Institute, Dasman 15462, Kuwait.

The inhibition of MyoD expression is important for obtaining muscle progenitors
that can replenish the satellite cell niche during muscle repair. Progenitors
could be derived from either embryonic stem cells or satellite cells. Hedgehog
(Hh) signaling is important for MyoD expression during embryogenesis and adult
muscle regeneration. To date, the mechanistic understanding of MyoD regulation by
Hh signaling is unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the Hh effector, Gli2,
regulates MyoD expression and associates with MyoD gene elements. Gain- and
loss-of-function experiments in pluripotent P19 cells show that Gli2 activity is 
sufficient and required for efficient MyoD expression during skeletal myogenesis.
Inhibition of Hh signaling reduces MyoD expression during satellite cell
activation in vitro. In addition to regulating MyoD expression, Hh signaling
regulates MyoD transcriptional activity, and MyoD activates Hh signaling in
myogenic conversion assays. Finally, Gli2, MyoD, and MEF2C form a protein
complex, which enhances MyoD activity on skeletal muscle-related promoters. We
therefore link Hh signaling to the function and expression of MyoD protein during
myogenesis in stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3567689
PMID: 23266826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Oncogene. 2013 Nov 21;32(47):5388-96. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.588. Epub 2012 Dec
17.

Primary cilia attenuate hedgehog signalling in neoplastic chondrocytes.

Ho L(1), Ali SA, Al-Jazrawe M, Kandel R, Wunder JS, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Primary cilia can act as either a negative or positive regulator of the hedgehog 
(Hh) signaling pathway. Many cartilage tumors are characterized by abnormal
activation of the Hh pathway. Here, we report that the presence of primary cilia 
occurs at a low frequency (12.4%) in neoplastic chondrocytes from malignant human
chondrosarcomas, compared with chondrocytes from normal articular cartilage
(67.7%). To determine the function of primary cilia in cartilaginous neoplasia,
we studied benign cartilage tumors that are formed in mice by
chondrocyte-specific overexpression of Gli2, a downstream transcriptional
activator of the Hh pathway. Col2A1-Gli2 mice were crossed with Ift88+/- mice,
which display a partial loss of ciliogenesis. Surprisingly, cartilage tumors
developed in Ift88+/- mice that were phenotypically similar to those that arise
in Col2A1-Gli2 mice. Further activation of the Hh pathway was observed in
Col2A1-Gli2; Ift88+/- mice compared with either Col2A1-Gli2 or Ift88+/- mice,
which was associated with an increased incidence of cartilage tumors.
Chondrosarcomas were established in explant cultures, and treated with choral
hydrate, which disrupts the functional primary cilia. Thus, treatment resulted in
hyperactivity of the Hh signaling pathway, as well as cellular changes that could
promote tumor growth. Primary cilia functions to inhibit Hh signaling in
neoplastic chondrocytes. The activation of Hh signaling is sufficient to induce
benign cartilage tumors without another oncogenic initiating event. Moreover, as 
primary cilia suppress Hh pathway activation in chondrosarcoma, cellular
mechanisms inhibiting proper cilia function may be important in maintaining the
neoplastic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3898120
PMID: 23246966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Mar;34(3):550-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs375. Epub 2012 Dec
7.

Cathepsin B and uPAR regulate self-renewal of glioma-initiating cells through
GLI-regulated Sox2 and Bmi1 expression.

Gopinath S(1), Malla R, Alapati K, Gorantla B, Gujrati M, Dinh DH, Rao JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology & Pharmacology, University of Illinois College of
Medicine at Peoria, One Illini Drive, Peoria, IL 61656, USA.

Cancer-initiating cells comprise a heterogeneous population of undifferentiated
cells with the capacity for self-renewal and high proliferative potential. We
investigated the role of uPAR and cathepsin B in the maintenance of stem cell
nature in glioma-initiating cells (GICs). Simultaneous knockdown of uPAR and
cathepsin B significantly reduced the expression of CD133, Nestin, Sox2 and Bmi1 
at the protein level and GLI1 and GLI2 at the messenger RNA level. Also,
knockdown of uPAR and cathepsin B resulted in a reduction in the number of GICs
as well as sphere size. These changes are mediated by Sox2 and Bmi1, downstream
of hedgehog signaling. Addition of cyclopamine reduced the expression of Sox2 and
Bmi1 along with GLI1 and GLI2 expression, induced differentiation and reduced
subsphere formation of GICs thereby indicating that hedgehog signaling acts
upstream of Sox2 and Bmi1. Further confirmation was obtained from increased
luciferase expression under the control of a GLI-bound Sox2 and Bmi1 luciferase
promoter. Simultaneous knockdown of uPAR and cathepsin B also reduced the
expression of Nestin Sox2 and Bmi1 in vivo. Thus, our study highlights the
importance of uPAR and cathepsin B in the regulation of malignant stem cell
self-renewal through hedgehog components, Bmi1 and Sox2.

PMCID: PMC3581601
PMID: 23222817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 2;33(1):65-73. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.544. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

MEK1-RSK2 contributes to Hedgehog signaling by stabilizing GLI2 transcription
factor and inhibiting ubiquitination.

Liu Z(1), Li T(2), Reinhold MI(3), Naski MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA [2] Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Biology,
College of Chemistry and Life Sciences, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua,
China. (3)1] Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center
at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA [2] Department of Physician Assistant
Studies, Grand Valley State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA. (4)1] Department
of Pathology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San
Antonio, TX, USA [2] Department of Pathology, St Mary's Health Care, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA.

The transcription factor GLI2 has an important role in the transduction of
Hedgehog signaling and thereby regulates tumorigenesis in a wide variety of human
tumors. However, the mechanisms controlling GLI2 protein expression and
stabilization are incompletely understood. In this study, we show that the
mitogen-activated protein kinase MEK1 modulates GLI2 both at the mRNA and protein
level. Constitutively activated MEK1 prolonged the half-life of GLI2 and
increased its nuclear translocation, accompanied by attenuated ubiquitination of 
GLI2 protein. RSK2, a protein kinase lying downstream of MEK-ERK cascade,
mimicked the effect of MEK on GLI2 stabilization. MEK1 and RSK2 failed to augment
the half-life of GLI2 lacking GSK-3ß phosphorylation sites, indicating that
MEK-RSK stabilizes GLI2 by controlling targeting GSK-3ß-mediated phosphorylation 
and ubiquitination of GLI2. The significance of MEK-RSK stabilization was
demonstrated in experiments showing that activation of MEK-RSK paralleled higher 
protein level of GLI2 in several multiple myelomas (MM) cells relative to normal 
B cells. Moreover, combined treatment with RSK and GLI inhibitors led to an
enhanced apoptosis of MM cells. Thus, our results indicate that MEK-RSK cascade
positively regulates GLI2 stabilization and represses its degradation via
inhibiting GSK-3ß-dependent phosphorylation and ubiquitination of GLI2.

PMID: 23208494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Mar 1;22(5):1005-16. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds505. Epub 2012 Nov
30.

Hedgehog regulates Norrie disease protein to drive neural progenitor
self-renewal.

McNeill B(1), Mazerolle C, Bassett EA, Mears AJ, Ringuette R, Lagali P, Picketts 
DJ, Paes K, Rice D, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ont. K1H 8L6,
Canada.

Norrie disease (ND) is a congenital disorder characterized by retinal
hypovascularization and cognitive delay. ND has been linked to mutations in
'Norrie Disease Protein' (Ndp), which encodes the secreted protein Norrin. Norrin
functions as a secreted angiogenic factor, although its role in neural
development has not been assessed. Here, we show that Ndp expression is initiated
in retinal progenitors in response to Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, which induces Gli2
binding to the Ndp promoter. Using a combination of genetic epistasis and acute
RNAi-knockdown approaches, we show that Ndp is required downstream of Hh
activation to induce retinal progenitor proliferation in the retina. Strikingly, 
Ndp regulates the rate of cell-cycle re-entry and not cell-cycle kinetics,
thereby uncoupling the self-renewal and cell-cycle progression functions of Hh.
Taken together, we have uncovered a cell autonomous function for Ndp in retinal
progenitor proliferation that is independent of its function in the retinal
vasculature, which could explain the neural defects associated with ND.

PMID: 23201751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Lett. 2013 Mar 1;330(1):22-32. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.11.018. Epub
2012 Nov 28.

GANT-61 inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cell growth in vitro and in NOD/SCID/IL2R
gamma null mice xenograft.

Fu J(1), Rodova M, Roy SK, Sharma J, Singh KP, Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Multiple lines of evidence suggest that the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling
pathway is aberrantly reactivated in pancreatic cancer stem cells (CSCs). The
objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which
GANT-61 (Gli transcription factor inhibitor) regulates stem cell characteristics 
and tumor growth. Effects of GANT-61 on CSC's viability, spheroid formation,
apoptosis, DNA-binding and transcriptional activities, and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) were measured. Humanized NOD/SCID/IL2R gamma(null) mice were
used to examine the effects of GANT-61 on CSC's tumor growth. GANT-61 inhibited
cell viability, spheroid formation, and Gli-DNA binding and transcriptional
activities, and induced apoptosis by activation of caspase-3 and cleavage of
Poly-ADP ribose Polymerase (PARP). GANT-61 increased the expression of
TRAIL-R1/DR4, TRAIL-R2/DR5 and Fas, and decreased expression of PDGFRa and Bcl-2.
GANT-61 also suppressed EMT by up-regulating E-cadherin and inhibiting N-cadherin
and transcription factors Snail, Slug and Zeb1. In addition, GANT-61 inhibited
pluripotency maintaining factors Nanog, Oct4, Sox-2 and cMyc. Suppression of both
Gli1 plus Gli2 by shRNA mimicked the changes in cell viability, spheroid
formation, apoptosis and gene expression observed in GANT-61-treated pancreatic
CSCs. Furthermore, GANT-61 inhibited CSC tumor growth which was associated with
up-regulation of DR4 and DR5 expression, and suppression of Gli1, Gli2, Bcl-2,
CCND2 and Zeb1 expression in tumor tissues derived from NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3> null mice.
Our data highlight the importance of Shh pathway for self-renewal and metastasis 
of pancreatic CSCs, and also suggest Gli as a therapeutic target for pancreatic
cancer in eliminating CSCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4153855
PMID: 23200667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Radiat Res. 2013 Jan;179(1):69-75. doi: 10.1667/RR3091.1. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Hedgehog signaling regulates the repair response in mouse liver damaged by
irradiation.

Wang S(1), Hyun J, Youn B, Jung Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Pusan National University, Pusan, Korea.

Radiotherapy is commonly used in treating many kinds of cancers that cannot be
cured by other therapeutic strategies. However, radiation-induced fibrosis in the
treatment of intrahepatic cancer is a major obstacle. Hedgehog pathway is known
to regulate the fibrotic process and proliferation of progenitor cells. Hedgehog 
ligands act as a profibrotic factor and hedgehog-responsive cells undergo
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), eventually contributing to the
fibrogenic process. Herein, we investigated whether the hedgehog pathway was
associated with radiation-induced hepatic fibrosis. Female mice were irradiated
with a single dose of 20 Gy and were sacrificed 1 week postirradiation, to obtain
the livers for biochemical and histological analysis. Hematoxylin and eosin and
Sirius Red staining were used in evaluating liver morphology and fibrosis,
respectively. Immunochemical staining for active caspase 3 and CD44 was used to
examine the repair response of the irradiated livers. Immunoblot analysis was
performed to detect the expression of hedgehog molecules and fibrogenic markers. 
Fat accumulation in hepatocytes and increased apoptosis were observed in liver
sections from mice treated with radiation. Expression of hedgehog ligand, Indian 
hedgehog, and hedgehog target gene, Gli2, were significantly up-regulated in the 
liver of mice treated with radiation. Levels of transforming growth factor-ß
(inducer of fibrosis) and a-smooth muscle actin (marker of myofibroblastic
hepatic stellate cells) were also greatly increased in the damaged liver compared
to the normal liver. The EMT marker, laminin-ß3, showed a great increase, whereas
EMT inhibitor, bmp7, was significantly decreased in mouse liver postirradiation. 
Furthermore, CD44-positive progenitors were shown to accumulated in the injured
liver. These results suggest that increased expression of hedgehog signaling
promotes proliferation of myofibroblastic hepatic stellate cells and progenitors,
and thereby contributes to the repair response after irradiation.

PMID: 23181588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cancer Lett. 2013 Feb 28;329(2):228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.11.005. Epub
2012 Nov 23.

MAP3K10 promotes the proliferation and decreases the sensitivity of pancreatic
cancer cells to gemcitabine by upregulating Gli-1 and Gli-2.

An Y(1), Cai B, Chen J, Lv N, Yao J, Xue X, Tu M, Tang D, Wei J, Jiang K, Wu J,
Li Q, Gao W, Miao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is among the most lethal human
malignancies and is regulated by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Recently,
MAP3K10 has been shown to regulate Shh signaling, suggesting a role for MAP3K10
in the tumorigenesis of PDAC. We determined the expression status of MAP3K10 in
PDAC tissues and cell lines, and analyzed the viability and cell proliferation of
PDAC cells with an overexpression or knockdown of MAP3K10 in vitro. MAP3K10 was
upregulated in PDAC tissues and cell lines. Overexpression of MAP3K10 promoted
the proliferation and decreased the gemcitabine sensitivity of pancreatic cancer 
cells. In contrast, knockdown of MAP3K10 significantly decreased cell
proliferation and sensitized cells to gemcitabine. However, neither
overexpression nor knockdown of MAP3K10 affected cell migration. Moreover,
overexpression of MAP3K10 resulted in upregulation of Gli-1 and Gli-2 in PDAC
cells. Our results indicate a novel and important role for MAP3K10 in the
proliferation and chemoresistance of PDAC. Our study suggests that targeting
MAP3K10 is a potential strategy for the development of alternative therapies for 
pancreatic cancers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Neuron. 2012 Nov 21;76(4):735-49. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.09.017.

14-3-3 proteins regulate a cell-intrinsic switch from sonic hedgehog-mediated
commissural axon attraction to repulsion after midline crossing.

Yam PT(1), Kent CB, Morin S, Farmer WT, Alchini R, Lepelletier L, Colman DR,
Tessier-Lavigne M, Fournier AE, Charron F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Neural Development, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Axons must switch responsiveness to guidance cues during development for correct 
pathfinding. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) attracts spinal cord commissural axons
ventrally toward the floorplate. We show that after crossing the floorplate,
commissural axons switch their response to Shh from attraction to repulsion, so
that they are repelled anteriorly by a posterior-high/anterior-low Shh gradient
along the longitudinal axis. This switch is recapitulated in vitro with
dissociated commissural neurons as they age, indicating that the switch is
intrinsic and time dependent. 14-3-3 protein inhibition converted Shh-mediated
repulsion of aged dissociated neurons to attraction and prevented the correct
anterior turn of postcrossing commissural axons in vivo, an effect mediated
through PKA. Conversely, overexpression of 14-3-3 proteins was sufficient to
drive the switch from Shh-mediated attraction to repulsion both in vitro and
in vivo. Therefore, we identify a 14-3-3 protein-dependent mechanism for a
cell-intrinsic temporal switch in the polarity of axon turning responses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23177959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050193. Epub 2012 Nov 16.

Antagonistic and cooperative actions of Kif7 and Sufu define graded intracellular
Gli activities in Hedgehog signaling.

Law KK(1), Makino S, Mo R, Zhang X, Puviindran V, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Graded Hedgehog (Hh) signaling governs the balance of Gli transcriptional
activators and repressors to specify diverse ventral cell fates in the spinal
cord. It remains unclear how distinct intracellular Gli activity is generated.
Here, we demonstrate that Sufu acts universally as a negative regulator of Hh
signaling, whereas Kif7 inhibits Gli activity in cooperation with, and
independent of, Sufu. Together, they deter naïve precursors from acquiring
increasingly ventral identity. We show that Kif7 is also required to establish
high intracellular Gli activity by antagonizing the Sufu-inhibition of Gli2.
Strikingly, by abolishing the negative regulatory action of Sufu, diverse ventral
cell fates can be specified in the absence of extracellular Hh signaling. These
data suggest that Sufu is the primary regulator of graded Hh signaling and
establish that the antagonistic and cooperative actions of Kif7 and Sufu are
responsible for setting up distinct Gli activity in ventral cell fate
specification.

PMCID: PMC3500354
PMID: 23166838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Exp Dermatol. 2012 Nov;21(11):847-52. doi: 10.1111/exd.12016.

Protein kinase A activation inhibits oncogenic Sonic hedgehog signalling and
suppresses basal cell carcinoma of the skin.

Makinodan E(1), Marneros AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Cutaneous Biology Research 
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Basal cell carcinoma of the skin (BCC) is caused by constitutive activation of
the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway, mainly through mutations either in the Shh
receptor Patched (PTCH) or in its co-receptor Smoothened (Smo). Inhibitors of
this pathway that are currently in clinical trials inhibit Smo. However,
mutations in Smo can result in resistance to these inhibitors. To target most
BCCs and avoid acquired resistance because of Smo mutations, inhibiting the
Shh-pathway downstream of Smo is critical. Attractive downstream targets would be
at the level of Gli proteins, the transcriptional activators of this pathway in
BCCs. Previously it has been shown that Gli1 and Gli2, when phosphorylated by
protein kinase A (PKA), are targeted for proteosomal degradation. Here we show
that PKA activation via the cAMP agonist forskolin is sufficient to completely
abolish oncogenic Smo activity in vitro. In an inducible BCC mouse model due to a
Smo mutation that confers resistance to current Smo inhibitors, topical forskolin
treatment significantly reduced Gli1 mRNA levels and resulted in strongly
suppressed BCC tumor growth. Our data show that forskolin inhibits the growth of 
even those BCCs that are resistant to Smo inhibitors and provide a
proof-of-principle framework for the development of topically applied human
skin-permeable novel pharmacologic inhibitors of oncogenic Shh-signaling through 
PKA activation.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23163650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Nat Commun. 2012;3:1200. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2212.

The Hedgehog signalling pathway regulates autophagy.

Jimenez-Sanchez M(1), Menzies FM, Chang YY, Simecek N, Neufeld TP, Rubinsztein
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY,
UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;14(1):3.

Autophagy is a highly conserved degradative process that removes damaged or
unnecessary proteins and organelles, and recycles cytoplasmic contents during
starvation. Autophagy is essential in physiological processes such as embryonic
development but how autophagy is regulated by canonical developmental pathways is
unclear. Here we show that the Hedgehog signalling pathway inhibits autophagosome
synthesis, both in basal and in autophagy-induced conditions. This mechanism is
conserved in mammalian cells and in Drosophila, and requires the orthologous
transcription factors Gli2 and Ci, respectively. Furthermore, we identify that
activation of the Hedgehog pathway reduces PERK levels, concomitant with a
decrease in phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a, suggesting a novel target of this pathway and providing a
possible link between Hedgehog signalling and autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3514496
PMID: 23149744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Oncogene. 2013 Oct;32(40):4737-47. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.502. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

WIP1 phosphatase modulates the Hedgehog signaling by enhancing GLI1 function.

Pandolfi S(1), Montagnani V, Penachioni JY, Vinci MC, Olivito B, Borgognoni L,
Stecca B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori (CRL-ITT), Florence, Italy.

The Hedgehog-GLI (HH-GLI) signaling plays a critical role in controlling growth
and tissue patterning during embryogenesis and is implicated in a variety of
human malignancies, including those of the skin. Phosphorylation events have been
shown to regulate the activity of the GLI transcription factors, the final
effectors of the HH-GLI signaling pathway. Here, we show that WIP1 (or PPM1D), an
oncogenic phosphatase amplified/overexpressed in several types of human cancer,
is a positive modulator of the HH signaling. Mechanistically, WIP1 enhances the
function of GLI1 by increasing its transcriptional activity, nuclear localization
and protein stability, but not of GLI2 nor GLI3. We also find that WIP1 and GLI1 
are in a complex. Modulation of the transcriptional activity of GLI1 by WIP1
depends on the latter's phosphatase activity and, remarkably, does not require
p53, a known WIP1 target. Functionally, we find that WIP1 is required for
melanoma and breast cancer cell proliferation and self-renewal in vitro and
melanoma xenograft growth induced by activation of the HH signaling.
Pharmacological blockade of the HH pathway with the SMOOTHENED antagonist
cyclopamine acts synergistically with inhibition of WIP1 in reducing growth of
melanoma and breast cancer cells in vitro. Overall, our data uncover a role for
WIP1 in modulating the activity of GLI1 and in sustaining cancer cell growth and 
cancer stem cell self-renewal induced by activation of the HH pathway. These
findings open a novel therapeutic approach for human melanomas and, possibly,
other cancer types expressing WIP1 and with activated HH pathway.

PMID: 23146903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jan;373(1-2):217-27. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1493-6. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

Sulforaphane regulates self-renewal of pancreatic cancer stem cells through the
modulation of Sonic hedgehog-GLI pathway.

Li SH(1), Fu J, Watkins DN, Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Sulforaphane (SFN), a component of dietary cruciferous vegetables has been
characterized for its anti-proliferative properties. We have recently
demonstrated that pancreatic CSCs display activation of sonic hedgehog pathway
which are fundamental drivers of stem cell renewal, and SFN inhibits the
self-renewal of pancreatic CSCs in vitro. Consistent with these observations, we 
sought to determine the chemopreventive potential of SFN in an in vivo setting.
We show here for the first time that sulforaphane treatment resulted in a
significant reduction in the tumor growth of orthotopically implanted primary
pancreatic CSCs isolated from human pancreatic tumors into the pancreas of
NOD/SCID/IL2Rgamma mice, which is mediated through the modulation of Sonic
hedgehog-GLI signaling. Hedgehog pathway blockade by SFN at a dose of 20 mg/kg
resulted in a 45 % reduction in growth of pancreatic cancer tumors and reduced
expression of Shh pathway components, Smo, Gli 1, and Gli 2 in mouse tissues.
Further, SFN inhibited the expression of pluripotency maintaining transcription
factors Nanog and Oct-4 and angiogenic markers VEGF and PDGFRa which are
downstream targets of Gli transcription. Furthermore, SFN treatment resulted in a
significant reduction in EMT markers Zeb-1, which correlated with increase in
E-Cadherin expression suggesting the blockade of signaling involved in early
metastasis. Interestingly, SFN downregulated the expression of Bcl-2 and XIAP to 
induce apoptosis. These data demonstrate that, at a tolerable dose, inhibition of
Shh pathway by SFN results in marked reduction in EMT, metastatic, angiogenic
markers with significant inhibition in tumor growth in mice. Since aberrant Shh
signaling occurs in pancreatic tumorigenesis, therapeutics that target Shh
pathway may improve the outcomes of patients with pancreatic cancer by targeting 
CSCs, thus suggesting the use of sulforaphane to further improve preventive and
therapeutic approaches in patients with this devastating disease.

PMID: 23129257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Ann Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;77(1):31-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2012.00734.x. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

Anorectal atresia and variants at predicted regulatory sites in candidate genes.

Carter TC(1), Kay DM, Browne ML, Liu A, Romitti PA, Kuehn D, Conley MR, Caggana
M, Druschel CM, Brody LC, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Statistics, and Prevention Research, Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda 20892,
MD, USA.

Anorectal atresia is a serious birth defect of largely unknown etiology but
candidate genes have been identified in animal studies and human syndromes.
Because alterations in the activity of these genes might lead to anorectal
atresia, we selected 71 common variants predicted to be in transcription factor
binding sites, CpG windows, splice sites, and miRNA target sites of 25 candidate 
genes, and tested for their association with anorectal atresia. The study
population comprised 150 anorectal atresia cases and 623 control infants without 
major malformations. Variants predicted to affect transcription factor binding,
splicing, and DNA methylation in WNT3A, PCSK5, TCF4, MKKS, GLI2, HOXD12, and BMP4
were associated with anorectal atresia based on a nominal P value < 0.05. The
GLI2 and BMP4 variants are reported to be moderately associated with gene
expression changes (Spearman's rank correlation coefficients between -0.260 and
0.226). We did not find evidence for interaction between maternal pre-pregnancy
obesity and variants in MKKS, a gene previously associated with obesity, on the
risk of anorectal atresia. Our results for MKKS support previously suggested
associations with anorectal malformations. Our findings suggest that more
research is needed to determine whether altered GLI2 and BMP4 expression is
important in anorectal atresia in humans.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/University College London.

PMCID: PMC3535506
PMID: 23127126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Liver Int. 2013 Jan;33(1):149-61. doi: 10.1111/liv.12016. Epub 2012 Nov 1.

Macrophage-derived Hedgehog ligands promotes fibrogenic and angiogenic responses 
in human schistosomiasis mansoni.

Pereira TA(1), Xie G, Choi SS, Syn WK, Voieta I, Lu J, Chan IS, Swiderska M,
Amaral KB, Antunes CM, Secor WE, Witek RP, Lambertucci JR, Pereira FL, Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Dec;9(12):689.

BACKGROUND: Schistosomiasis mansoni is a major cause of portal fibrosis and
portal hypertension. The Hedgehog pathway regulates fibrogenic repair in some
types of liver injury.
AIMS: Determine if Hedgehog pathway activation occurs during fibrosis progression
in schistosomiasis and to determine if macrophage-related mechanisms are
involved.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to characterize the cells that generate
and respond to Hedgehog ligands in 28 liver biopsies from patients with different
grades of schistosomiasis fibrosis staged by ultrasound. Cultured macrophages
(RAW264.7 and primary rat Kupffer cells) and primary rat liver sinusoidal
endothelial cells (LSEC) were treated with schistosome egg antigen (SEA) and
evaluated using qRT-PCR. Inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway was used to
investigate its role in alternative activation of macrophages (M2) and vascular
tube formation.
RESULTS: Patients with schistosomiasis expressed more ligands (Shh and Ihh) and
target genes (Patched and Gli2) than healthy individuals. Activated LSEC and
myofibroblasts were Hedgehog responsive [Gli2(+)] and accumulated in parallel
with fibrosis stage (P < 0.05). Double IHC for Ihh/CD68 showed that Ihh(+) cells 
were macrophages. In vitro studies demonstrated that SEA-stimulated macrophages
to express Ihh and Shh mRNA (P < 0.05). Conditioned media from such macrophages
induced luciferase production by Shh-LightII cells (P < 0.001) and Hedgehog
inhibitors blocked this effect (P < 0.001). SEA-treated macrophages also
up-regulated their own expression of M2 markers, and Hh pathway inhibitors
abrogated this response (P < 0.01). Inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway in LSEC
blocked SEA-induced migration and tube formation.
CONCLUSION: SEA stimulates liver macrophages to produce Hh ligands, which promote
alternative activation of macrophages, fibrogenesis and vascular remodelling in
schistosomiasis.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3518740
PMID: 23121638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Sep;3(3):140-142. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

High Intellectual Function in Individuals with Mutation-Positive Microform
Holoprosencephaly.

Solomon BD(1), Pineda-Alvarez DE, Gropman AL, Willis MJ, Hadley DW, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, Naval Medical Center, San Diego, Calif., USA.

Holoprosencephaly is the most common malformation of the forebrain and typically 
results in severe neurocognitive impairment with accompanying midline facial
anomalies. Holoprosencephaly is heterogeneous and may be caused by chromosome
aberrations or environmental factors, occur in the context of a syndrome or be
due to heterozygous mutations in over 10 identified genes. The presence of these 
mutations may result in an extremely wide spectrum of severity, ranging from
brain malformations incompatible with life to individuals with normal brain
findings and subtle midline facial differences. Typically, clinicians regard
intellectual disability as a sign that a parent or relative of a severely
affected patient may be a mildly affected mutation 'carrier' with what is termed 
microform holoprosencephaly. Here we present 5 patients with clear phenotypic
signs of microform holoprosencephaly, all of whom have evidence of above-average 
intellectual function. In 4 of these 5 individuals, the molecular cause of
holoprosencephaly has been identified and includes mutations affecting SHH, SIX3,
GLI2, and FGF8. This report expands the phenotypic spectrum of holoprosencephaly 
and is important in the counseling of patient and affected families.

PMCID: PMC3473351
PMID: 23112757  [PubMed]


286. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048039. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Inflammation and Gli2 suppress gastrin gene expression in a murine model of
antral hyperplasia.

Saqui-Salces M(1), Covés-Datson E, Veniaminova NA, Waghray M, Syu LJ, Dlugosz AA,
Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States of America.

Chronic inflammation in the stomach can lead to gastric cancer. We previously
reported that gastrin-deficient (Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice develop bacterial overgrowth,
inflammatory infiltrate, increased Il-1ß expression, antral hyperplasia and
eventually antral tumors. Since Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is active in gastric
cancers but its role in precursor lesions is poorly understood, we examined the
role of inflammation and Hh signaling in antral hyperplasia. LacZ reporter mice
for Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Gli1, and Gli2 expression bred onto the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B>
background revealed reduced Shh and Gli1 expression in the antra compared to wild
type controls (WT). Gli2 expression in the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> corpus was unchanged. However 
in the hyperplastic Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antra, Gli2 expression increased in both the
mesenchyme and epithelium, whereas expression in WT mice remained exclusively
mesenchymal. These observations suggested that Gli2 is differentially regulated
in the hyperplastic Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antrum versus the corpus and by a Shh
ligand-independent mechanism. Moreover, the proinflammatory cytokines Il-1ß and
Il-11, which promote gastric epithelial proliferation, were increased in the
Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> stomach along with Inf<U+03B3>. To test if inflammation could account for
elevated epithelial Gli2 expression in the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antra, the human gastric cell 
line AGS was treated with IL-1ß and was found to increase GLI2 but decrease GLI1 
levels. IL-1ß also repressed human GAST gene expression. Indeed, GLI2 but not
GLI1 or GLI3 expression repressed gastrin luciferase reporter activity by ~50
percent. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation of GLI2 in AGS cells confirmed
that GLI2 directly binds to the GAST promoter. Using a mouse model of
constitutively active epithelial GLI2 expression, we found that activated GLI2
repressed Gast expression but induced Il-1ß gene expression and proliferation in 
the gastric antrum, along with a reduction of the number of G-cells. In summary, 
epithelial Gli2 expression was sufficient to stimulate Il-1ß expression, repress 
Gast gene expression and increase proliferation, leading to antral hyperplasia.

PMCID: PMC3480483
PMID: 23110168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Oncotarget. 2012 Aug;3(8):854-68. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Regulation of DNA damage following termination of Hedgehog (HH) survival
signaling at the level of the GLI genes in human colon cancer.

Agyeman A(1), Mazumdar T, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of the Hedgehog (HH) signaling response is mediated by
GLI genes (GLI1, GLI2) downstream of SMO, that are also activated by oncogenic
signaling pathways. We have demonstrated the importance of targeting GLI
downstream of SMO in the induction of cell death in human colon carcinoma cells. 
In HT29 cells inhibition of GLI1/GLI2 by the small molecule inhibitor GANT61
induced DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and activation of ATM, MDC1 and NBS1;
<U+03B3>H2AX and MDC1, NBS1 and MDC1 co-localized in nuclear foci. Early activation of
ATM was decreased by 24 hr, when p-NBS1(Ser343), activated by ATM, was
significantly reduced in cell extracts. Bound <U+03B3>H2AX was detected in isolated
chromatin fractions or nuclei during DNA damage but not during DNA repair. MDC1
was tightly bound to chromatin at 32 hr as cells accumulated in early S-phase
prior to becoming subG1, and during DNA repair. Limited binding of NBS1 was
detected at all times during DNA damage but was strongly bound during DNA repair.
Transient overexpression of NBS1 protected HT29 cells from GANT61-induced cell
death, while knockdown of H2AX by H2AXshRNA delayed DNA damage signaling. Data
demonstrate following GLI1/GLI2 inhibition: 1) induction of DNA damage in cells
that are also resistant to SMO inhibitors, 2) dynamic interactions between <U+03B3>H2AX,
MDC1 and NBS1 in single cell nuclei and in isolated chromatin fractions, 3)
expression and chromatin binding properties of key mediator proteins that mark
DNA damage or DNA repair, and 4) the importance of NBS1 in the DNA damage
response mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3478462
PMID: 23097684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Gastroenterology. 2013 Jan;144(1):134-144.e6. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.09.061. 
Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Inactivation of Patched1 in mice leads to development of gastrointestinal
stromal-like tumors that express Pdgfra but not kit.

Pelczar P(1), Zibat A, van Dop WA, Heijmans J, Bleckmann A, Gruber W, Nitzki F,
Uhmann A, Guijarro MV, Hernando E, Dittmann K, Wienands J, Dressel R, Wojnowski
L, Binder C, Taguchi T, Beissbarth T, Hogendoorn PC, Antonescu CR, Rubin BP,
Schulz-Schaeffer W, Aberger F, van den Brink GR, Hahn H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: A fraction of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) cells
overexpress the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)A, although most
overexpress KIT. It is not known if this is because these receptor tyrosine
kinases have complementary oncogenic potential, or because of heterogeneity in
the cellular origin of GIST. Little also is known about why Hedgehog (HH)
signaling is activated in some GIST. HH binds to and inactivates the receptor
protein patched homolog (PTCH).
METHODS: Ptch was conditionally inactivated in mice (to achieve constitutive HH
signaling) using a Cre recombinase regulated by the lysozyme M promoter.
Cre-expressing cells were traced using R26R-LacZ reporter mice. Tumors were
characterized by in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, immunoblot, and
quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analyses. Cell
transformation was assessed by soft agar assay.
RESULTS: Loss of Ptch from lysozyme M-expressing cells resulted in the
development of tumors of GIST-like localization and histology; these were reduced
when mice were given imatinib, a drug that targets KIT and PDGFRA. The Hh
signaling pathway was activated in the tumor cells, and Pdgfra, but not Kit, was 
overexpressed and activated. Lineage tracing revealed that Cre-expressing
intestinal cells were Kit-negative. These cells sometimes expressed Pdgfra and
were located near Kit-positive interstitial cells of Cajal. In contrast to KIT,
activation of PDGFRA increased anchorage-independent proliferation and was
required for tumor formation in mice by cells with activated HH signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Inactivation of Ptch in mice leads to formation of GIST-like tumors 
that express Pdgfra, but not Kit. Activation of Pdgfra signaling appears to
facilitate tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4231777
PMID: 23041331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Development. 2012 Nov;139(22):4152-61. doi: 10.1242/dev.081190. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Kif7 regulates Gli2 through Sufu-dependent and -independent functions during skin
development and tumorigenesis.

Li ZJ(1), Nieuwenhuis E, Nien W, Zhang X, Zhang J, Puviindran V, Wainwright BJ,
Kim PC, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Abnormal activation of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling leads to basal cell carcinoma
(BCC) of the skin, the most common human cancer. Gli2, the major transcriptional 
activator of Hh signaling, is essential for hair follicle development and its
overexpression in epidermis induces BCC formation and maintains tumor growth.
Despite its importance in skin development and tumorigenesis, little is known
about the molecular regulation of Gli2. Sufu and Kif7 are two evolutionarily
conserved regulators of Gli transcription factors. Here, we show that Sufu and
Kif7 regulate Gli2 through distinct mechanisms in keratinocytes. Sufu restricts
the activity of Gli2 through cytoplasmic sequestration. Kif7 possesses
Sufu-dependent and -independent regulatory functions in Hh signaling: while it
promotes Hh pathway activity through the dissociation of Sufu-Gli2 complex, it
also contributes to the repression of Hh target genes in the absence of Sufu.
Deletion of both Sufu and Kif7 in embryonic skin leads to complete loss of
follicular fate. Importantly, although inactivation of Sufu or Kif7 alone in
adult epidermis cannot promote BCC formation, their simultaneous deletion induces
BCC. These studies establish Sufu and Kif7 as crucial components in the
regulation of Gli2 localization and activity, and illustrate their overlapping
functions in skin development and tumor suppression.

PMID: 23034632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Genome Res. 2013 Jan;23(1):23-33. doi: 10.1101/gr.141887.112. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Small noncoding differentially methylated copy-number variants, including lncRNA 
genes, cause a lethal lung developmental disorder.

Szafranski P(1), Dharmadhikari AV, Brosens E, Gurha P, Kolodziejska KE, Zhishuo
O, Dittwald P, Majewski T, Mohan KN, Chen B, Person RE, Tibboel D, de Klein A,
Pinner J, Chopra M, Malcolm G, Peters G, Arbuckle S, Guiang SF 3rd, Hustead VA,
Jessurun J, Hirsch R, Witte DP, Maystadt I, Sebire N, Fisher R, Langston C, Sen
P, Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

An unanticipated and tremendous amount of the noncoding sequence of the human
genome is transcribed. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) constitute a significant
fraction of non-protein-coding transcripts; however, their functions remain
enigmatic. We demonstrate that deletions of a small noncoding differentially
methylated region at 16q24.1, including lncRNA genes, cause a lethal lung
developmental disorder, alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of
pulmonary veins (ACD/MPV), with parent-of-origin effects. We identify overlapping
deletions 250 kb upstream of FOXF1 in nine patients with ACD/MPV that arose de
novo specifically on the maternally inherited chromosome and delete lung-specific
lncRNA genes. These deletions define a distant cis-regulatory region that
harbors, besides lncRNA genes, also a differentially methylated CpG island, binds
GLI2 depending on the methylation status of this CpG island, and physically
interacts with and up-regulates the FOXF1 promoter. We suggest that
lung-transcribed 16q24.1 lncRNAs may contribute to long-range regulation of FOXF1
by GLI2 and other transcription factors. Perturbation of lncRNA-mediated
chromatin interactions may, in general, be responsible for position effect
phenomena and potentially cause many disorders of human development.

PMCID: PMC3530681
PMID: 23034409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046008. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Gradual loss of ACTH due to a novel mutation in LHX4: comprehensive mutation
screening in Japanese patients with congenital hypopituitarism.

Takagi M(1), Ishii T, Inokuchi M, Amano N, Narumi S, Asakura Y, Muroya K,
Hasegawa Y, Adachi M, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine Tokyo, Japan.

Mutations in transcription factors genes, which are well regulated spatially and 
temporally in the pituitary gland, result in congenital hypopituitarism (CH) in
humans. The prevalence of CH attributable to transcription factor mutations
appears to be rare and varies among populations.This study aimed to define the
prevalence of CH in terms of nine CH-associated genes among Japanese patients. We
enrolled 91 Japanese CH patients for DNA sequencing of POU1F1, PROP1, HESX1,
LHX3, LHX4, SOX2, SOX3, OTX2, and GLI2. Additionally, gene copy numbers for
POU1F1, PROP1, HESX1, LHX3, and LHX4 were examined by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification. The gene regulatory properties of mutant 
LHX4 proteins were characterized in vitro. We identified two novel heterozygous
LHX4 mutations, namely c.249-1G>A, p.V75I, and one common POU1F1 mutation,
p.R271W. The patient harboring the c.249-1G>A mutation exhibited isolated growth 
hormone deficiency at diagnosis and a gradual loss of ACTH, whereas the patient
with the p.V75I mutation exhibited multiple pituitary hormone deficiency. In
vitro experiments showed that both LHX4 mutations were associated with an
impairment of the transactivation capacities of POU1F1 andaGSU, without any
dominant-negative effects. The total mutation prevalence in Japanese CH patients 
was 3.3%. This study is the first to describe, a gradual loss of ACTH in a
patient carrying an LHX4 mutation. Careful monitoring of hypothalamic-pituitary
-adrenal function is recommended for CH patients with LHX4 mutations.

PMCID: PMC3454328
PMID: 23029363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45332. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045332. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Hedgehog pathway signaling regulates human colon carcinoma HT-29 epithelial cell 
line apoptosis and cytokine secretion.

Yoshimoto AN(1), Bernardazzi C, Carneiro AJ, Elia CC, Martinusso CA, Ventura GM, 
Castelo-Branco MT, de Souza HS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Multidisciplinar de Pesquisa, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is involved in embryogenesis and physiologic processes 
including cell survival and proliferation. We used the HT-29 and other human
colon carcinoma cell lines to investigate Hh signaling and biological functions
in colonic epithelial cells. HT-29 cells were cultured under different conditions
and exposed to various stimuli. The expression of Hh pathway components and
related genes and proteins were assessed by real-time PCR and immunofluorescence.
Viability, apoptosis and cell proliferation were measured by the MTT assay,
Annexin-V/7-AAD staining and BrdU uptake, respectively. Chemokines production was
measured by ELISA in culture supernatants. Indian and Sonic Hh mRNA levels and
the downstream transcription factors Gli-1 and Gli-2 increased following
treatment with Hh agonists and butyrate, but decreased upon exposure to
cyclopamine or GANT61. BMP4 and BMP7 expression increased after stimulation with 
Hh agonists. Gli-1 protein expression increased after Hh agonists and decreased
following cyclopamine. Exposure to Hh agonists promoted ß-catenin reduction and
subcellular redistribution. Levels of IL-8 and MCP-1 decreased upon exposure to
Hh agonists compared to Hh antagonists, LPS, IFN-<U+03B3> or EGF. Monocyte chemotaxis
decreased upon exposure to supernatants of HT-29 cells treated with Shh compared 
to Hh antagonists, LPS and IFN-<U+03B3>. Cellular incorporation of BrdU and cell
viability decreased following Hh blockade. Hh agonists abrogated the anti-CD95
induced apoptosis. Hh pathway is a key controller of colon cancer cells, as
demonstrated by its effect in dampening inflammatory signals and antagonizing
apoptosis. The differential expression of Hh components may underlie
abnormalities in the local immune response and in epithelial barrier integrity,
with potential homeostatic implications for the development of colonic
inflammation and malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3446889
PMID: 23028941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Dec 1;303(11):L978-90. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00184.2012. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Role of Sonic Hedgehog in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Bolaños AL(1), Milla CM, Lira JC, Ramírez R, Checa M, Barrera L, García-Alvarez
J, Carbajal V, Becerril C, Gaxiola M, Pardo A, Selman M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, Mexico
City, Mexico.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Mar 15;304(6):L391-3.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive and lethal disease of
unknown etiology and uncertain pathogenic mechanisms. Recent studies indicate
that the pathogenesis of the disease may involve the abnormal expression of
certain developmental pathways. Here we evaluated the expression of Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH), Patched-1, Smoothened, and transcription factors
glioma-associated oncogene homolog (GLI)1 and GLI2 by RT-PCR, as well as their
localization in IPF and normal lungs by immunohistochemistry. The effects of SHH 
on fibroblast proliferation, migration, collagen and fibronectin production, and 
apoptosis were analyzed by WST-1, Boyden chamber chemotaxis, RT-PCR, Sircol, and 
annexin V-propidium iodide binding assays, respectively. Our results showed that 
all the main components of the Sonic signaling pathway were overexpressed in IPF 
lungs. With the exception of Smoothened, they were also upregulated in IPF
fibroblasts. SHH and GLI2 localized to epithelial cells, whereas Patched-1,
Smoothened, and GLI1 were observed mainly in fibroblasts and inflammatory cells. 
No staining was detected in normal lungs. Recombinant SHH increased fibroblast
proliferation (P < 0.05), collagen synthesis, (2.5 ± 0.2 vs. 4.5 ± 1.0 µg of
collagen/ml; P < 0.05), fibronectin expression (2-3-fold over control), and
migration (190.3 ± 12.4% over control, P < 0.05). No effect was observed on
a-smooth muscle actin expression. SHH protected lung fibroblasts from
TNF-a/IFN-<U+03B3>/Fas-induced apoptosis (14.5 ± 3.2% vs. 37.3 ± 7.2%, P < 0.0001). This
protection was accompanied by modifications in several apoptosis-related
proteins, including increased expression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis.
These findings indicate that the SHH pathway is activated in IPF lungs and that
SHH may contribute to IPF pathogenesis by increasing the proliferation,
migration, extracellular matrix production, and survival of fibroblasts.

PMID: 23023967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Dev Biol. 2012 Dec 1;372(1):28-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.09.005. Epub 2012
Sep 20.

Intraepithelial paracrine Hedgehog signaling induces the expansion of ciliated
cells that express diverse progenitor cell markers in the basal epithelium of the
mouse mammary gland.

García-Zaragoza E(1), Pérez-Tavarez R, Ballester A, Lafarga V, Jiménez-Reinoso A,
Ramírez A, Murillas R, Gallego MI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammary Pathology, Centro Nacional de Microbiología, Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Carretera de Majadahonda a Pozuelo Km 2, Majadahonda 28220, 
Madrid, Spain.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway regulates embryo patterning and progenitor cell
homeostasis in adult tissues, including epidermal appendages. A role for the Hh
pathway in mammary biology and breast cancer has also been suggested. The aim of 
this study was to analyze Hh signaling in the mouse mammary gland through the
generation of transgenic mice that express Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) under the control
of the mammary-specific WAP promoter (WAP-Shh mice). To identify mammary cells
capable of activating the Hh pathway we bred WAP-Shh mice to Ptch1-lacZ knock-in 
mice, in which the expression of a nuclear-targeted ß-galactosidase reporter
protein (ß-gal) is driven by the endogenous Patched 1 gene regulatory region.
After two cycles of induction of transgenic Shh expression, we detected areas of 
X-gal reactivity. Immunohistochemical analysis showed nuclear ß-gal staining in
clusters of mammary cells in WAP-Shh/Ptch1-lacZ bitransgenic mice. These were
epithelial cells present in a basal location of displastic ducts and alveoli,
adjacent to Shh-expressing luminal cells, and overexpressed epithelial basal
markers keratin 5, 14 and 17 and transcription factor p63. Absence of smooth
muscle actin expression and a cuboidal morphology differentiated Hh-responding
cells from flat-shaped mature myoepithelial cells. Groups of cells expressing
stem cell markers integrin ß3 and keratins 6 and 15 were also detected within
Hh-responding areas. In addition, we found that Hh-responding cells in the
mammary glands of WAP-Shh/Ptch1-lacZ mice were ciliated and exhibited a low
proliferation rate. Our data show the paracrine nature of hedgehog signaling in
the epithelial compartment of the mouse mammary gland, where a subset of basal
cells that express mammary progenitor cell markers and exhibit primary cilia is
expanded in response to secretory epithelium-derived Shh.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Orthop Res. 2013 Mar;31(3):502-9. doi: 10.1002/jor.22230. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

Targeting hedgehog-GLI-2 pathway in osteosarcoma.

Yang W(1), Liu X, Choy E, Mankin H, Hornicek FJ, Duan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Biology Laboratory, Center for Sarcoma and Connective Tissue Oncology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02114, USA.

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignant tumor of bone. Patients with
localized osteosarcoma are routinely treated with chemotherapy and surgery.
However, many of these patients eventually relapse after these treatments. In
such cases, there are limited treatment options for these patients and most will 
eventually die with metastatic disease. Therefore, it is imperative to identify
better therapeutic strategies. Hedgehog-GLI is responsible for the development of
vertebrate embryonic and tumorigenesis. Specifically, the transcription factor,
GLI-2, plays a key role in development of normal prostate. Aberrant activation of
GLI-2 is correlated with various malignancies. We observe that GLI-2 is highly
expressed in osteosarcoma cell lines, and this correlates with poor clinical
outcomes in patients. Knockdown of GLI-2 by siRNA decreases osteosarcoma cell
proliferation and viability, which eventually induces cell death as revealed in
both in 2D and 3D cultures. In addition, we notice that administration of GLI-2
siRNA can increase the sensitivity of osteosarcoma cells to chemotherapeutic
drugs. These findings suggest GLI-2 is required for osteosarcoma cell
proliferation and survival. GLI-2 may be exploited as a therapeutic target for
the treatment of osteosarcoma patients.

Copyright © 2012 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 22968906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2013 Apr;78(4):551-7. doi: 10.1111/cen.12044.

Relatively high frequency of non-synonymous GLI2 variants in patients with
congenital hypopituitarism without holoprosencephaly.

França MM(1), Jorge AA, Carvalho LR, Costalonga EF, Otto AP, Correa FA, Mendonca 
BB, Arnhold IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e
Genetica Molecular LIM/42, Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Hospital das Clinicas da
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: GLI2 is a downstream transcription factor in Sonic Hedgehog
signalling, acting early in ventral forebrain and pituitary development.
Heterozygous nonsense GLI2 mutations have been reported in patients with isolated
or combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), with or without
holoprosencephaly. The aim of this study was to screen for GLI2 mutations in a
large cohort of patients with congenital GH deficiency.
DESIGN AND PATIENTS: The GLI2 coding region of 41 patients with severe isolated
GH deficiency (IGHD) and 136 patients with CPHD was amplified by PCR using
intronic primers and sequenced. The frequency of GLI2 variants was verified in up
to 155 Brazilian controls and in the 1000 Genomes database. The consequences of
allelic variants were analysed by the Polyphen, SIFT, Mutationtaster and SNAP
prediction sites.
RESULTS: Eighteen different heterozygous non-synonymous GLI2 variants were
identified in 24 patients. Twenty-three patients had CPHD and one had IGHD. Two
patients had additional diabetes insipidus, indicating deficiencies of anterior
and posterior pituitary lobes. The posterior pituitary lobe on MRI was ectopic in
16, not visible in 4, normally placed in 2 and imaging was not available in two
patients, but there were no signs of holoprosencephaly. Sixteen GLI2 variants
were considered deleterious in at least one of the prediction sites.
CONCLUSIONS: A relatively high frequency of non-synonymous GLI2 variants was
identified in patients with congenital GH deficiency without other brain defects,
and most of these patients presented with CPHD and an ectopic posterior pituitary
lobe. In vitro functional assays may contribute to ascertain the deleterious
consequences of these variants.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22967285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2012;5(6):503-11. Epub 2012 Jul 29.

Morphoproteomics provides support for TGF-ß pathway signaling in the
osteoclastogenesis and immune dysregulation of osteolytic Langerhans cell
histiocytosis.

Alexandrescu S(1), Tatevian N, Czerniak BA, Covinsky MH, Burns NK, Brown RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas at Houston-Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) has a challenging and still unclear
pathogenesis. A body of literature points to impaired maturation of the lesional 
dendritic cells, and to immune dysregulation in the form of increased FoxP3
cells. Various cytokine abnormalities such as expression of transforming growth
factor (TGF)-ß have been reported, as well as abnormalities in lipid content in
LCH cells. Morphoproteomic techniques were applied to identify the signal
transduction pathways that could influence histogenesis and immune regulation in 
osteolytic LCH. Five pediatric cases of osteolytic LCH were examined, using
antibodies against CD1a, S100, CD68, CD8, FoxP3, phosphorylated (p)-STAT3
(Tyr705), protein kinase C (PKC)-a, phospholipase (PL)D1, fatty acid synthase
(FASN), and zinc finger protein, Gli2. Positive and negative controls were
performed. A FoxP3(+)/CD8(+) cell ratio was calculated by counting the FoxP3+ and
CD8+ cells in 10 high power fields for each case. There is induction of sonic
hedgehog (SHH) mediators consistent with TGF-ß signaling pathway through
Smad3-dependent activation of Gli2, findings supported by the plasmalemmal and
cytoplasmic expression of PKC-a and PLD1, and nuclear expression of Gli2, in
lesional cells. The FoxP3+/CD8+ cell ratio is increased, ranging from 1.7-7.94.
There is moderate cytoplasmic expression of FASN in most of the Langerhans cells,
a finding that supports previously published phospholipid abnormalities in LCH
and is consistent with PKC-a/PLD1/TGF-ß signaling. With our study, we strongly
suggest that the TGF-ß cell signaling pathway is a major player in the
pathogenesis of LCH, leading to non-canonical induction of nuclear Gli2
expression, thereby contributing to osteoclastogenesis in LCH histiocytes. It
could also cause a state of immune frustration in LCH, by inducing the
transformation of CD4(+)CD25(-) cells into CD4(+)/FoxP3(+) cells. This coincides 
with the clinical evidence of a response to thalidomide in patients with
osteolytic LCH, given its reported ability to reduce TGF-beta 1 and FoxP3 cells. 
Such TGF-ß signaling in osteoclastogenesis and immune dysregulation, and the
presence of FASN in the majority of cells, have additional therapeutic
implications for osteolytic LCH.

PMCID: PMC3430113
PMID: 22949932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Int J Cancer. 2013 Apr 1;132(7):1516-24. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27820. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Targeting the hedgehog signal transduction pathway at the level of GLI inhibits
neuroblastoma cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

Wickström M(1), Dyberg C, Shimokawa T, Milosevic J, Baryawno N, Fuskevåg OM,
Larsson R, Kogner P, Zaphiropoulos PG, Johnsen JI.

Author information: 
(1)Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Malin.Wickstrom@ki.se

Hedgehog (HH) signaling is an important regulator of embryogenesis that has been 
associated with the development of several types of cancer. HH signaling is
characterized by Smoothened (SMO)-dependent activation of the GLI transcription
factors, which regulate the expression of critical developmental genes.
Neuroblastoma, an embryonal tumor of the sympathetic nervous system, was recently
shown to express high levels of key molecules in this signaling cascade. Using
compounds blocking SMO (cyclopamine and SANT1) or GLI1/GLI2 (GANT61) activity
revealed that inhibition of HH signaling at the level of GLI was most effective
in reducing neuroblastoma growth. GANT61 sensitivity positively correlated to
GLI1 and negatively to MYCN expression in the neuroblastoma cell lines tested.
GANT61 downregulated GLI1, c-MYC, MYCN and Cyclin D1 expression and induced
apoptosis of neuroblastoma cells. The effects produced by GANT61 were mimicked by
GLI knockdown but not by SMO knockdown. Furthermore, GANT61 enhanced the effects 
of chemotherapeutic drugs used in the treatment of neuroblastoma in an additive
or synergistic manner and reduced the growth of established neuroblastoma
xenografts in nude mice. Taken together this study suggests that inhibition of HH
signaling is a highly relevant therapeutic target for high-risk neuroblastoma
lacking MYCN amplification and should be considered for clinical testing.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22949014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Nov;136(2):153-68. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.08.004.
Epub 2012 Aug 11.

Prevailing importance of the hedgehog signaling pathway and the potential for
treatment advancement in sarcoma.

Kelleher FC(1), Cain JE, Healy JM, Watkins DN, Thomas DM.

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Service, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 12 St. Andrew's Place,
A'Beckitt Street, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. fergalkelleher@hotmail.com

The hedgehog signaling pathway is important in embryogenesis and post natal
development. Constitutive activation of the pathway due to mutation of pathway
components occurs in ~25% of medulloblastomas and also in basal cell carcinomas. 
In many other malignancies the therapeutic role for hedgehog inhibition though
intriguing, based on preclinical data, is far from assured. Hedgehog inhibition
is not an established part of the treatment paradigm of sarcoma but the
scientific rationale for a possible benefit is compelling. In chondrosarcoma
there is evidence of hedgehog pathway activation and an ontologic comparison
between growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and different chondrosarcoma
subtypes. Immunostaining epiphyseal growth plate for Indian hedgehog is
particularly positive in the zone of pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes which
correlates ontologically with conventional chondrosarcoma. In Ewing sarcoma/PNET 
tumors the Gli1 transcription factor is a direct target of the EWS-FLI1
oncoprotein present in 85% of cases. In many cases of rhabdomyosarcomas there is 
increased expression of Gli1 (Ragazzini et al., 2004). Additionally, a third of
embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas have loss of Chr.9q22 that encompasses the patched
locus (Bridge et al., 2000). The potential to treat osteosarcoma by inhibition of
Gli2 and the role of the pathway in ovarian fibromas and other connective tissue 
tumors is also discussed (Nagao et al., 2011; Hirotsu et al., 2010). Emergence of
acquired secondary resistance to targeted therapeutics is an important issue that
is also relevant to hedgehog inhibition. In this context secondary resistance of 
medulloblastomas to treatment with a smoothened antagonist in two tumor mouse
models is examined.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40874. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040874. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

GLI2 regulates TGF-ß1 in human CD4+ T cells: implications in cancer and HIV
pathogenesis.

Furler RL(1), Uittenbogaart CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David E Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America.

Elevated levels of the immunoregulatory cytokine TGF-ß1 in cancer and HIV
infection have been linked to the suppression of protective immune responses. The
transcriptional regulation of TGF-ß1 is complex and still not completely
understood. We report here for the first time that the transcription factor GLI2 
regulates the expression of TGF-ß1 in human CD4(+) T cells. In silico screening
revealed five novel putative GLI binding sites in the human TGF-ß1 promoter. At
least two of these sites within the human TGF-ß1 promoter are regulated by the
GLI2 activator as knockdown of GLI2 in regulatory CD4(+)CD25(hi) T cells, high
producers of TGF-ß1, significantly decreased TGF-ß1 transcription. Additionally, 
naïve CD4(+) T cells, low producers of TGF-ß1, increased their basal level of
TGF-ß1 mRNA following lentiviral infection with GLI2. The transcriptional
regulation of TGF-ß1 by GLI2 is a new extension to Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) and
TGF-ß1 cross-regulation and may provide insight into the detrimental elevation of
TGF-ß1 leading to pathogenesis in cancer and HIV infection.

PMCID: PMC3409217
PMID: 22859956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Jun;3(1):1-5. Epub 2012 May 16.

Genetic Overlap between Holoprosencephaly and Kallmann Syndrome.

Vaaralahti K(1), Raivio T, Koivu R, Valanne L, Laitinen EM, Tommiska J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Patients with Kallmann syndrome (KS; congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
decreased/absent sense of smell), septo-optic dysplasia (SOD), or
holoprosencephaly (HPE) reportedly have midline defects. In this study, we
investigate a genetic overlap between KS, SOD, and HPE. Nineteen subjects (18
males, 1 female) with KS and without mutations in the known KS genes were
screened for mutations in SOX2, SHH, SIX3,TGIF1,TDGF1,FOXH1,GLI2, and GLI3. One
male carried 2 heterozygous missense changes, one in SIX3 (c.428G>A, p.G143D) and
the other in GLI2 (c.2509G>A, p.E837K). Both of these genes have been implicated 
in the etiology of HPE and neither of these changes were present in 200 control
subjects. Other variants found among the subjects were known polymorphisms. KS
and HPE may display a genetic overlap. The involvement of genes implicated in the
etiology of midline defects in patients with KS warrants further studies.

PMCID: PMC3398826
PMID: 22855648  [PubMed]


302. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 1;370(1):110-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.017. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Limb anterior-posterior polarity integrates activator and repressor functions of 
GLI2 as well as GLI3.

Bowers M(1), Eng L, Lao Z, Turnbull RK, Bao X, Riedel E, Mackem S, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Anterior-posterior (AP) limb patterning is directed by sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signaling from the posteriorly located zone of polarizing activity (ZPA). GLI3
and GLI2 are the transcriptional mediators generally utilized in SHH signaling,
and each can function as an activator (A) and repressor (R). Although GLI3R has
been suggested to be the primary effector of SHH signaling during limb AP
patterning, a role for GLI3A or GLI2 has not been fully ruled out, nor has it
been determined whether Gli3 plays distinct roles in limb development at
different stages. By conditionally removing Gli3 in the limb at multiple
different time points, we uncovered four Gli3-mediated functions in limb
development that occur at distinct but partially over-lapping time windows: AP
patterning of the proximal limb, AP patterning of the distal limb, regulation of 
digit number and bone differentiation. Furthermore, by removing Gli2 in Gli3
temporal conditional knock-outs, we uncovered an essential role for Gli2 in
providing the remaining posterior limb patterning seen in Gli3 single mutants. To
test whether GLIAs or GLIRs regulate different aspects of AP limb patterning
and/or digit number, we utilized a knock-in allele in which GLI1, which functions
solely as an activator, is expressed in place of the bifunctional GLI2 protein.
Interestingly, we found that GLIAs contribute to AP patterning specifically in
the posterior limb, whereas GLIRs predominantly regulate anterior patterning and 
digit number. Since GLI3 is a more effective repressor, our results explain why
GLI3 is required only for anterior limb patterning and why GLI2 can compensate
for GLI3A in posterior limb patterning. Taken together, our data suggest that
establishment of a complete range of AP positional identities in the limb
requires integration of the spatial distribution, timing, and dosage of GLI2 and 
GLI3 activators and repressors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432687
PMID: 22841643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Stem Cell Res. 2012 Sep;9(2):156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2012.06.002. Epub 2012
Jun 13.

Sonic hedgehog released from scratch-injured astrocytes is a key signal necessary
but not sufficient for the astrocyte de-differentiation.

Yang H(1), Feng GD, Olivera C, Jiao XY, Vitale A, Gong J, You SW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurosciences, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
China. yanghao71_99@yahoo.com

Recent studies demonstrated that mature atrocytes have the capacity for
de-differentiating into neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) in vitro and in
vivo. However, it is still unknown what signals endow astroglial cells with a
de-differentiation potential. Furthermore, the signaling molecules and underlying
mechanism that confer astrocytes with the competence of NSPC phenotypes have not 
been completely elucidated. Here, we found that sonic hedgehog (Shh) production
in astrocytes following mechanical injury was significantly elevated, and that
incubation of astrocyes with the injured astrocyte conditioned medium (ACM)
causes astrocytes to gradually lose their immunophenotypical profiles, and
acquire NSPC characteristics, as demonstrated by down-regulation of typical
astrocytic markers (GFAP and S100) and up-regulation of markers that are
generally expressed in NSCs, (nestin, Sox2, and CD133). ACM treated astrocytes
exhibit self-renewal capacity and multipotency similar to NSPCs. Concomitantly,
in addition to Ptc, there was a significant up-regulation of the Shh downstream
signal components Gli2 and Cyclin D1 which are involved in cell proliferation,
dramatic changes in cell morphology, and the disruption of cell-cycle G1 arrest. 
Conversely, the depletion of Shh by administration of its neutralizing antibody
(Shh n-Ab) effectively inhibited the de-differentiation process. Strikingly, Shh 
alone had little effect on astrocyte de-differentiation to NSPCs. These data
above suggest that Shh is a key instructive molecule while other molecules
secreted from insulted astrocytes may synergistically promote the
de-differentiation event.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Bone. 2012 Sep;51(3):407-17. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.06.021. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

The intraflagellar transport protein IFT80 is required for cilia formation and
osteogenesis.

Yang S(1), Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Buffalo, 
State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA. sy47@buffalo.edu

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins are essential for the assembly and
maintenance of cilia, which play important roles in development and homeostasis. 
IFT80 is a newly defined IFT protein. Partial mutation of IFT80 in humans causes 
diseases such as Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (JATD) and short rib
polydactyly (SRP) type III with abnormal skeletal development. However, the role 
and mechanism of IFT80 in osteogenesis is unknown. Here, we first detected IFT80 
expression pattern and found that IFT80 was highly expressed in mouse long bone, 
skull, and during osteoblast differentiation. By using lentivirus-mediated RNA
interference (RNAi) technology to silence IFT80 in murine mesenchymal progenitor 
cell line-C3H10T1/2 and bone marrow derived stromal cells, we found that
silencing IFT80 led to either shortening or loss of cilia and the decrease of
Arl13b expression - a small GTPase that is localized in cilia. Additionally,
silencing IFT80 blocked the expression of osteoblast markers and significantly
inhibited ALP activity and cell mineralization. We further found that IFT80
silencing inhibited the expression of Gli2, a critical transcriptional factor in 
the hedgehog signaling pathway. Overexpression of Gli2 rescued the deficiency of 
osteoblast differentiation from IFT80-silenced cells, and dramatically promoted
osteoblast differentiation. Moreover, introduction of Smo agonist (SAG) promotes 
osteoblast differentiation, which was partially inhibited by IFT80 silencing.
Thus, these results suggested that IFT80 plays an important role in osteogenesis 
through regulating Hedgehog/Gli signal pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3412883
PMID: 22771375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 15;368(2):382-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.06.008. Epub 2012 
Jun 12.

Forward genetics uncovers Transmembrane protein 107 as a novel factor required
for ciliogenesis and Sonic hedgehog signaling.

Christopher KJ(1), Wang B, Kong Y, Weatherbee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Cilia are dynamic organelles that are essential for a vast array of developmental
patterning events, including left-right specification, skeletal formation, neural
development, and organogenesis. Despite recent advances in understanding cilia
form and function, many key ciliogenesis components have yet to be identified. By
using a forward genetics approach, we isolated a novel mutant allele (schlei) of 
the mouse Transmembrane protein 107 (Tmem107) gene, which we show here is
critical for cilia formation and embryonic patterning. Tmem107 is required for
normal Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling in the neural tube and acts in combination 
with Gli2 and Gli3 to pattern ventral and intermediate neuronal cell types.
schlei mutants also form extra digits, and we demonstrate that Tmem107 acts in
the Shh pathway to determine digit number, but not identity, by regulating a
subset of Shh target genes. Phenotypically, schlei mutants share several features
with other cilia mutants; however, spatial restriction of mutant phenotypes and
lack of left-right patterning defects in schlei animals suggest differential
requirements for Tmem107 in cilia formation in distinct tissues. Also, in
contrast to mutants with complete loss of cilia, schlei mutants retain some
function of both Gli activator and repressor forms. Together, these studies
identify a previously unknown regulator of ciliogenesis and provide insight into 
how ciliary factors affect Shh signaling and cilia biogenesis in distinct
tissues.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3402655
PMID: 22698544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Cell Biol. 2012 Jun 11;197(6):789-800. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201110049.

The IFT-A complex regulates Shh signaling through cilia structure and membrane
protein trafficking.

Liem KF Jr(1), Ashe A, He M, Satir P, Moran J, Beier D, Wicking C, Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Two intraflagellar transport (IFT) complexes, IFT-A and IFT-B, build and maintain
primary cilia and are required for activity of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway. 
A weak allele of the IFT-A gene, Ift144, caused subtle defects in cilia structure
and ectopic activation of the Shh pathway. In contrast, strong loss of IFT-A,
caused by either absence of Ift144 or mutations in two IFT-A genes, blocked
normal ciliogenesis and decreased Shh signaling. In strong IFT-A mutants, the Shh
pathway proteins Gli2, Sufu, and Kif7 localized correctly to cilia tips,
suggesting that these pathway components were trafficked by IFT-B. In contrast,
the membrane proteins Arl13b, ACIII, and Smo failed to localize to primary cilia 
in the absence of IFT-A. We propose that the increased Shh activity seen in
partial loss-of-function IFT-A mutants may be a result of decreased ciliary ACIII
and that the loss of Shh activity in the absence of IFT-A is a result of severe
disruptions of cilia structure and membrane protein trafficking.

PMCID: PMC3373400
PMID: 22689656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037761. Epub 2012 May 29.

Novel mechanism of action on Hedgehog signaling by a suppressor of fused carboxy 
terminal variant.

Tostar U(1), Finta C, Rahman MF, Shimokawa T, Zaphiropoulos PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden.

The Suppressor of Fused (SUFU) protein plays an essential role in the Hedgehog
(HH) signaling pathway, by regulation of the GLI transcription factors. Two major
isoforms of human SUFU are known, a full-length (SUFU-FL) and a carboxy-terminal 
truncated (SUFU- <U+0394>C) variant. Even though SUFU- <U+0394>C is expressed at an equivalent 
level as SUFU-FL in certain tissues, the function of SUFU-<U+0394>C and its impact on HH
signal transduction is still unclear. In two cell lines from rhabdomyosarcoma, a 
tumor type associated with deregulated HH signaling, SUFU-<U+0394>C mRNA was expressed
at comparable levels as SUFU-FL mRNA, but at the protein level only low amounts
of SUFU-<U+0394>C were detectable. Heterologous expression provided support to the
notion that the SUFU-<U+0394>C protein is less stable compared to SUFU-FL. Despite this,
biochemical analysis revealed that SUFU-<U+0394>C could repress GLI2 and GLI1<U+0394>N, but not
GLI1FL, transcriptional activity to the same extent as SUFU-FL. Moreover, under
conditions of activated HH signaling SUFU-<U+0394>C was more effective than SUFU-FL in
inhibiting GLI1<U+0394>N. Importantly, co-expression with GLI1FL indicated that SUFU-<U+0394>C 
but not SUFU-FL reduced the protein levels of GLI1FL. Additionally, confocal
microscopy revealed a co-localization of GLI1FL with SUFU-<U+0394>C but not SUFU-FL in
aggregate structures. Moreover, specific siRNA mediated knock-down of SUFU-<U+0394>C
resulted in up-regulation of the protein levels of GLI1FL and the HH signaling
target genes PTCH1 and HHIP. Our results are therefore suggesting the presence of
novel regulatory controls in the HH signaling pathway, which are elicited by the 
distinct mechanism of action of the two alternative spliced SUFU proteins.

PMCID: PMC3362617
PMID: 22666390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Sep 10;318(15):1877-88. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.05.005. Epub
2012 May 30.

YAP regulates neuronal differentiation through Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway.

Lin YT(1), Ding JY, Li MY, Yeh TS, Wang TW, Yu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Tight regulation of cell numbers by controlling cell proliferation and apoptosis 
is important during development. Recently, the Hippo pathway has been shown to
regulate tissue growth and organ size in Drosophila. In mammalian cells, it also 
affects cell proliferation and differentiation in various tissues, including the 
nervous system. Interplay of several signaling cascades, such as Notch, Wnt, and 
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathways, control cell proliferation during neuronal
differentiation. However, it remains unclear whether the Hippo pathway
coordinates with other signaling cascades in regulating neuronal differentiation.
Here, we used P19 cells, a mouse embryonic carcinoma cell line, as a model to
study roles of YAP, a core component of the Hippo pathway, in neuronal
differentiation. P19 cells can be induced to differentiate into neurons by
expressing a neural bHLH transcription factor gene Ascl1. Our results showed that
YAP promoted cell proliferation and inhibited neuronal differentiation.
Expression of Yap activated Shh but not Wnt or Notch signaling activity during
neuronal differentiation. Furthermore, expression of Yap increased the expression
of Patched homolog 1 (Ptch1), a downstream target of the Shh signaling. Knockdown
of Gli2, a transcription factor of the Shh pathway, promoted neuronal
differentiation even when Yap was over-expressed. We further demonstrated that
over-expression of Yap inhibited neuronal differentiation in primary mouse
cortical progenitors and Gli2 knockdown rescued the differentiation defect in Yap
over-expressing cells. In conclusion, our study reveals that Shh signaling acts
downstream of YAP in regulating neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22659622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 1;21(16):2939-48. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0016. Epub 2012 
Jul 16.

Effects of the hedgehog inhibitor GDC-0449, alone or in combination with
dasatinib, on BCR-ABL-positive leukemia cells.

Okabe S(1), Tauchi T, Tanaka Y, Katagiri S, Ohyashiki K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
okabe@tokyo-med.ac.jp

Hedgehog (Hh)-glioma-associated oncogene homolog (Gli) signaling is implicated in
a large number of human cancers such as leukemia. In this study, we investigated 
the effects of the potent Hh antagonist GDC-0449 on the BCR-ABL-positive cell
line OM9;22 and primary samples when leukemia cells were protected by a feeder
cell line (S9 cells). The numbers of OM9;22 cells significantly increased with S9
cells. Treatment of OM9;22 cells with GDC-0449 caused cell growth inhibition and 
induced apoptosis. Moreover, GDC-0449 inhibited the colony growth of Philadelphia
chromosome (Ph)-positive primary samples. We next investigated the effects of a
combination of GDC-0449 and dasatinib on these cell lines. The growth inhibition 
typically promoted by dasatinib was significantly reduced in the presence of S9
cells. Treatment of Ph-positive leukemia cells with GDC-0449 and dasatinib in the
presence of S9 caused significantly more cytotoxicity than that caused by each
drug alone. Inhibition of Gli1 or Gli2 by siRNA transfection reduced the growth
of the Ph-positive cell line K562 and increased cytotoxicity of dasatinib.
Moreover, colony formations of Gli1 or Gli2 knockdown cells were also reduced.
Data from this study suggest that administration of the Hh inhibitor GDC-0449
inhibits BCR-ABL-positive cell growth and enhances the cytotoxic effects of
dasatinib in the presence of feeder cells.

PMID: 22642671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cancer Cell. 2012 May 15;21(5):601-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.04.012.

Distinct neural stem cell populations give rise to disparate brain tumors in
response to N-MYC.

Swartling FJ(1), Savov V, Persson AI, Chen J, Hackett CS, Northcott PA, Grimmer
MR, Lau J, Chesler L, Perry A, Phillips JJ, Taylor MD, Weiss WA.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Department of Neurology, Brain Tumor Research Center
and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA. fredrik.swartling@igp.uu.se

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 May 15;21(5):593-5.

The proto-oncogene MYCN is mis-expressed in various types of human brain tumors. 
To clarify how developmental and regional differences influence transformation,
we transduced wild-type or mutationally stabilized murine N-myc(T58A) into neural
stem cells (NSCs) from perinatal murine cerebellum, brain stem, and forebrain.
Transplantation of N-myc(WT) NSCs was insufficient for tumor formation.
N-myc(T58A) cerebellar and brain stem NSCs generated medulloblastoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumors, whereas forebrain NSCs developed diffuse glioma.
Expression analyses distinguished tumors generated from these different regions, 
with tumors from embryonic versus postnatal cerebellar NSCs demonstrating Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) dependence and SHH independence, respectively. These differences
were regulated in part by the transcription factor SOX9, activated in the SHH
subclass of human medulloblastoma. Our results demonstrate context-dependent
transformation of NSCs in response to a common oncogenic signal.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3360885
PMID: 22624711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jul 4;586(14):2016-25. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.05.011. Epub
2012 May 15.

Crosstalk between TGF-ß and hedgehog signaling in cancer.

Javelaud D(1), Pierrat MJ, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, 91400 Orsay, France.

Hedgehog (HH) and TGF-ß signals control various aspects of embryonic development 
and cancer progression. While their canonical signal transduction cascades have
been well characterized, there is increasing evidence that these pathways are
able to exert overlapping activities that challenge efficient therapeutic
targeting. We herein review the current knowledge on HH signaling and summarize
the recent findings on the crosstalks between the HH and TGF-ß pathways in
cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Dev Cell. 2012 May 15;22(5):940-51. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.009.

IFT25 links the signal-dependent movement of Hedgehog components to
intraflagellar transport.

Keady BT(1), Samtani R, Tobita K, Tsuchya M, San Agustin JT, Follit JA, Jonassen 
JA, Subramanian R, Lo CW, Pazour GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The intraflagellar transport (IFT) system is required for building primary cilia,
sensory organelles that cells use to respond to their environment. IFT particles 
are composed of about 20 proteins, and these proteins are highly conserved across
ciliated species. IFT25, however, is absent from some ciliated organisms,
suggesting that it may have a unique role distinct from ciliogenesis. Here, we
generate an Ift25 null mouse and show that IFT25 is not required for ciliary
assembly but is required for proper Hedgehog signaling, which in mammals occurs
within cilia. Mutant mice die at birth with multiple phenotypes, indicative of
Hedgehog signaling dysfunction. Cilia lacking IFT25 have defects in the
signal-dependent transport of multiple Hedgehog components including Patched-1,
Smoothened, and Gli2, and fail to activate the pathway upon stimulation. Thus,
IFT function is not restricted to building cilia where signaling occurs, but also
plays a separable role in signal transduction events.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3366633
PMID: 22595669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2012 Spring;42(2):123-9.

Neuron precursor features of spindle cell oncocytoma of adenohypophysis.

Alexandrescu S(1), Brown RE, Tandon N, Bhattacharjee MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas-Houston, 
School of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. sanda.alexandrescu@uth.tmc.edu

CONTEXT: Spindle cell oncocytoma of the adenohypophysis (SCO) is a non-endocrine 
neoplasm with few recurrent forms described. It arises from the
folliculo-stellate cells of the adenohypophysis.
OBJECTIVE: We describe a case of SCO in a 24-year-old woman and provide
pathogenetic information.
DESIGN: Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E), and immunohistochemistry, with controls, for
S100, SMI-311, neurofilament, EMA, CD68, GFAP, chromogranin, synaptophysin, and
Ki67 were performed. CD44, nestin, Gli2, p-Akt(Ser 473) and p-mTOR(Ser 2448)
antibodies were applied, and each analyte's cellular distribution and intensity
were noted.
RESULTS: H&E showed a proliferation of spindle and polygonal cells with a
fascicular pattern, without mitoses. There was reactivity for SMI-311, CD44,
nestin, S100, EMA, and vimentin. Neurofilament, CD68, chromogranin,
synaptophysin, and GFAP were not expressed. p-Akt and p-mTOR were expressed
suggesting mTORC2. Gli2 showed nuclear expression in the tumoral cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that SCO has neuron-like precursor cells.
Sonic hedgehog and mTOR pathways are activated.

PMID: 22585606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Jul;11(7):1587-97. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-1058. Epub
2012 May 2.

Smoothened antagonists reverse taxane resistance in ovarian cancer.

Steg AD(1), Katre AA, Bevis KS, Ziebarth A, Dobbin ZC, Shah MM, Alvarez RD,
Landen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

The hedgehog pathway has been implicated in the formation and maintenance of a
variety of malignancies, including ovarian cancer; however, it is unknown whether
hedgehog signaling is involved in ovarian cancer chemoresistance. The goal of
this study was to determine the effects of antagonizing the hedgehog receptor,
Smoothened (Smo), on chemotherapy response in ovarian cancer. Expression of
hedgehog pathway members was assessed in three pairs of parental and
chemotherapy-resistant ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780ip2/A2780cp20,
SKOV3ip1/SKOV3TRip2, HeyA8/HeyA8MDR) using quantitative PCR and Western blot
analysis. Cell lines were exposed to increasing concentrations of two different
Smo antagonists (cyclopamine, LDE225) alone and in combination with carboplatin
or paclitaxel. Selective knockdown of Smo, Gli1, or Gli2 was achieved using siRNA
constructs. Cell viability was assessed by MTT assay. A2780cp20 and SKOV3TRip2
orthotopic xenografts were treated with vehicle, LDE225, paclitaxel, or
combination therapy. Chemoresistant cell lines showed higher expression (>2-fold,
P < 0.05) of hedgehog signaling components compared with their respective
parental lines. Smo antagonists sensitized chemotherapy-resistant cell lines to
paclitaxel, but not to carboplatin. LDE225 treatment also increased sensitivity
of ALDH-positive cells to paclitaxel. A2780cp20 and SKOV3TRip2 xenografts treated
with combined LDE225 and paclitaxel had significantly less tumor burden than
those treated with vehicle or either agent alone. Increased taxane sensitivity
seems to be mediated by a decrease in P-glycoprotein (MDR1) expression. Selective
knockdown of Smo, Gli1, or Gli2 all increased taxane sensitivity. Smo antagonists
reverse taxane resistance in chemoresistant ovarian cancer models, suggesting
combined anti-hedgehog and chemotherapies could provide a useful therapeutic
strategy for ovarian cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3392529
PMID: 22553355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 15;109(20):7859-64. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1114718109. Epub 2012 May 1.

Hedgehog pathway inhibitor saridegib (IPI-926) increases lifespan in a mouse
medulloblastoma model.

Lee MJ(1), Hatton BA, Villavicencio EH, Khanna PC, Friedman SD, Ditzler S, Pullar
B, Robison K, White KF, Tunkey C, LeBlanc M, Randolph-Habecker J, Knoblaugh SE,
Hansen S, Richards A, Wainwright BJ, McGovern K, Olson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathway drives a subset of medulloblastomas, a malignant
neuroectodermal brain cancer, and other cancers. Small-molecule Shh pathway
inhibitors have induced tumor regression in mice and patients with
medulloblastoma; however, drug resistance rapidly emerges, in some cases via de
novo mutation of the drug target. Here we assess the response and resistance
mechanisms to the natural product derivative saridegib in an aggressive
Shh-driven mouse medulloblastoma model. In this model, saridegib treatment
induced tumor reduction and significantly prolonged survival. Furthermore, the
effect of saridegib on tumor-initiating capacity was demonstrated by reduced
tumor incidence, slower growth, and spontaneous tumor regression that occurred in
allografts generated from previously treated autochthonous medulloblastomas
compared with those from untreated donors. Saridegib, a known P-glycoprotein
(Pgp) substrate, induced Pgp activity in treated tumors, which likely contributed
to emergence of drug resistance. Unlike other Smoothened (Smo) inhibitors, the
drug resistance was neither mutation-dependent nor Gli2 amplification-dependent, 
and saridegib was found to be active in cells with the D473H point mutation that 
rendered them resistant to another Smo inhibitor, GDC-0449. The fivefold increase
in lifespan in mice treated with saridegib as a single agent compares favorably
with both targeted and cytotoxic therapies. The absence of genetic mutations that
confer resistance distinguishes saridegib from other Smo inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3356655
PMID: 22550175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 8;287(24):20483-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.359299. Epub 2012 
May 1.

Small ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO) modification inhibits GLI2 protein
transcriptional activity in vitro and in vivo.

Han L(1), Pan Y, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong
University, Shandong University, Jinan City, Shandong 250012, China.

The Gli transcription factors are key downstream mediators of the Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway. How the activities of Gli transcription factors are regulated 
by upstream Hh signaling events and protein modifications are not fully
understood. Here we show that GLI2 is conjugated by small ubiquitin-like modifier
(SUMO) at lysine residues 630 and 716 in the cell. The level of GLI2 sumoylation 
is reduced by either mutations in six serine residues that are normally
phosphorylated by protein kinase A (PKA) or stimulation by HH. This suggests that
PKA phosphorylation enhances GLI2 sumoylation, whereas HH signaling inhibits it. 
In addition, mutation of these two lysines into arginine residues significantly
increases GLI2 transcriptional activity in a cell-based reporter assay. The same 
mutations in the GLI2 locus also result in an increase in GLI2 activity in the
mouse. Interestingly, GLI2 can interact with HDAC5 (histone deacetylase 5), but
the GLI2 mutant cannot. Taken together, our results suggest that SUMO
modification inhibits GLI2 transcriptional activity by recruiting HDAC5.

PMCID: PMC3370232
PMID: 22549777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Pol J Pathol. 2012 Mar;63(1):25-30.

The immunoexpression of Shh, Smo and Gli2 in Helicobacter pylori positive and
negative gastric biopsies.

Stasikowska-Kanicka O(1), Wagrowska-Danilewicz M, Bialek I, Danilewicz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nefropathology, Medical University of Lodz, Poland.
olga.stasikowska@umed.lodz.pl

The Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a principal role during embryonic
development, tissue regeneration and carcinogenesis in various adult tissues.
Although hedgehog signaling is important in gastric carcinogenesis, its role in
Helicobacter pylori-associated gastritis is unclear. The aim of our study was to 
examine Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway in response to H. pylori
infection. Thirty-one formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue specimens of
chronic gastritis were retrieved from archival material. The immunoexpression of 
Shh, Smoothened (Smo) and Glioblastoma transcription factor 2 (Gli2) were
detected using the immunohistochemical method. Sonic Hedgehog protein was
expressed in H. pylori-positive and H. pylori-negative groups of patients. The
immunoexpression of Shh, Smo and Gli2 proteins was lower in H. pylori-positive
group compared to H. pylori-negative group, however only the differences in Shh
and Smo immunoexpression were statistically significant. The immunoexpression of 
Shh was significantly correlated with the immunoexpression of Smo in both tested 
groups (p < 0.001, p < 0.02, respectively). No statistically significant
correlation was found between Shh and Gli2 among H. pylori-positive and H.
pylori-negative groups. The above findings support the hypothesis of the
involvement of Shh signaling pathway in H. Pylori-associated gastritis.

PMID: 22535603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jun;158A(6):1519. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35317. Epub 2012 Apr
23.

Clarification of intellectual abilities in patients with GLI2 mutations cited by 
Kevelam et al., 2012 Am J Med Genet Part A.

França MM, Arnhold IJ.

PMID: 22528067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Med Genet. 2012 May;49(5):317-21. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100737. Epub 2012
Apr 17.

Exome sequencing identifies mutations in LZTFL1, a BBSome and smoothened
trafficking regulator, in a family with Bardet--Biedl syndrome with situs
inversus and insertional polydactyly.

Marion V(1), Stutzmann F, Gérard M, De Melo C, Schaefer E, Claussmann A, Hellé S,
Delague V, Souied E, Barrey C, Verloes A, Stoetzel C, Dollfus H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Physiopathologiedes syndromes rareshéréditaires, INSERM-AVENIR,
Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. vincent.marion@unistra.fr

BACKGROUND: Bardet--Biedl Syndrome (BBS) is an emblematic recessive genetically
highly heterogeneous ciliopathy characterised mainly by polydactyly, retinitis
pigmentosa, obesity, cognitive impairment, and kidney dysfunction. The 16 BBS
genes known to date are implied in the primary cilia related cellular pathways.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis followed
by exome sequencing was performed in a consanguineous family diagnosed with BBS
with unusual developmental features, namely situs inversus and insertional
polydactyly. A homozygous 5 bp deletion (NM_020347.2:c.402-406del,
p.Pro136ThrfsX5) in LZTFL1 was identified. No LZTFL1 transcript was found in the 
patient's fibroblasts and no protein could be detected. The sonic hedgehog (Shh) 
pathway analysis conducted on the patient's fibroblast showed a significant
increase in Smo. Patched1 as well as the downstream target GLI2 were also found
to be upregulated, indicating an overall massive activation of the Shh signalling
in the absence of LZTFL1.
CONCLUSION: LZTFL1, encoding the human leucine zipper transcription factor like
1, has been recently shown to be an important negative regulator of BBSome
ciliary trafficking and Shh signalling. This study shows that absence of LZTFL1
leads to a BBS phenotype with enhanced developmental abnormalities associated
with cellular Shh dysfunction. LZTFL1 is a novel BBS gene (BBS17).

PMID: 22510444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Int J Biochem Mol Biol. 2012;3(1):46-57. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Hedgehog signaling activation in the development of squamous cell carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma of esophagus.

Yang L, Wang LS, Chen XL, Gatalica Z, Qiu S, Liu Z, Stoner G, Zhang H, Weiss H,
Xie J.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is frequently activated in human cancer, including
esophageal cancer. Most esophageal cancers are diagnosed in the advanced stages, 
therefore, identifying the very alterations that drive esophageal carcinogenesis 
may help designing novel strategies to diagnose and treat the disease. Analysis
of Hh signaling in precancerous lesions is a critical first step in determining
the significance of this pathway for carcinogenesis. Here we report our data on
Hh target gene expression in 174 human esophageal specimens [28 esophageal
adenocarcinomas (EAC), 19 Barrett's esophagus, 103 cases of esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC), and 24 of squamous dysplastic lesions], and in two rat
models of esophageal cancer. We found that 96% of human EAC express Hh target
genes. We showed that PTCH1 expression is the most reliable biomarker. In
contrast to EAC, only 38% of ESCC express Hh target genes. We found activation of
Hh signaling in precancerous lesions of ESCCs and EACs in different degrees (21% 
and 58% respectively). Expression of Hh target genes is frequently detected in
severe squamous dysplasia/ carcinoma in situ (p=0.04) and Barrett's esophagus
(p=0.01). Unlike EAC, sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression was rare in ESCCs.
Consistent with the human specimen data, we found a high percentage of Hh
signaling activation in precancerous lesions in rat models. These data indicate
that Hh signaling activation is an early molecular event in the development of
esophageal cancer, particularly EAC.

PMCID: PMC3325770
PMID: 22509480  [PubMed]


321. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 25;287(22):17996-8004. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.358341. Epub
2012 Apr 11.

Expression of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF), which is
critical for melanoma progression, is inhibited by both transcription factor GLI2
and transforming growth factor-ß.

Pierrat MJ(1), Marsaud V, Mauviel A, Javelaud D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, INSERM U1021, CNRS UMR3347, and
Université Paris XI, 91400 Orsay, France.

The melanocyte-specific transcription factor M-MITF is involved in numerous
aspects of melanoblast lineage biology including pigmentation, survival, and
migration. It plays complex roles at all stages of melanoma progression and
metastasis. We established previously that GLI2, a Kruppel-like transcription
factor that acts downstream of Hedgehog signaling, is a direct transcriptional
target of the TGF-ß/SMAD pathway and contributes to melanoma progression,
exerting antagonistic activities against M-MITF to control melanoma cell
invasiveness. Herein, we dissected the molecular mechanisms underlying both TGF-ß
and GLI2-driven M-MITF gene repression. Using transient cell transfection
experiments with M-MITF promoter constructs, chromatin immunoprecipitation,
site-directed mutagenesis, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we
identified a GLI2 binding site within the -334/-296 region of the M-MITF
promoter, critical for GLI2-driven transcriptional repression. This region is,
however, not needed for inhibition of M-MITF promoter activity by TGF-ß. We
determined that TGF-ß rapidly repressed protein kinase A activity, thus reducing 
both phospho-cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) levels and
CREB-dependent transcription of the M-MITF promoter. Increased GLI2 binding to
its cognate cis-element, associated with reduced CREB-dependent transcription,
allowed maximal inhibition of the M-MITF promoter via two distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3365743
PMID: 22496449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17860-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.347716. Epub 2012
Apr 9.

Gli1 protein participates in Hedgehog-mediated specification of osteoblast
lineage during endochondral ossification.

Hojo H(1), Ohba S, Yano F, Saito T, Ikeda T, Nakajima K, Komiyama Y, Nakagata N, 
Suzuki K, Takato T, Kawaguchi H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. hojo@bmw.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

With regard to Hedgehog signaling in mammalian development, the majority of
research has focused on Gli2 and Gli3 rather than Gli1. This is because Gli1(-/-)
mice do not show any gross abnormalities in adulthood, and no detailed analyses
of fetal Gli1(-/-) mice are available. In this study, we investigated the
physiological role of Gli1 in osteogenesis. Histological analyses revealed that
bone formation was impaired in Gli1(-/-) fetuses compared with WT fetuses.
Gli1(-/-) perichondrial cells expressed neither runt-related transcription factor
2 (Runx2) nor osterix, master regulators of osteogenesis, in contrast to WT
cells. In vitro analyses showed that overexpression of Gli1 up-regulated early
osteogenesis-related genes in both WT and Runx2(-/-) perichondrial cells, and
Gli1 activated transcription of those genes via its association with their
5'-regulatory regions, underlying the function of Gli1 in the perichondrium.
Moreover, Gli1(-/-);Gli2(-/-) mice showed more severe phenotypes of impaired bone
formation than either Gli1(-/-) or Gli2(-/-) mice, and osteoblast differentiation
was impaired in Gli1(-/-);Gli3(-/-) perichondrial cells compared with Gli3(-/-)
cells in vitro. These data suggest that Gli1 itself can induce early osteoblast
differentiation, at least to some extent, in a Runx2-independent manner. It also 
plays a redundant role with Gli2 and is involved in the repressor function of
Gli3 in osteogenesis. On the basis of these findings, we propose that upon
Hedgehog input, Gli1 functions collectively with Gli2 and Gli3 in osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3366782
PMID: 22493482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Hepatology. 2012 Sep;56(3):1108-16. doi: 10.1002/hep.25758.

Osteopontin is a novel downstream target of SOX9 with diagnostic implications for
progression of liver fibrosis in humans.

Pritchett J(1), Harvey E, Athwal V, Berry A, Rowe C, Oakley F, Moles A, Mann DA, 
Bobola N, Sharrocks AD, Thomson BJ, Zaitoun AM, Irving WL, Guha IN, Hanley NA,
Hanley KP.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Group, School of Biomedicine, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Osteopontin (OPN) is an important component of the extracellular matrix (ECM),
which promotes liver fibrosis and has been described as a biomarker for its
severity. Previously, we have demonstrated that Sex-determining region Y-box 9
(SOX9) is ectopically expressed during activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC)
when it is responsible for the production of type 1 collagen, which causes scar
formation in liver fibrosis. Here, we demonstrate that SOX9 regulates OPN. During
normal development and in the mature liver, SOX9 and OPN are coexpressed in the
biliary duct. In rodent and human models of fibrosis, both proteins were
increased and colocalized to fibrotic regions in vivo and in culture-activated
HSCs. SOX9 bound a conserved upstream region of the OPN gene, and abrogation of
Sox9 in HSCs significantly decreased OPN production. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has 
previously been shown to regulate OPN expression directly by glioblastoma (GLI)
1. Our data indicate that in models of liver fibrosis, Hh signaling more likely
acts through SOX9 to modulate OPN. In contrast to Gli2 and Gli3, Gli1 is sparse
in HSCs and is not increased upon activation. Furthermore, reduction of GLI2, but
not GLI3, decreased the expression of both SOX9 and OPN, whereas overexpressing
SOX9 or constitutively active GLI2 could rescue the antagonistic effects of
cyclopamine on OPN expression.CONCLUSION: These data reinforce SOX9, downstream
of Hh signaling, as a core factor mediating the expression of ECM components
involved in liver fibrosis. Understanding the role and regulation of SOX9 during 
liver fibrosis will provide insight into its potential modulation as an
antifibrotic therapy or as a means of identifying potential ECM targets, similar 
to OPN, as biomarkers of fibrosis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3638324
PMID: 22488688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Med Rep. 2012 May;5(5):1245-50. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.820. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

Effect of TGF-ß on Gli2 expression in HL60 and U937 cell lines.

Li Z(1), Pan D, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, PR China.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in a variety of tumor-related
diseases, including leukemia. The aim of this study was to determine whether
there is an interaction between the Hh signaling pathway and transforming growth 
factor-ß (TGF-ß) in the HL60 and U937 cell lines. HL60 and U937 cells were
treated with TGF-ß, tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and specific inhibitor of
Smad3 (SIS3). The expression of Gli2 was detected by real-time PCR and western
blotting. The results showed that TGF-ß alone did not affect the Gli2 expression 
in HL60 cells, while it significantly reduced the level of Gli2 expression in
U937 cells. TGF-ß+TNF-a reduced the expression of Gli2 in HL60 cells and U937
cells. The reduction in the level of Gli2 expression in U937 cells by TGF-ß+TNF-a
was greater than that caused by TGF-ß alone. SIS3 inhibited the effect of TGF-ß. 
Our results suggest that the effect on Gli2 expression in HL60 and U937 cells
induced by TGF-ß is Smad3-dependent and independent of Hh receptor signaling.

PMID: 22395235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Front Neurosci. 2012 Feb 22;6:27. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2012.00027. eCollection
2012.

Mouse thalamic differentiation: gli-dependent pattern and gli-independent
prepattern.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Heide M, Zhou X, Blaess S, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University 
of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for thalamic development. The Gli
transcription factors act downstream of Shh - while Gli2 is the major activator
(GliA), Gli3 acts primarily as a repressor (GliR). The thalamus is remarkable
among dorsal structures because of its proximity to the mid-diencephalic
organizer, a unique dorsal Shh source. This lends complexity to the interactions 
between Shh, Gli2, and Gli3, suggesting the presence of a dorsal Gli activator
which elsewhere is found only ventrally, and making the dissection of thalamic
Gli functions particularly interesting. A current model based on mutant
phenotypes in telencephalon and midbrain postulates a degree of reciprocal
antagonism of Shh and Gli3 in dorsal brain regions. To approach the role of Gli
factors in thalamic specification we first analyzed mice deficient in Gli2 or
Gli3. In Gli2 mutants, the thalamus is small and poorly differentiated with the
exception of the medial and intralaminar nuclei which, in contrast, are
specifically and severely affected by Gli3 inactivation. Gbx2 expression is very 
reduced in the Gli3 mutant. Most thalamic nuclei are present in both mutants,
although incompletely differentiated, as reflected by the loss of specific
markers. The ventral posterior group, revealed by novel specific marker Hes1, is 
present in both mutants and extends axons to the telencephalon. To test the
Gli3/Shh interaction we generated a novel mutant deficient in Gli3 and
neuroepithelial Shh. The thalamus of the n-Shh/Gli3 double mutants is very large 
and very poorly differentiated except for a broad domain of Gbx2, Lhx2, and Calb2
expression. In utero electroporation experiments on wild type embryos suggest
that a stage-specific factor acting early is responsible for this prepattern. We 
show that, in the thalamus, GliA acts downstream of Shh to specify pattern and
size of the thalamic nuclei to the exception of the medial and intralaminar
groups. Gli3A can partially substitute for Gli2A in the Gli2 mutant. GliR is
essential for specification and growth of the medial and intralaminar nuclei,
contributes to the specification of other thalamic nuclei and reduces thalamic
size. GliA (from neuroepithelial Shh signaling) and GliR do not show reciprocal
antagonism in the thalamus, and their joint abolition does not rescue the wild
type phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3283895
PMID: 22371696  [PubMed]


326. J Cell Sci. 2012 Apr 15;125(Pt 8):1945-57. doi: 10.1242/jcs.095893. Epub 2012 Feb
22.

Disruption of Kif3a in osteoblasts results in defective bone formation and
osteopenia.

Qiu N(1), Xiao Z, Cao L, Buechel MM, David V, Roan E, Quarles LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, the University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN 38165, USA.

We investigated whether Kif3a in osteoblasts has a direct role in regulating
postnatal bone formation. We conditionally deleted Kif3a in osteoblasts by
crossing osteocalcin (Oc; also known as Bglap)-Cre with Kif3a(flox/null) mice.
Conditional Kif3a-null mice (Kif3a(Oc-cKO)) had a 75% reduction in Kif3a
transcripts in bone and osteoblasts. Conditional deletion of Kif3a resulted in
the reduction of primary cilia number by 51% and length by 27% in osteoblasts.
Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice developed osteopenia by 6 weeks of age unlike Kif3a(flox/+)
control mice, as evidenced by reductions in femoral bone mineral density (22%),
trabecular bone volume (42%) and cortical thickness (17%). By contrast,
Oc-Cre;Kif3a(flox/+) and Kif3a(flox/null) heterozygous mice exhibited no skeletal
abnormalities. Loss of bone mass in Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice was associated with
impaired osteoblast function in vivo, as reflected by a 54% reduction in mineral 
apposition rate and decreased expression of Runx2, osterix (also known as Sp7
transcription factor 7; Sp7), osteocalcin and Dmp1 compared with controls.
Immortalized osteoblasts from Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice exhibited increased cell
proliferation, impaired osteoblastic differentiation, and enhanced adipogenesis
in vitro. Osteoblasts derived from Kif3a(Oc-cKO) mice also had lower basal
cytosolic calcium levels and impaired intracellular calcium responses to fluid
flow shear stress. Sonic hedgehog-mediated Gli2 expression and Wnt3a-mediated
ß-catenin and Axin2 expression were also attenuated in Kif3a(Oc-cKO) bone and
osteoblast cultures. These data indicate that selective deletion of Kif3a in
osteoblasts disrupts primary cilia formation and/or function and impairs
osteoblast-mediated bone formation through multiple pathways including
intracellular calcium, hedgehog and Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3360919
PMID: 22357948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Am J Pathol. 2012 Apr;180(4):1441-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.12.039. Epub
2012 Feb 17.

Hedgehog-Gli pathway activation during kidney fibrosis.

Fabian SL(1), Penchev RR, St-Jacques B, Rao AN, Sipilä P, West KA, McMahon AP,
Humphreys BD.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates tissue patterning during
development, including patterning and growth of limbs and face, but whether Hh
signaling plays a role in adult kidney remains undefined. In this study, using a 
panel of hedgehog-reporter mice, we show that the two Hh ligands (Indian hedgehog
and sonic hedgehog ligands) are expressed in tubular epithelial cells. We report 
that the Hh effectors (Gli1 and Gli2) are expressed exclusively in adjacent
platelet-derived growth factor receptor-ß-positive interstitial pericytes and
perivascular fibroblasts, suggesting a paracrine signaling loop. In two models of
renal fibrosis, Indian Hh ligand was upregulated with a dramatic activation of
downstream Gli effector expression. Hh-responsive Gli1-positive interstitial
cells underwent 11-fold proliferative expansion during fibrosis, and both Gli1-
and Gli2-positive cells differentiated into a-smooth muscle actin-positive
myofibroblasts. In the pericyte-like cell line 10T1/2, hedgehog ligand triggered 
cell proliferation, suggesting a possible role for this pathway in the regulation
of cell cycle progression of myofibroblast progenitors during the development of 
renal fibrosis. The hedgehog antagonist IPI-926 abolished Gli1 induction in vivo 
but did not decrease kidney fibrosis. However, the transcriptional induction of
Gli2 was unaffected by IPI-926, suggesting the existence of
smoothened-independent Gli activation in this model. This study is the first
detailed description of paracrine hedgehog signaling in adult kidney, which
indicates a possible role for hedgehog-Gli signaling in fibrotic chronic kidney
disease.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3349903
PMID: 22342522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2012 Mar;49(3):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.12.008. Epub
2012 Jan 16.

Comparative genomics identification of a novel set of temporally regulated
hedgehog target genes in the retina.

McNeill B(1), Perez-Iratxeta C, Mazerolle C, Furimsky M, Mishina Y,
Andrade-Navarro MA, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth Road, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in numerous developmental and
adult processes with many links to cancer. In vertebrates, the activity of the Hh
pathway is mediated primarily through three Gli transcription factors (Gli1, 2
and 3) that can serve as transcriptional activators or repressors. The
identification of Gli target genes is essential for the understanding of the
Hh-mediated processes. We used a comparative genomics approach using the mouse
and human genomes to identify 390 genes that contained conserved Gli binding
sites. RT-qPCR validation of 46 target genes in E14.5 and P0.5 retinal explants
revealed that Hh pathway activation resulted in the modulation of 30 of these
targets, 25 of which demonstrated a temporal regulation. Further validation
revealed that the expression of Bok, FoxA1, Sox8 and Wnt7a was dependent upon
Sonic Hh (Shh) signaling in the retina and their regulation is under positive and
negative controls by Gli2 and Gli3, respectively. We also show using chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Gli2 binds to the Sox8 promoter, suggesting that Sox8 is
an Hh-dependent direct target of Gli2. Finally, we demonstrate that the Hh
pathway also modulates the expression of Sox9 and Sox10, which together with Sox8
make up the SoxE group. Previously, it has been shown that Hh and SoxE group
genes promote Müller glial cell development in the retina. Our data are
consistent with the possibility for a role of SoxE group genes downstream of Hh
signaling on Müller cell development.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22281533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 1;31(44):4718-24. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.610. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Inhibition of Gli1 results in altered c-Jun activation, inhibition of
cisplatin-induced upregulation of ERCC1, XPD and XRCC1, and inhibition of
platinum-DNA adduct repair.

Kudo K(1), Gavin E, Das S, Amable L, Shevde LA, Reed E.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA.

The transcription of ERCC1 and other nucleotide excision repair (NER) genes is
strongly influenced by c-jun. C-jun is transcriptionally regulated by Gli
proteins of the Hedgehog pathway. We therefore studied the possible relationships
between Gli1, c-jun, and the upregulation of ERCC1, XPD and XRCC1 in
cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cells. We studied the paired human
ovarian cancer cell lines A2780 and A2780-CP70. We used a shRNA construct that
specifically degrades Gli1 message. Genes we assessed for mRNA and/or protein
levels included: c-jun, ERCC1, XPD, XRCC1, Gli1, Gli2, SHH, IHH, GAPDH and
a-tubulin. Platinum-DNA adduct repair was assessed by atomic absorbance
spectrometry with Zeeman background correction. Use of the anti-Gli1 shRNA in
cisplatin-resistant cells resulted in a block of the cell's ability to upregulate
genes in response to cisplatin treatment, including: c-jun, ERCC1, XPD and XRCC1.
This block in upregulation of c-jun was concurrent with a change in the
phosphorylation pattern of the c-jun protein, shifting that pattern from a
Ser63/73 dominant pattern, to a Thr91/93 dominant pattern. A2780-CP70 cells were 
treated at their cisplatin IC50, and DNA repair was assessed after pretreatment
with anti-Gli1 shRNA or scrambled shRNA control. Control cells repaired 78% of
platinum-DNA adducts at 12<U+2009>h, compared with 33% repair in cells pretreated with
anti-Gli1 shRNA resulting in a 2.4-fold difference. Pretreatment of A2780-CP70
cells with anti-Gli1 shRNA resulted in supra-additive cell killing with
cisplatin; shifting the cisplatin IC50 (half maximal inhibitory concentration)
from 30<U+2009>µM to 5<U+2009>µM. Pretreatment of these cells with cyclopamine did not shift
the cisplatin IC50. We conclude that the transcriptional protein Gli1 is
important in the upregulation of these three DNA repair genes in human ovarian
cancer cells, and that Gli1 strongly influences platinum-DNA adduct repair, and
cellular sensitivity to cisplatin. This Gli1 role has c-jun as an intermediate in
the pathway. In all, inhibition of Gli1 by a specific shRNA inhibits the
upregulation of c-jun Ser63/73, and also inhibits the upregulation of three genes
essential to NER (ERCC1, XPD) and base excision repair (XRCC1).

PMID: 22266871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):741-52. doi: 10.1002/stem.1030.

Genome-wide analysis of N1ICD/RBPJ targets in vivo reveals direct transcriptional
regulation of Wnt, SHH, and hippo pathway effectors by Notch1.

Li Y(1), Hibbs MA, Gard AL, Shylo NA, Yun K.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.

The Notch pathway plays a pivotal role in regulating cell fate decisions in many 
stem cell systems. However, the full repertoire of Notch target genes in vivo and
the mechanisms through which this pathway activity is integrated with other
signaling pathways are largely unknown. Here, we report a transgenic mouse in
which the activation of the Notch pathway massively expands the neural stem cell 
(NSC) pool in a cell context-dependent manner. Using this in vivo system, we
identify direct targets of RBPJ/N1ICD in cortical NSCs at a genome-wide level
through combined ChIP-Seq and transcriptome analyses. Through a highly
conservative analysis of these datasets, we identified 98 genes that are directly
regulated by N1ICD/RPBJ in vivo. These include many transcription factors that
are known to be critical for NSC self-renewal (Sox2, Pax6, Tlx, and Id4) and the 
transcriptional effectors of the Wnt, SHH, and Hippo pathways, TCF4, Gli2, Gli3, 
Yap1, and Tead2. Since little is known about the function of the Hippo-Yap
pathway in NSCs, we analyzed Yap1 expression and function in NSCs. We show that
Yap1 expression is restricted to the stem cell compartment in the developing
forebrain and that its expression is sufficient to rescue Notch pathway
inhibition in NSC self-renewal assays. Together, results of this study reveal a
previously underappreciated complexity and breadth of Notch1 targets in vivo and 
show direct interaction between Notch and Hippo-Yap pathways in NSCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3734558
PMID: 22232070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Hum Pathol. 2012 Aug;43(8):1229-33. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.08.026. Epub 2012
Jan 4.

Loss of heterozygosity of the PTCH gene in ameloblastoma.

Farias LC(1), Gomes CC, Brito JA, Galvão CF, Diniz MG, de Castro WH, Bernardes
Vde F, De Marco LA, Gomez RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Pathology, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte-MG CEP 31270, Brazil.

Ameloblastoma is a locally aggressive benign neoplasm derived from odontogenic
epithelium, with high recurrence rates. Alterations in the Sonic Hedgehog
signaling pathway, including PTCH gene mutations, have been associated with the
pathogenesis of some odontogenic tumors. The purpose of the present study was to 
assess loss of heterozygosity at the PTCH locus in ameloblastoma. Twelve
ameloblastomas were included, and loss of heterozygosity was assessed by using 3 
microsatellite markers D9S252, D9S127, and D9S287 and 3 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms rs112794371, rs111446700, and rs357564, all located at the PTCH
gene locus. Furthermore, we investigated GLI1 and GLI2 transcription levels by
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in 8 ameloblastomas 
and, concomitantly, PTCH protein levels by immunohistochemical analysis. Loss of 
heterozygosity at 9q21.33-9q.31 was detected in 4 (40.0%) of 10 informative cases
of ameloblastoma. All 8 analyzed samples expressed GLI1 messenger RNA and 7 cases
GLI2 messenger RNA. Interestingly, loss of heterozygosity at the PTCH locus was
not correlated with GLI1 or GLI2 transcription levels, nor was there any
correlation with PTCH protein expression. In conclusion, our findings suggest
that loss of heterozygosity in the PTCH region may be relevant to the
pathogenesis of ameloblastoma but may target a different gene than PTCH.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22221699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Hepatology. 2012 Jun;55(6):1711-21. doi: 10.1002/hep.25559. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Hedgehog pathway activation parallels histologic severity of injury and fibrosis 
in human nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Guy CD(1), Suzuki A, Zdanowicz M, Abdelmalek MF, Burchette J, Unalp A, Diehl AM; 
NASH CRN.

Collaborators: Abrams SH, Fairly LA, McCullough AJ, Brandt P, Bringman D,
Dasarathy S, DasarathY J, Hawkins C, Liu YC, Rogers N, Stage M, McCullough AJ,
Dasarathy S, Pagadala M, Sargent R, Yerian L, Zein C, Merriman R, Nguyen A, Mohan
P, Nair K, DeVore S, Kohli R, Lake K, Xanthakos S, Abdelmalek MF, Buie S, Diehl
AM, Gottfried M, Guy C, Hanna M, Killenberg P, Kwan S, Pan YP, Piercy D, Smith M,
Byam E, Chalasani N, Cummings OW, Klipsch A, Molleston JP, Ragozzino L, Subbarao 
G, Vuppalanchi R, Pfeifer K, Scheimann A, Torbenson M, Kerkar N, Narayanappa S,
Suchy F, Fishbein MH, Jacques K, Quinn A, Riazi C, Whitington PF, Coffey M,
Galdzicka S, Murray K, Young M, Barlow S, Derdoy J, Hoffmann J, King D, Morris A,
Siegner J, Stewart S, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Thompson J, Behling C, Durelle J,
Hassanein T, Lavine JE, Loomba R, Morgan A, Rose S, Patton H, Schwimmer JB,
Sirlin C, Stein T, Aouizerat B, Bambha K, Bass NM, Ferrell LD, Filipowski D, Gu
B, Merriman R, Pabst M, Rosenthal M, Rosenthal P, Steel T, Yeh M, Boyett S,
Contos MJ, Fuchs M, Jones A, Luketic VA, Puri P, Sandhu B, Sanyal AJ, Sargeant C,
Noble K, White M, Kowdley KV, Mooney J, Nelson J, Ackermann S, Saunders C, Trinh 
V, Wang C, Brunt EM, Kleiner DE, Grave GD, Doo EC, Hoofnagle JH, Robuck PR, Belt 
P, Brancati FL, Clark JM, Colvin R, Donithan M, Green M, Hollick R, Isaacson M,
Kim W, Lydecker A, Mann P, Miriel L, Sternberg A, Tonascia J, Ünalp-Arida A, Van 
Natta M, Vaughn I, Wilson L, Yates K.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2012 Oct;56(4):1589.
    Hepatology. 2012 Oct;56(4):1587-8; author reply 1588.

The Hedgehog (HH)-signaling pathway mediates several processes that are
deregulated in patients with metabolic syndrome (e.g., fat mass regulation,
vascular/endothelial remodeling, liver injury and repair, and carcinogenesis).
The severity of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and metabolic syndrome
generally correlate. Therefore, we hypothesized that the level of HH-pathway
activation would increase in parallel with the severity of liver damage in NAFLD.
To assess potential correlations between known histologic and clinical predictors
of advanced liver disease and HH-pathway activation, immunohistochemistry was
performed on liver biopsies from a large, well-characterized cohort of NAFLD
patients (n = 90) enrolled in the Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research 
Network (NASH CRN) Database 1 study. Increased HH activity (evidenced by
accumulation of HH-ligand-producing cells and HH-responsive target cells)
strongly correlated with portal inflammation, ballooning, and fibrosis stage
(each P < 0.0001), supporting a relationship between HH-pathway activation and
liver damage. Pathway activity also correlated significantly with markers of
liver repair, including numbers of hepatic progenitors and myofibroblastic cells 
(both P < 0.03). In addition, various clinical parameters that have been linked
to histologically advanced NAFLD, including increased patient age (P < 0.005),
body mass index (P < 0.002), waist circumference (P < 0.0007), homeostatic model 
assessment of insulin resistance (P < 0.0001), and hypertension (P < 0.02),
correlated with hepatic HH activity.CONCLUSION: In NAFLD patients, the level of
hepatic HH-pathway activity is highly correlated with the severity of liver
damage and with metabolic syndrome parameters that are known to be predictive of 
advanced liver disease. Hence, deregulation of the HH-signaling network may
contribute to the pathogenesis and sequelae of liver damage that develops with
metabolic syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3499103
PMID: 22213086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2012:605-9. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2012.32.605.

Hedgehog Pathway in Pediatric Cancers: They're Not Just for Brain Tumors Anymore.

Macdonald TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Pediatric Neuro-Oncology Program, Aflac Cancer Center and Blood
Disorders Service, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, and Emory University School 
of Medicine, Emory Children's Center, Atlanta, GA.

The Hedgehog (HH) pathway regulates fundamental processes in embryonic
development, including stem cell maintenance, cell differentiation, tissue
polarity, and cell proliferation. In the vertebrate pathway, Sonic hedgehog (SHH)
binds to Patched1 (PTCH1), which relieves its inhibition of Smoothened (SMO),
allowing the GLI family of transcription factors to translocate to the nucleus
and activate HH target genes such as GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, CYCLIN D1, BCL-2, and
MYCN. The HH pathway is also an active participant in tumorigenesis. In 1996,
loss-of-function mutation in PTCH1 was discovered to be the cause of nevoid basal
cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS, or Gorlin syndrome), an autosomal dominant
disease associated with increased rates of basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
medulloblastoma (MB), and rarely, rhabdomyosarcoma. It is now estimated that 100%
of sporadic BCC and up to 20% to 30% of MB also harbor activating HH pathway
mutations. Together, these discoveries firmly established the linkage between HH 
pathway activation and cancer development. Intense research has since been
focused on further defining the role of the HH pathway in BCC and MB and
potential therapeutic strategies to inhibit HH signaling. Early clinical trials
of SMO inhibitors have shown promising results in the treatment of adult BCC and 
SHH-driven MB. More recently, a number of other pediatric cancers have been
reported to show HH activity, making these tumors potential candidates for HH
inhibitor therapy. To date however, no HH pathway mutations have been identified 
in other pediatric cancers. This review will describe the HH pathway signaling in
development and cancer with a focus on recent evidence for HH pathway activation 
in central nervous system (CNS) and non-CNS pediatric cancers.

PMID: 24451804  [PubMed - in process]


334. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3329-47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1232. Epub 2011
Dec 22.

Gli2 and MEF2C activate each other's expression and function synergistically
during cardiomyogenesis in vitro.

Voronova A(1), Al Madhoun A, Fischer A, Shelton M, Karamboulas C, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 May;40(10):4723-4.

The transcription factors Gli2 (glioma-associated factor 2), which is a
transactivator of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signalling, and myocyte enhancer factor 2C
(MEF2C) play important roles in the development of embryonic heart muscle and
enhance cardiomyogenesis in stem cells. Although the physiological importance of 
Shh signalling and MEF2 factors in heart development is well known, the
mechanistic understanding of their roles is unclear. Here, we demonstrate that
Gli2 and MEF2C activated each other's expression while enhancing cardiomyogenesis
in differentiating P19 EC cells. Furthermore, dominant-negative mutant proteins
of either Gli2 or MEF2C repressed each other's expression, while impairing
cardiomyogenesis in P19 EC cells. In addition, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) revealed association of Gli2 to the Mef2c gene, and of MEF2C to the Gli2
gene in differentiating P19 cells. Finally, co-immunoprecipitation studies showed
that Gli2 and MEF2C proteins formed a complex, capable of synergizing on
cardiomyogenesis-related promoters containing both Gli- and MEF2-binding
elements. We propose a model whereby Gli2 and MEF2C bind each other's regulatory 
elements, activate each other's expression and form a protein complex that
synergistically activates transcription, enhancing cardiac muscle development.
This model links Shh signalling to MEF2C function during cardiomyogenesis and
offers mechanistic insight into their in vivo functions.

PMCID: PMC3333882
PMID: 22199256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Dev Dyn. 2012 Feb;241(2):403-14. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23723. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

Thyroid hormone-induced sonic hedgehog signal up-regulates its own pathway in a
paracrine manner in the Xenopus laevis intestine during metamorphosis.

Hasebe T(1), Kajita M, Fu L, Shi YB, Ishizuya-Oka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Nippon Medical School, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa,
Japan. hasebet@nms.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: During Xenopus laevis metamorphosis, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is directly
induced by thyroid hormone (TH) at the transcription level as one of the earliest
events in intestinal remodeling. However, the regulation of other components of
this signaling pathway remains to be analyzed. Here, we analyzed the
spatiotemporal expression of Patched (Ptc)-1, Smoothened (Smo), Gli1, Gli2, and
Gli3 during natural and TH-induced intestinal remodeling.
RESULTS: We show that all of the genes examined are transiently up-regulated in
the mesenchymal tissues during intestinal metamorphosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Interestingly, in the presence of protein synthesis inhibitors, Gli2
but not the others was induced by TH, suggesting that Gli2 is a direct TH
response gene, while the others are likely indirect ones. Furthermore, we
demonstrate by the organ culture experiment that overexpression of Shh enhances
the expression of Ptc-1, Smo, and Glis even in the absence of TH, indicating that
Shh regulates its own pathway components during intestinal remodeling.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3428560
PMID: 22190352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Dev Biol. 2012 Feb 15;362(2):141-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.11.022. Epub 2011 
Dec 11.

Dual function of suppressor of fused in Hh pathway activation and mouse spinal
cord patterning.

Liu J(1), Heydeck W, Zeng H, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, Center for Cellular
Dynamics, Huck Institute of Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The morphogen Sonic hedgehog, one of the Hedgehog (Hh) family of secreted
proteins, plays a key role in patterning the mammalian spinal cord along its
dorsoventral (D/V) axis through the activation of Glioma-associated oncogene
(Gli) family of transcription factors. Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), a
Gli-interacting protein, modulates the D/V patterning of the spinal cord by
antagonizing Hh signaling. The molecular mechanisms underlying the function of
Sufu in Hh pathway activation and spinal cord D/V patterning remain
controversial, particularly in light of recent findings that Sufu protects Gli2
and Gli3 proteins from proteasomal degradation. In the current study, we show
that Hh pathway activation and dorsal expansion of ventral spinal cord cell types
in the absence of Sufu depend on the activator activities of all three Gli family
proteins. We also show that Sufu plays a positive role in the maximal activation 
of Hh signaling that defines the ventral-most cell fate in the mammalian spinal
cord, likely through protecting Gli2 and Gli3 proteins from degradation. Finally,
by altering the level of Gli3 repressor on a background of reduced Gli activator 
activities, we reveal an important contribution of Gli3 repressor activity to the
Hh pathway activation and the D/V patterning of the spinal cord.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22182519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Acta Histochem. 2012 Oct;114(6):620-5. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2011.11.007. Epub
2011 Dec 15.

Different expression patterns of Gli1-3 in mouse embryonic maxillofacial
development.

Du J(1), Fan Z, Ma X, Wu Y, Liu S, Gao Y, Wang J, Shen Y, Fan M, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Laboratory for Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Capital Medical 
University School of Stomatology, Beijing, China.

The Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway plays many key roles in the
development of Drosophila and vertebrate embryos, including regulating
craniofacial development. The GLI family of transcription factors (GLI1, 2, and
3) mediates the SHH morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of
downstream target genes. Signaling aberrations seriously affect vertebrate
development. To better understand the regulation of GLI transcription factors, we
investigated the expression patterns of Gli1-3 during murine embryonic
craniofacial development using in situ hybridization with whole-mounts and
sections and quantitative real-time PCR. We found that Gli1 expression was mostly
detected in the mesenchyme in embryonic dermis, and strongly detected in
embryonic oral mucosa at late stages of face development. Gli2 was strong in
mesenchyme, both in dermis and oral mucosa. Gli3 expression was detected fainter 
in the epithelium than the mesenchyme at 11 days post-coitum (dpc), but at 14.5
dpc, expression was stronger in the epithelium. Of the three genes, Gli1
expression was highest in early stages of face development, Gli3 expression was
highest in the second half of facial development (and remained stable
thereafter), whereas Gli2 expression remained low throughout facial development. 
The present findings suggest that Gli1-3 may play different roles during facial
development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Apr;123(4):515-27. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0918-8. Epub
2011 Dec 9.

Biological and clinical heterogeneity of MYCN-amplified medulloblastoma.

Korshunov A(1), Remke M, Kool M, Hielscher T, Northcott PA, Williamson D, Pfaff
E, Witt H, Jones DT, Ryzhova M, Cho YJ, Wittmann A, Benner A, Weiss WA, von
Deimling A, Scheurlen W, Kulozik AE, Clifford SC, Peter Collins V, Westermann F, 
Taylor MD, Lichter P, Pfister SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Focal high-level amplifications of MYC (or MYCC) define a subset of high-risk
medulloblastoma patients. However, the prognostic role of MYCN oncogene
amplification remains unresolved. We aimed to evaluate the prognostic value of
this alteration alone and in combination with biological modifiers in 67
pediatric medulloblastomas with MYCN amplification (MYCN-MB). Twenty-one MYCN-MB 
were examined using gene expression profiling and array-CGH, whereas for 46
tumors immunohistochemical analysis and FISH were performed. All 67 tumors were
further subjected to mutational analyses. We compared molecular, clinical, and
prognostic characteristics both within biological MYCN-MB groups and with
non-amplified tumors. Transcriptomic analysis revealed SHH-driven tumorigenesis
in a subset of MYCN-MBs indicating a biological dichotomy of MYCN-MB. Activation 
of SHH was accompanied by variant-specific cytogenetic aberrations including
deletion of 9q in SHH tumors. Non-SHH MB were associated with gain of 7q and
isochromosome 17q/17q gain. Among clinically relevant variables, SHH subtype and 
10q loss for non-SHH tumors comprised the most powerful markers of favorable
prognosis in MYCN-MB. In conclusion, we demonstrate considerable heterogeneity
within MYCN-MB in terms of genetics, tumor biology, and clinical outcome. Thus,
assessment of disease group and 10q copy-number status may improve risk
stratification of this group and may delineate MYCN-MB with the same dismal
prognosis as MYC amplified tumors. Furthermore, based on the enrichment of MYCN
and GLI2 amplifications in SHH-driven medulloblastoma, amplification of these
downstream signaling intermediates should be taken into account before a patient 
is enrolled into a clinical trial using a smoothened inhibitor.

PMID: 22160402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2012 Feb;19(1):33-9. doi:
10.1097/MED.0b013e32834ed639.

Genetic disorders of the pituitary.

Cohen LE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. laurie.cohen@childrens.harvard.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss pituitary development and function related to those
factors in which molecular defects resulting in combined pituitary hormone
deficiency have been described in humans, and to describe recently reported novel
mutations in these factors (January 2010 to September 2011).
RECENT FINDINGS: Novel mutations have been found in transcription factors
involved in pituitary development, HESX1; LHX3; LHX4; SOX3; Prophet of Pit-1; and
POU1FI, and in some of the signaling molecules expressed in the ventral
diencephalon (fibroblast growth factor 8 and GLI2). There is phenotypic
variability for the same mutation suggesting variable penetrance due to other
genetic, epigenetic, or environmental factors. The incidence of mutations in
these factors is low suggesting that other genes or environmental factors are
responsible for the majority of cases of combined pituitary hormone deficiency.
SUMMARY: Development of the pituitary gland and pituitary cell determination and 
specification depend on the expression and interaction of signaling molecules and
transcription factors in overlapping, but distinct, spatial and temporal
patterns. Studying genotype-phenotype correlations in patients with mutations in 
these factors give insight into the mechanisms involved in normal pituitary
development and function.

PMID: 22157402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Feb 1;18(3):869-81. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2188.
Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Stem cell pathways contribute to clinical chemoresistance in ovarian cancer.

Steg AD(1), Bevis KS, Katre AA, Ziebarth A, Dobbin ZC, Alvarez RD, Zhang K,
Conner M, Landen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

PURPOSE: Within heterogeneous tumors, subpopulations often labeled cancer stem
cells (CSC) have been identified that have enhanced tumorigenicity and
chemoresistance in ex vivo models. However, whether these populations are more
capable of surviving chemotherapy in de novo tumors is unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined 45 matched primary/recurrent tumor pairs of
high-grade ovarian adenocarcinomas for expression of CSC markers ALDH1A1, CD44,
and CD133 using immunohistochemistry. Tumors collected immediately after
completion of primary therapy were then laser capture microdissected and
subjected to a quantitative PCR array examining stem cell biology pathways
(Hedgehog, Notch, TGF-ß, and Wnt). Select genes of interest were validated as
important targets using siRNA-mediated downregulation.
RESULTS: Primary samples were composed of low densities of ALDH1A1, CD44, and
CD133. Tumors collected immediately after primary therapy were more densely
composed of each marker, whereas samples collected at first recurrence, before
initiating secondary therapy, were composed of similar percentages of each marker
as their primary tumor. In tumors collected from recurrent platinum-resistant
patients, only CD133 was significantly increased. Of stem cell pathway members
examined, 14% were significantly overexpressed in recurrent compared with matched
primary tumors. Knockdown of genes of interest, including endoglin/CD105 and the 
hedgehog mediators Gli1 and Gli2, led to decreased ovarian cancer cell viability,
with Gli2 showing a novel contribution to cisplatin resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that ovarian tumors are enriched with CSCs and
stem cell pathway mediators, especially at the completion of primary therapy.
This suggests that stem cell subpopulations contribute to tumor chemoresistance
and ultimately recurrent disease.

PMCID: PMC3271164
PMID: 22142828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Lung Cancer. 2012 May;76(2):191-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.10.015. Epub 2011 
Nov 23.

Hedgehog signaling pathway molecules and ALDH1A1 expression in early-stage
non-small cell lung cancer.

Raz G(1), Allen KE, Kingsley C, Cherni I, Arora S, Watanabe A, Lorenzo CD,
Edwards V DK, Sridhar S, Hostetter G, Weiss GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Cell Biology Division, The Translational Genomics Research
Institute (TGen), Phoenix, AZ, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Hedgehog Signaling Pathway (HHSP) has been implicated in the
development of multiple cancers. HHSP activation may primarily be hedgehog
ligand-dependent in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC); while a subset may be
ligand-independent. In this study NSCLC primary tumors were used to identify
correlations between multiple biomarkers thought to be involved in the HHSP and
the clinical outcomes of patients with NSCLC. Identification of such correlations
could be used to aid in NSCLC treatment and predicting patient prognosis.
METHODS: A tissue microarray representing 248 clinically annotated stage I-II
NSCLC cases was stained using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and scored for HHSP
proteins namely, SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, and GLI2; as well as, ALDH1A1, a putative
cancer stem cell marker. Data was analyzed for correlation between IHC staining, 
EGFR and KRAS mutations, and clinical characteristics including relapse-free
survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: In adenocarcinoma, there were significant correlations of IHC expression
between SHH and downstream HHSP receptor SMO (p=0.017) and transcription factor
GLI1 (p=0.001), while SMO correlated with GLI1 (p=0.007). In squamous cell
carcinoma, SHH significantly correlated with GLI2 protein expression (p=0.003).
After multiple testing correction, there was no significant correlation between
any of the six markers and RFS or OS.
CONCLUSIONS: Key downstream components of the HHSP show correlation with sonic
hedgehog ligand (SHH) expression, suggesting that ligand-dependent signaling is
more prevalent in primary NSCLC tumors. Surprisingly, in early-stage NSCLC, there
were no significant correlations between HHSP proteins or ALDH1A1 and RFS or OS.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22115706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):166-73. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34350. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

A patient with a mild holoprosencephaly spectrum phenotype and heterotaxy and a
1.3<U+2009>Mb deletion encompassing GLI2.

Kevelam SH(1), van Harssel JJ, van der Zwaag B, Smeets HJ, Paulussen AD,
Lichtenbelt KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands. s.kevelam@vumc.nl

Loss-of-function mutations of GLI2 are associated with features at the mild end
of the holoprosencephaly spectrum, including abnormal pituitary gland formation
and/or function, and craniofacial abnormalities. In addition patients may have
branchial arch anomalies and polydactyly. Large, microscopically visible,
interstitial deletions spanning 2q14.2 have been reported in patients with
multiple congenital anomalies and intellectual disability. We report here on a
patient with a mild holoprosencephaly spectrum phenotype (bilateral cleft lip and
palate and abnormal pituitary gland formation with panhypopituitarism) and normal
psychomotor development, who was found to carry a 1.3<U+2009>Mb submicroscopic
heterozygous deletion in 2q14.2, encompassing the GLI2 gene. We review the
genotype and phenotype of previously published probands with GLI2 aberrations.
Our findings confirm the association of haploinsufficiency of GLI2 and mild HPE
spectrum features. Consistent with prior reports, we observed incomplete
penetrance of the deletion in the family, illustrating the multifactorial
etiology of holoprosencephaly spectrum features. In addition to the
holoprosencephaly spectrum features, the proband had heterotaxy of the abdominal 
organs. Mutations in the known heterotaxy genes (NODAL, ZIC3 and CFC1) were
excluded. The deletion contains five genes, in addition to GLI2, including the
EPB4.1l5 gene. Based on findings in Epb4.1l5 mutant mice we hypothesize that
Epb4.1l5 is a candidate gene for the heterotaxy observed in the proband.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22106008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027306. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Hedgehog signaling antagonist GDC-0449 (Vismodegib) inhibits pancreatic cancer
stem cell characteristics: molecular mechanisms.

Singh BN(1), Fu J, Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine, The
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence from in vitro and in vivo studies has demonstrated
that aberrant reactivation of the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway
regulates genes that promote cellular proliferation in various human cancer stem 
cells (CSCs). Therefore, the chemotherapeutic agents that inhibit activation of
Gli transcription factors have emerged as promising novel therapeutic drugs for
pancreatic cancer. GDC-0449 (Vismodegib), orally administrable molecule belonging
to the 2-arylpyridine class, inhibits SHH signaling pathway by blocking the
activities of Smoothened. The objectives of this study were to examine the
molecular mechanisms by which GDC-0449 regulates human pancreatic CSC
characteristics in vitro.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: GDC-0499 inhibited cell viability and induced
apoptosis in three pancreatic cancer cell lines and pancreatic CSCs. This
inhibitor also suppressed cell viability, Gli-DNA binding and transcriptional
activities, and induced apoptosis through caspase-3 activation and PARP cleavage 
in pancreatic CSCs. GDC-0449-induced apoptosis in CSCs showed increased Fas
expression and decreased expression of PDGFRa. Furthermore, Bcl-2 was
down-regulated whereas TRAIL-R1/DR4 and TRAIL-R2/DR5 expression was increased
following the treatment of CSCs with GDC-0449. Suppression of both Gli1 plus Gli2
by shRNA mimicked the changes in cell viability, spheroid formation, apoptosis
and gene expression observed in GDC-0449-treated pancreatic CSCs. Thus, activated
Gli genes repress DRs and Fas expressions, up-regulate the expressions of Bcl-2
and PDGFRa and facilitate cell survival.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data suggest that GDC-0499 can be used for the
management of pancreatic cancer by targeting pancreatic CSCs.

PMCID: PMC3210776
PMID: 22087285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Leuk Lymphoma. 2012 Jun;53(6):1196-202. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.639877. Epub
2012 Jan 5.

Inhibition of hedgehog signaling induces monocytic differentiation of HL-60
cells.

Bai LY(1), Weng JR, Lo WJ, Yeh SP, Wu CY, Wang CY, Chiu CF, Lin CW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, China Medical University,Taichung, Taiwan.

There is little evidence to demonstrate the importance of the Sonic hedgehog
homolog (Shh) pathway to differentiation therapy in the treatment of
hematological neoplasms. Here we characterize the changes in acute myelogenous
leukemia (HL-60) cells after blocking the Shh pathway by an antagonist of
Smoothened, cyclopamine. Cyclopamine induces apoptosis of HL-60 cells in a dose- 
and time-dependent manner with increased G0/G1 cycle fraction. Treatment with
cyclopamine increases the expression of monocytic cell markers CD11b and CD14,
but the expression of CD13, CD33 and CD38 is unchanged. The monocytic
differentiation of HL-60 cells induced by cyclopamine is also evidenced by an
increase in Egr-1 expression. Importantly, cyclopamine down-regulates the
phosphorylation of Akt and ERK, but activates AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
signaling. Further investigations should determine the clinical application of
modulating the Shh pathway in the treatment of hematological malignancies.

PMID: 22080758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002356. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002356. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

SOX9 governs differentiation stage-specific gene expression in growth plate
chondrocytes via direct concomitant transactivation and repression.

Leung VY(1), Gao B, Leung KK, Melhado IG, Wynn SL, Au TY, Dung NW, Lau JY, Mak
AC, Chan D, Cheah KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Cartilage and endochondral bone development require SOX9 activity to regulate
chondrogenesis, chondrocyte proliferation, and transition to a non-mitotic
hypertrophic state. The restricted and reciprocal expression of the collagen X
gene, Col10a1, in hypertrophic chondrocytes and Sox9 in immature chondrocytes
epitomise the precise spatiotemporal control of gene expression as chondrocytes
progress through phases of differentiation, but how this is achieved is not
clear. Here, we have identified a regulatory element upstream of Col10a1 that
enhances its expression in hypertrophic chondrocytes in vivo. In immature
chondrocytes, where Col10a1 is not expressed, SOX9 interacts with a conserved
sequence within this element that is analogous to that within the intronic
enhancer of the collagen II gene Col2a1, the known transactivation target of
SOX9. By analysing a series of Col10a1 reporter genes in transgenic mice, we show
that the SOX9 binding consensus in this element is required to repress expression
of the transgene in non-hypertrophic chondrocytes. Forced ectopic Sox9 expression
in hypertrophic chondrocytes in vitro and in mice resulted in down-regulation of 
Col10a1. Mutation of a binding consensus motif for GLI transcription factors,
which are the effectors of Indian hedgehog signaling, close to the SOX9 site in
the Col10a1 regulatory element, also derepressed transgene expression in
non-hypertrophic chondrocytes. GLI2 and GLI3 bound to the Col10a1 regulatory
element but not to the enhancer of Col2a1. In addition to Col10a1, paired
SOX9-GLI binding motifs are present in the conserved non-coding regions of
several genes that are preferentially expressed in hypertrophic chondrocytes and 
the occurrence of pairing is unlikely to be by chance. We propose a regulatory
paradigm whereby direct concomitant positive and negative transcriptional control
by SOX9 ensures differentiation phase-specific gene expression in chondrocytes.
Discrimination between these opposing modes of transcriptional control by SOX9
may be mediated by cooperation with different partners such as GLI factors.

PMCID: PMC3207907
PMID: 22072985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Oct;19(5):1129-33.

[Expression and clinical significances of hedgehog signaling pathway in
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XY(1), Liu XQ, Ge XL, Fen LL, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shandong University Provincial Hospital, Jinan,
Shandong Province, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the expression and clinicopathologic
significance of Gli1 and Gli2, 2 factors of Hedgehog(Hh) signaling pathway, in
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL). Gli1 and Gli2 mRNA and protein in 18 cases of NHL
and 10 cases of reactive lymphadenitis were amplified and identified by real-time
PCR, and were assayed by immunohistochemical staining respectively. The results
showed that (1) Gli1 and Gli2 mRNA in NHL group (RQ 2.05, 2.31) were expressed
higher than that in reactive lymphadenitis group (RQ 0.82, 0.89). Gli1 mRNA
activated level was positively related with Gli2 (r = 0.63, p < 0.01). In
addition, Gli2 also positively correlated to clinical stages of NHL (p = 0.03),
but the expressions of Gli1 and Gli2 mRNA had no significant correlation to B
symptoms, blood ß(2)-microglobulin, age and sex. (2) The positive expression rate
of Gli1 and Gli2 protein in NHL group were 80% and 68% respectively, which were
extremely higher than that in reactive lymphadenitis group. Gli1 protein level
was positively related with Gli2 (r = 0.62, p < 0.05). Both Gli1 and Gli2 protein
expression positively correlated to clinical staging of NHL (p = 0.05, p = 0.01).
It is concluded that the Gli1 and Gli2 of Hh signaling pathway have been found to
higher express in patients with NHL, and have significance for clinical staging
and predicting prognosis of NHL. To further investigate the role of Hh signaling 
pathway in NHL will contribute to elucidate the occurrence and development of
NHL, and provide a favorable method for therapy of NHL.

PMID: 22040957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Neoplasia. 2011 Oct;13(10):923-30.

Ectopic overexpression of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) induces stromal expansion and
metaplasia in the adult murine pancreas.

Fendrich V(1), Oh E, Bang S, Karikari C, Ottenhof N, Bisht S, Lauth M, Brossart
P, Katsanis N, Maitra A, Feldmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Ligand-dependent activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been
implicated in both tumor initiation and metastasis of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Prior studies in genetically engineered mouse models
(GEMMs) have assessed the role of Hh signaling by cell autonomous expression of a
constitutively active Gli2 within epithelial cells. On the contrary, aberrant
pathway reactivation in the human exocrine pancreas occurs principally as a
consequence of Sonic Hh ligand (Shh) overexpression from epithelial cells. To
recapitulate the cognate pathophysiology of Hh signaling observed in the human
pancreas, we examined GEMM where Hh ligand is conditionally overexpressed within 
the mature exocrine pancreas using a tamoxifen-inducible Elastase-Cre promoter
(Ela-CreERT2;LSL-mShh). We also facilitated potential cell autonomous epithelial 
responsiveness to secreted Hh ligand by generating compound transgenic mice with 
concomitant expression of the Hh receptor Smoothened
(Ela-CreERT2;LSL-mShh;LSL-mSmo). Of interest, none of these mice developed
intraductal precursor lesions or PDAC during the follow-up period of up to 12
months after tamoxifen induction. Instead, all animals demonstrated marked
expansion of stromal cells, consistent with the previously described
epithelial-to-stromal paracrine Hh signaling. Hh responsiveness was mirrored by
the expression of primary cilia within the expanded mesenchymal compartment and
the absence within mature acinar cells. In the absence of cooperating mutations, 
Hh ligand overexpression in the mature exocrine pancreas is insufficient to
induce neoplasia, even when epithelial cells coexpress the Smo receptor. This
autochthonous model serves as a platform for studying epithelial stromal
interactions in pancreatic carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3201569
PMID: 22028618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Prostate. 2012 Jun 1;72(8):817-24. doi: 10.1002/pros.21500. Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Paracrine Hedgehog increases the steroidogenic potential of prostate stromal
cells in a Gli-dependent manner.

Levina E(1), Chen M, Carkner R, Shtutman M, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)South Carolina College of Pharmacy, Department of Biomedical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Columbia, South Carolina, USA.

Acquired intratumoral steroidogenesis is involved in progression of prostate
cancer to castration resistant disease (CRPC) and a target for improved
therapeutics. Recent work has shown that prostate cancer cells can acquire
steroidogenic activity as they progress to a therapeutic-resistant state.
However, benign prostate stromal cells (PrSCs) also have steroidogenic potential 
though they are often overlooked as a source of intratumoral androgens. Here, we 
present preliminary studies showing that the steroidogenic activity of primary
human PrSCs is significantly increased by exposure to a Hedgehog agonist (SAG) or
by transduction of PrSCs with lentiviruses that expresses active Gli2 (Gli2<U+0394>N), a
transcription factor that is triggered by Hh signaling. Comparative gene
expression profiling on Chips, that was confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR, 
revealed that hedgehog agonist treatment induced in these cells expressions of
hedgehog target genes (Gli1, Ptch1, and SCUBE1) plus a specific cadre of genes
involved in cholesterol/steroid biosynthesis, metabolism, and transport. Genes
involved downstream in steroid hormone generation, including CYP17A1 and CYP19A1 
were also induced. Both the hedgehog agonist and the Gli2-expressing lentivirus
significantly increased the output of testosterone (T) from PrSCs that were
supplemented with dihydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), an adrenal precursor of T.
Finally, knockdown of Gli2 by siRNA suppressed the ability of SAG to induce this 
response. Collectively, our data indicate that hedgehog/Gli signaling may be a
factor in acquired intratumoral steroidogenesis of a prostate tumor through its
actions on stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment and an influence for the
development of CRPC.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22025366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Hepatogastroenterology. 2011 Nov-Dec;58(112):2071-6. doi: 10.5754/hge11155.

The role of hedgehog signaling pathway in liver regeneration.

Cai Y(1), Zheng H, Gong W, Che Y, Jiang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In this study, we explored the role of the Hedgehog signaling
pathway in liver regeneration.
METHODOLOGY: Retrorsine, partial hepatectomy and combined were utilized in mature
Fisher344 rats. Specific assays, such as RT-PCR, real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry were used to detect the constituents of the Hedgehog
signaling pathway during liver regeneration.
RESULTS: mRNA expression of Ihh, Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 were all shown in 
liver tissue homogenates in control/normal, retrorsine, partial hepatectomy and
retrorsine/partial hepatectomy groups while no Shh expression was found.
Real-time PCR analysis indicated that there were significant differences in
Hedgehog signaling pathway-related constituents (Ihh, Ptc, Gli1 and Gli3) among
the different treatment groups and at distinct time points in the same treatment 
group during liver regeneration. The data also suggested an interaction effect
between different treatment and time to the variation of Ihh, Ptc, Gli1 and Gli3.
The protein expression of Ptc and Gli1 in liver regeneration was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry, which differed in the duration among different groups.
Nevertheless, the protein expression of Ptc and Gli1 were not detected
successfully by western blot.
CONCLUSIONS: It appears that the Hedgehog signaling pathway may be involved in
liver regeneration.

PMID: 22024090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Development. 2011 Nov;138(22):4921-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.070805. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Protein kinase A acts at the basal body of the primary cilium to prevent Gli2
activation and ventralization of the mouse neural tube.

Tuson M(1), He M, Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Protein kinase A (PKA) is an evolutionarily conserved negative regulator of the
hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction pathway. PKA is known to be required for the
proteolytic processing event that generates the repressor forms of the Ci and Gli
transcription factors that keep target genes off in the absence of Hh. Here, we
show that complete loss of PKA activity in the mouse leads to midgestation
lethality and a completely ventralized neural tube, demonstrating that PKA is as 
strong a negative regulator of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway as patched 1
(Ptch1) or suppressor of fused (Sufu). Genetic analysis shows that although PKA
is important for production of the repressor form of Gli3, the principal function
of PKA in the Shh pathway in neural development is to restrain activation of
Gli2. Activation of the Hh pathway in PKA mutants depends on cilia, and the
catalytic and regulatory subunits of PKA are localized to a compartment at the
base of the primary cilia, just proximal to the basal body. The data show that
PKA does not affect cilia length or trafficking of smoothened (Smo) in the
cilium. Instead, we find that there is a significant increase in the level of
Gli2 at the tips of cilia of PKA-null cells. The data suggest a model in which
PKA acts at the base of the cilium after Gli proteins have transited the primary 
cilium; in this model the sequential movement of Gli proteins between
compartments in the cilium and at its base controls accessibility of Gli proteins
to PKA, which determines the fates of Gli proteins and the activity of the Shh
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3201661
PMID: 22007132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Dec;22(23):4694-703. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-12-0994. Epub 2011 
Oct 5.

Arl13b regulates ciliogenesis and the dynamic localization of Shh signaling
proteins.

Larkins CE(1), Aviles GD, East MP, Kahn RA, Caspary T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA.

Arl13b, a ciliary protein within the ADP-ribosylation factor family and Ras
superfamily of GTPases, is required for ciliary structure but has poorly defined 
ciliary functions. In this paper, we further characterize the role of Arl13b in
cilia by examining mutant cilia in vitro and determining the localization and
dynamics of Arl13b within the cilium. Previously, we showed that mice lacking
Arl13b have abnormal Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling; in this study, we show the
dynamics of Shh signaling component localization to the cilium are disrupted in
the absence of Arl13b. Significantly, we found Smoothened (Smo) is enriched in
Arl13b-null cilia regardless of Shh pathway stimulation, indicating Arl13b
regulates the ciliary entry of Smo. Furthermore, our analysis defines a role for 
Arl13b in regulating the distribution of Smo within the cilium. These results
suggest that abnormal Shh signaling in Arl13b mutant embryos may result from
defects in protein localization and distribution within the cilium.

PMCID: PMC3226485
PMID: 21976698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 11;108(41):17010-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105404108. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Elevated Hedgehog/Gli signaling causes beta-cell dedifferentiation in mice.

Landsman L(1), Parent A, Hebrok M.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Although Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates cell differentiation during pancreas
organogenesis, the consequences of pathway up-regulation in adult ß-cells in vivo
have not been investigated. Here, we elevate Hh signaling in ß-cells by
expressing an active version of the GLI2 transcription factor, a mediator of the 
Hh pathway, in ß-cells that are also devoid of primary cilia, a critical
regulator of Hh activity. We show that increased Hh signaling leads to impaired
ß-cell function and insulin secretion, resulting in glucose intolerance in
transgenic mice. This phenotype was accompanied by reduced expression of both
genes critical for ß-cell function and transcription factors associated with
their mature phenotype. Increased Hh signaling further correlated with increased 
expression of the precursor cell markers Hes1 and Sox9, both direct Hh targets
that are normally excluded from ß-cells. Over time, the majority of ß-cells
down-regulated GLI2 levels, thereby regaining the full differentiation state and 
restoring normoglycemia in transgenic mice. However, sustained high Hh levels in 
some insulin-producing cells further eroded the ß-cell identity and eventually
led to the development of undifferentiated pancreatic tumors. Summarily, our
results indicate that deregulation of the Hh pathway impairs ß-cell function by
interfering with the mature ß-cell differentiation state.

PMCID: PMC3193206
PMID: 21969560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;76 Suppl 3:11-3. doi: 10.1159/000330140. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Genetics of human stature: Insight from single gene disorders.

Kiess W(1), Kratzsch J, Kruis T, Müller E, Wallborn T, Odeh R, Schlicke M, Klammt
J, Pfäffle R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany.

Mutations of numerous genes encoding proteins that affect multiple pathways
responsible for regulation of cell proliferation can cause growth disturbances in
humans. Genes such as HESX1, PROP1, PIT1/POU1F1 and GLI2 have been shown to cause
pituitary hormone deficiency. In addition, heterozygous mutations or gene
deletions in the growth hormone-insulin-like growth factor (GH-IGF) axis such as 
the GH, GH-releasing hormone receptor, GH receptor, STAT5b, IGF-I, IGF-I receptor
and the acid labile subunit have also been observed in children with growth
failure and short stature. More recently, mutations of genes encoding regulators 
of cell proliferation and division, i.e., the pericentrin gene, have also
resulted in severe growth disturbances.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21912148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2011;98:231-64. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381328-2.00010-9.

Genetics of tardive dyskinesia.

Lee HJ(1), Kang SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Anam Hospital, Korea University College of Medicine,
Anam-dong 5-ga, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-705, South Korea.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is one of the most serious adverse side effects of
antipsychotic drugs and is an important topic of pharmacogenetic studies. Since
there is a genetic susceptibility for developing this adverse reaction, and given
that it is hard to predict its development prior to or during the early period of
medication, the genetic study of TD is a promising research topic that has a
direct clinical application. Moreover, such studies would improve our
understanding of the genetic mechanism(s) underlying abnormal dyskinetic
movement. A substantial number of case-control association studies of TD have
been performed, with numbers of studies focusing on the genes involved in
antipsychotic drug metabolism, such as those for cytochrome P450 (CYP) and
oxidative stress related genes as well as various neurotransmitter related genes.
These studies have produced relatively consistent though controversial findings
for certain polymorphisms such as CYP2D6*10, DRD2 Taq1A, DRD3 Ser9Gly, HTR2A
T102C, and MnSOD Ala9Val. Moreover, the application of the genome-wide
association study (GWAS) to the susceptibility of TD has revealed certain
associated genes that previously were never considered to be associated with TD, 
such as the rs7669317 on 4q24, GLI2 gene, GABA pathway genes, and HSPG2 gene.
Although a substantial number of genetic studies have investigated TD, many of
the positive findings have not been replicated or are inconsistent, which could
be due to differences in study design, sample size, and/or subject ethnicity. We 
expect that more refined research will be performed in the future to resolve
these issues, which will then enable the genetic prediction of TD and clinical
application thereof.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21907090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;113(1):204-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23345.

Hedgehog signaling and osteoblast gene expression are regulated by purmorphamine 
in human mesenchymal stem cells.

Oliveira FS(1), Bellesini LS, Defino HL, da Silva Herrero CF, Beloti MM, Rosa AL.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Culture Laboratory, School of Dentistry of Ribeirao Preto, University of 
Sao Paulo, 14040-904 Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Several biological events are controlled by Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, including
osteoblast phenotype development. This study aimed at evaluating the gene
expression profile of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) treated with the Hh
agonist, purmorphamine, focusing on Hh signaling and osteoblast differentiation. 
hMSCs from bone marrow were cultured in non-osteogenic medium with or without
purmorphamine (2<U+2009>µM) for periods of up to 14 days. Purmorphamine up-regulated
gene expression of the mediators of Hh pathway, SMO, PTCH1, GLI1, and GLI2. The
activation of Hh pathway by purmorphamine increased the expression of several
genes (e.g., RUNX2 and BMPs) related to osteogenesis. Our results indicated that 
purmorphamine triggers Hh signaling pathway in hMSCs, inducing an increase in the
expression of a set of genes involved in the osteoblast differentiation program. 
Thus, we conclude that Hh is a crucial pathway in the commitment of
undifferentiated cells to the osteoblast lineage.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21898541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Anticancer Res. 2011 Sep;31(9):2705-12.

6-Thioguanine inhibition of parathyroid hormone-related protein expression is
mediated by GLI2.

Johnson RW(1), Merkel AR, Danilin S, Nguyen MP, Mundy GR, Sterling JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Tennessee Valley Healthcare System (VISN 9),
Nashville, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer cells frequently metastasize to bone, where they
up-regulate their expression of the transcription factor GLI2 and the downstream 
osteolytic factor parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP). The guanosine
nucleotide 6-thioguanine (6-TG) inhibits PTHrP expression and blocks osteolytic
bone destruction in mice inoculated with bone metastatic cells; however, the
mechanism by which 6-TG inhibits PTHrP remains unclear. We hypothesized that 6-TG
inhibition of PTHrP is mediated through GLI2 signaling.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and RWGT2
squamous-cell lung carcinoma cells were treated with 100 µM 6-TG and examined for
GLI2 mRNA expression and stability by Q-PCR, promoter activity by luciferase
assay, and protein expression by Western blot.
RESULTS: 6-TG significantly blocked GLI2 mRNA and protein expression, but did not
affect stability. Additionally, 6-TG directly inhibited GLI2 promoter activity,
and when cells were transfected with constitutively expressed GLI2, the
inhibitory effect of 6-TG on PTHrP expression was abolished.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data indicate that 6-TG regulates PTHrP in part
through GLI2 transcription, and therefore the clinical use of 6-TG or other
guanosine nucleotides may be a viable therapeutic option in tumor types
expressing elevated levels of GLI proteins.

PMCID: PMC3430074
PMID: 21868511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Endocr Dev. 2011;21:1-11. doi: 10.1159/000328081. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation.

Wuelling M(1), Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Biotechnology, Department of Developmental Biology,
University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

The skeletal elements of the axial and appendicular skeleton are preformed as
cartilage templates by a mechanism called endochondral ossification. During this 
process, a cartilage template is formed in which chondrocytes proliferate and
differentiate into hypertrophic chondrocytes and are gradually replaced by bone. 
Postnatally, remnants of embryonic chondrocytes remain in a restricted domain
between the ossified regions of the bones forming the growth plate. The
coordinated proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes ensures the
continuous elongation of the epiphyseal growth plates. The sequential changes
between proliferation and differentiation are tightly regulated by secreted
growth factors, which activate chondrocyte-specific transcription factors.
Transcription factors that play critical roles in regulating cell type-specific
gene expression include SOX9, GLI2/3 and RUNX2. This review will outline recent
advances in the analysis of the complex transcriptional network that regulates
distinct steps of chondrocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21865749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;71(17):5606-10. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1194. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

TGF-ß/SMAD/GLI2 signaling axis in cancer progression and metastasis.

Javelaud D(1), Alexaki VI, Dennler S, Mohammad KS, Guise TA, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, France.

The Hedgehog (HH) and TGF-ß signaling pathways represent essential regulators of 
cell proliferation and differentiation during embryogenesis. Pathway deregulation
is a characteristic of various cancers. Recently, evidence for a convergence of
these pathways at the level of the GLI2 transcription factor in the context of
tumor initiation and progression to metastasis has emerged. This short review
summarizes recent knowledge about GLI2 function and mechanisms of action
downstream of TGF-ß in cancer.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3165102
PMID: 21862631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Oncotarget. 2011 Aug;2(8):638-45.

The GLI genes as the molecular switch in disrupting Hedgehog signaling in colon
cancer.

Mazumdar T(1), DeVecchio J, Agyeman A, Shi T, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway leads to activation of GLI, which
transcriptionally regulate target genes. Regulated HH signaling activity is
critical during embryogenesis while aberrantly activated HH signaling is evident 
in a variety of human cancers. Canonical HH signaling engages the transmembrane
receptor Patched (PTCH) and the signaling intermediate Smoothened (SMO) to
activate GLI1 and GLI2. In addition GLI1 and GLI2 are activated by non-canonical 
oncogenic signaling pathways to further drive HH-dependent survival. We have
demonstrated in human colon carcinoma cells that inhibition of the RAS/RAF
pathway by U0126 decreases p-ERK protein expression and also inhibits
GLI-luciferase activity and GLI1 mRNA and protein levels. Of importance is the
demonstration that targeting of SMO (using cyclopamine) has minimal effect on
cell survival in comparison to the inhibition of GLI (using GANT61), which
induced extensive cell death in 7/7 human colon carcinoma cell lines. Genetic
inhibition of the function of GLI1 and GLI2 by transient transfection of the
C-terminus deleted repressor GLI3R, reduced proliferation and induced cleavage of
caspase-3 and cell death in HT29 cells, similar to the effects of GANT61.
Mechanistically, downstream of GLI1 and GLI2 inhibition, <U+03B3>H2AX (a marker of DNA
double strand breaks) expression was upregulated, and <U+03B3>H2AX nuclear foci were
demonstrated in cells that expressed GLI3R. Activation of the ATM/Chk2 axis with 
co-localization of <U+03B3>H2AX and p-Chk2 nuclear foci were demonstrated following
GLI1/GLI2 inhibition. GANT61 induced cellular accumulation at G1/S and early S
with no further progression before cells became subG1, while cDNA microarray gene
profiling demonstrated downregulation of genes involved in DNA replication, the
DNA damage response, and DNA repair, mechanisms that are currently being pursued.
These studies highlight the importance of targeting the GLI genes downstream of
SMO for terminating HH-dependent survival, suggesting that GLI may constitute a
molecular switch that determines the balance between cell survival and cell death
in human colon carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3248207
PMID: 21860067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23383. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023383. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Holoclone forming cells from pancreatic cancer cells enrich tumor initiating
cells and represent a novel model for study of cancer stem cells.

Tan L(1), Sui X, Deng H, Ding M.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is one of the direct causes of cancer-related
death. High level of chemoresistance is one of the major obstacles of clinical
treatment. In recent years, cancer stem cells have been widely identified and
indicated as the origin of chemoresistance in multi-types of solid tumors.
Increasing evidences suggest that cancer stem cells reside in the cells capable
of forming holoclones continuously. However, in pancreatic cancer,
holoclone-forming cells have not been characterized yet. Therefore, the goal of
our present study was to indentify the holoclone-forming pancreatic cancer stem
cells and develop an in vitro continuous colony formation system, which will
greatly facilitate the study of pancreatic cancer stem cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Pancreatic cancer cell line BxPC3 was submitted
to monoclonal cultivation to generate colonies. Based on the morphologies,
colonies were classified and analyzed for their capacities of secondary colony
formation, long-term survival in vitro, tumor formation in vivo, and drug
resistance. Flowcytometry and quantitative RT-PCR were performed to detect the
expression level of cancer stem cells associated cell surface markers, regulatory
genes and microRNAs in distinct types of colonies. Three types of colonies with
distinct morphologies were identified and termed as holo-, mero-, and paraclones,
in which only holoclones generated descendant colonies of all three types in
further passages. Compared to mero- and paraclones, holoclones possessed higher
capacities of long-term survival, tumor initiation, and chemoresistance. The
preferential expression of cancer stem cells related marker (CXCR4), regulatory
genes (BMI1, GLI1, and GLI2) and microRNAs (miR-214, miR-21, miR-221, miR-222 and
miR-155) in holoclones were also highlighted.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that the pancreatic
tumor-initiating cells with high level of chemoresistance were enriched in
holoclones derived from BxPC3 cell line. Generation of holoclones can serve as a 
novel model for studying cancer stem cells, and attribute to developing new
anti-cancer drugs.

PMCID: PMC3149653
PMID: 21826251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Nov;131(11):2289-97. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.196. Epub 2011
Aug 4.

Overexpression of hedgehog signaling is associated with epidermal tumor formation
in vitamin D receptor-null mice.

Teichert AE(1), Elalieh H, Elias PM, Welsh J, Bikle DD.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Dermatology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) ligand, 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D(3)
(1,25(OH)(2)D(3)), reduces proliferation and enhances differentiation, and thus
has been investigated for a role in preventing or treating cancer. Mice deficient
for the VDR display a hyperproliferative response in the hair follicle and
epidermis and decreased epidermal differentiation. Unlike their wild-type
littermates, when treated with 7,12 dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA) or UVB, they
develop skin tumors, including some characteristic of overexpression of the
hedgehog (Hh) pathway. Both the epidermis and utricles of the VDR-null animals
overexpress elements of the Hh pathway (sonic hedgehog (Shh) 2.02-fold, patched1 
1.58-fold, smoothened 3.54-fold, glioma-associated oncogene homolog (Gli)1
1.17-fold, and Gli2 1.66-fold). This overexpression occurs at an age (11 weeks)
at which epidermal hyperproliferation is most visible and is spatially controlled
in the epidermis. DMBA- or UVB-induced tumors in the VDR-null mice also
overexpress elements of this pathway. Moreover, 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) downregulates the
expression of some members of the Hh pathway in an epidermal explants culture
system, suggesting a direct regulation by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Our results suggest
that increased expression of Shh in the keratinocytes of the VDR-null animal
activates the Hh pathway, predisposing the skin to the development of both
malignant and benign epidermal neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC3193543
PMID: 21814234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2011 Oct;24(5):932-43. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2011.00893.x. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

GLI2 and M-MITF transcription factors control exclusive gene expression programs 
and inversely regulate invasion in human melanoma cells.

Javelaud D(1), Alexaki VI, Pierrat MJ, Hoek KS, Dennler S, Van Kempen L,
Bertolotto C, Ballotti R, Saule S, Delmas V, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, Orsay, France.

We recently identified GLI2, the most active of GLI transcription factors, as a
direct TGF-ß/SMAD target, whose expression in melanoma cells is associated with
increased invasiveness and metastatic capacity. In this work, we provide evidence
that high GLI2 expression is inversely correlated with that of the
melanocyte-specific transcription factor M-microphthalmia transcription factor
(M-MITF) and associated transcriptional program. GLI2-expressing cell lines were 
characterized by the loss of M-MITF-dependent melanocytic differentiation markers
and reduced pigmentation. The balance between M-MITF and GLI2 expression did not 
correlate with the presence or absence of BRAF-activating mutations, but rather
was controlled by two distinct pathways: the TGF-ß pathway, which favors GLI2
expression, and the protein kinase A (PKA)/cAMP pathway, which pushes the balance
toward high M-MITF expression. Furthermore, overexpression and knockdown
experiments demonstrated that GLI2 and M-MITF reciprocally repress each other's
expression and control melanoma cell invasion in an opposite manner. These
findings thus identify GLI2 as a critical transcription factor antagonizing
M-MITF function to promote melanoma cell phenotypic plasticity and invasive
behavior.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21801332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jul 1;131(1):30-40. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26323. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Inhibition of sonic hedgehog pathway and pluripotency maintaining factors
regulate human pancreatic cancer stem cell characteristics.

Tang SN(1), Fu J, Nall D, Rodova M, Shankar S, Srivastava RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, and Medicine,
University of Kansas Cancer Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160, USA.

Activation of the sonic hedgehog (SHh) pathway is required for the growth of
numerous tissues and organs and recent evidence indicates that this pathway is
often recruited to stimulate growth of cancer stem cells (CSCs) and to
orchestrate the reprogramming of cancer cells via epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular
mechanisms by which (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), an active compound in 
green tea, inhibits self-renewal capacity of pancreatic CSCs and synergizes with 
quercetin, a major polyphenol and flavonoid commonly detected in many fruits and 
vegetables. Our data demonstrated that EGCG inhibited the expression of
pluripotency maintaining transcription factors (Nanog, c-Myc and Oct-4) and
self-renewal capacity of pancreatic CSCs. Inhibition of Nanog by shRNA enhanced
the inhibitory effects of EGCG on self-renewal capacity of CSCs. EGCG inhibited
cell proliferation and induced apoptosis by inhibiting the expression of Bcl-2
and XIAP and activating caspase-3. Interestingly, EGCG also inhibited the
components of SHh pathway (smoothened, patched, Gli1 and Gli2) and Gli
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, EGCG inhibited EMT by inhibiting the
expression of Snail, Slug and ZEB1, and TCF/LEF transcriptional activity, which
correlated with significantly reduced CSC's migration and invasion, suggesting
the blockade of signaling involved in early metastasis. Furthermore, combination 
of quercetin with EGCG had synergistic inhibitory effects on self-renewal
capacity of CSCs through attenuation of TCF/LEF and Gli activities. Since
aberrant SHh signaling occurs in pancreatic tumorigenesis, therapeutics that
target SHh pathway may improve the outcomes of patients with pancreatic cancer by
targeting CSCs.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3480310
PMID: 21796625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cancer Microenviron. 2011 Dec;4(3):247-59. doi: 10.1007/s12307-011-0078-3. Epub
2011 Jul 26.

Contribution of bone tissue modulus to breast cancer metastasis to bone.

Guelcher SA(1), Sterling JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University,
2400 Highland Avenue, 107 Olin Hall, Nashville, TN, 37235-1604, USA,
Scott.guelcher@vanderbilt.edu.

Certain tumors, such as breast, frequently metastasize to bone where they can
induce bone destruction. Currently, it is well-accepted that the tumor cells are 
influenced by other cells and growth factors present in the bone microenvironment
that lead to tumor-induced bone disease. Over the past 20 years, many groups have
studied this process and determined the major contributing factors; however,
these results do not fully explain the changes in gene expression and cell
behavior that occur when tumor cells metastasize to bone. More recently, groups
studying metastasis from soft tissue sites have determined that the rigidity of
the microenvironment, which increases during tumor progression in soft tissue,
can regulate tumor cell behavior and gene expression. Therefore, we began to
investigate the role of the rigid bone extracellular matrix in the regulation of 
genes that stimulate tumor-induced bone disease. We found that the rigidity of
bone specifically regulates parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) and Gli2 
expression in a transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) and
mechanotransduction-dependent mechanism. In this review, we summarize the
mechanotransduction signaling pathway and how this influences TGF-ß signaling and
osteolytic gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3234324
PMID: 21789687  [PubMed]


365. Genes Cancer. 2010 Sep;1(9):941-51. doi: 10.1177/1947601910385449.

Reduction of human embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma tumor growth by inhibition of the
hedgehog signaling pathway.

Tostar U(1), Toftgård R, Zaphiropoulos PG, Shimokawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
SE-14183 Sweden.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most frequent soft-tissue sarcoma in children.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (E-RMS) represents the most common RMS subtype, but
the molecular events driving this tumor are still largely unknown. The hedgehog
(HH) pathway, a major signal transduction cascade, is linked with many cancers,
including RMS. As we previously have detected loss of heterozygosity of PTCH1 in 
E-RMS, we now examined 8 E-RMS tumor samples and 5 E-RMS cell lines for the
presence of PTCH1 mutations, but none was detected. However, in the E-RMS cell
lines, a variable pattern of up-regulated expression of certain HH signaling
target genes, including HHIP, PTCH1, SFRP1, and GLI1, was observed. Moreover,
treatment with the small molecule HH signaling inhibitors cyclopamine and GANT61 
inhibited cell proliferation in all E-RMS cell lines analyzed. Interestingly,
GANT61 was more effective, and this was accompanied by increased apoptosis, while
cyclopamine promoted necrotic events. Specific knockdown of SMO had no effect on 
the proliferation of E-RMS cells, indicating the presence of an SMO-independent
HH signaling pathway in the E-RMS cell lines. Furthermore, in an in vivo
xenograft model, tumor growth was significantly reduced by GANT61 treatment of
E-RMS cells. Additionally, siRNA experiments provided evidence that inhibition of
GLI1 or GLI3 but not GLI2 was sufficient to reduce proliferation of these cell
lines. As GANT61 is known to block GLI1/GLI2 transcriptional activity, the
inhibition of E-RMS growth by GANT61 is likely to be mediated through GLI1. In
conclusion, our findings implicate that GLI1 could constitute an effective
therapeutic target in pediatric E-RMS.

PMCID: PMC3092259
PMID: 21779473  [PubMed]


366. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab. 2011;6(3):453-467.

The hedgehog/Gli signaling paradigm in prostate cancer.

Chen M(1), Carkner R, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)Ordway Research Institute, 150 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

Hedgehog is a ligand-activated signaling pathway that regulates Gli-mediated
transcription. Although most noted for its role as an embryonic morphogen,
hyperactive hedgehog also causes human skin and brain malignancies. The
hedgehog-related gene anomalies found in these tumors are rarely found in
prostate cancer. Yet surveys of human prostate tumors show concordance of high
expression of hedgehog ligands and Gli2 that correlate with the potential for
metastasis and therapy-resistant behavior. Likewise, prostate cancer cell lines
express hedgehog target genes, and their growth and survival is affected by
hedgehog/Gli inhibitors. To date, the preponderance of data supports the idea
that prostate tumors benefit from a paracrine hedgehog microenvironment similar
to the developing prostate. Uncertainty remains as to whether hedgehog's
influence in prostate cancer also includes aspects of tumor cell autocrine-like
signaling. The recent findings that Gli proteins interact with the androgen
receptor and affect its transcriptional output have helped to identify a novel
pathway through which hedgehog/Gli might affect prostate tumor behavior and
raises questions as to whether hedgehog signaling in prostate cancer cells is
suitably measured by the expression of Gli target genes alone.

PMCID: PMC3137913
PMID: 21776292  [PubMed]


367. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;17(17):5674-85. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0432.
Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Targeting the notch ligand JAGGED1 in both tumor cells and stroma in ovarian
cancer.

Steg AD(1), Katre AA, Goodman B, Han HD, Nick AM, Stone RL, Coleman RL, Alvarez
RD, Lopez-Berestein G, Sood AK, Landen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

PURPOSE: Jagged1, a Notch ligand, is expressed on both tumor epithelial and
endothelial cells and therefore may be amenable to dual targeting of the tumor
stroma and malignant cell compartments of the tumor microenvironment.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We describe in vitro effects of targeting of Jagged1 on
ovarian cancer cells and in vivo effects of independent targeting of stromal and 
malignant cell Jagged1 using species-specific human or murine siRNA constructs
incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles and delivered intravenously in an
orthotopic mouse model.
RESULTS: Jagged1 expression was prominent in SKOV3ip1 and IGROV-AF1, and
significantly overexpressed in SKOV3TRip2, a taxane-resistant SKOV3 subclone.
Jagged1 silencing with siRNA decreased cell viability and reversed taxane
chemoresistance. In two different orthotopic ovarian cancer models, treatment
with anti-human Jagged1 siRNA-CH reduced growth by 54.4% to 58.3% and with
anti-murine Jagged1 siRNA-CH reduced growth by 41.7% to 48.8%. The combination of
both species-specific constructs reduced tumor weight by 87.5% to 93.1% and
sensitized SKOV3TRip2 tumors to docetaxel in vivo. Tumors showed reduced
microvessel density with anti-murine Jagged1 constructs and decreased
proliferation with anti-human Jagged1 siRNAs-CH. In addition, we show that
Jagged1 downregulation does not sensitize cells to taxanes through a reduction in
MDR1 expression, but at least in part by cross-talk with the GLI2 mediator of the
Hedgehog pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Jagged1 plays dual roles in cancer progression through an angiogenic
function in tumor endothelial cells and through proliferation and chemoresistance
in tumor cells. Dual inhibition represents an attractive therapeutic strategy for
ovarian and potentially other malignancies.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3166981
PMID: 21753153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;71(17):5904-14. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4173. Epub
2011 Jul 11.

Blocking Hedgehog survival signaling at the level of the GLI genes induces DNA
damage and extensive cell death in human colon carcinoma cells.

Mazumdar T(1), Devecchio J, Agyeman A, Shi T, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Canonical Hedgehog (HH) signaling is characterized by Smoothened (Smo)-dependent 
activation of the transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2, which regulate HH target
genes. In human colon carcinoma cells, treatment with the Gli small-molecule
inhibitor GANT61 induces extensive cell death in contrast to the Smo inhibitor
cyclopamine. Here we elucidate cellular events upstream of cell death elicited by
GANT61, which reveal the basis for its unique cytotoxic activity in colon
carcinoma cells. Unlike cyclopamine, GANT61 induced transient cellular
accumulation at G(1)-S (24 hours) and in early S-phase (32 hours), with elevated 
p21(Cip1), cyclin E, and cyclin A in HT29 cells. GANT61 induced DNA damage within
24 hours, with the appearance of p-ATM and p-Chk2. Pharmacologic inhibition of
Gli1 and Gli2 by GANT61 or genetic inhibition by transient transfection of the
Gli3 repressor (Gli3R) downregulated Gli1 and Gli2 expression and induced <U+03B3>H2AX, 
PARP cleavage, caspase-3 activation, and cell death. GANT61 induced <U+03B3>H2AX nuclear
foci, while transient transfection of Gli3R showed expression of Gli3R and <U+03B3>H2AX 
foci within the same nuclei in HT29, SW480, and HCT116. GANT61 specifically
targeted Gli1 and Gli2 substantiated by specific inhibition of (i) direct binding
of Gli1 and Gli2 to the promoters of target genes HIP1 and BCL-2, (ii)
Gli-luciferase activity, and (iii) transcriptional activation of BCL-2. Taken
together, these findings establish that inhibition of HH signaling at the level
of the GLI genes downstream of Smo is critical in the induction of DNA damage in 
early S-phase, leading to cell death in human colon carcinoma cells.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3165104
PMID: 21747117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 1;21(7):1059-68. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0206. Epub 2011
Aug 24.

Expression of Sonic hedgehog during cell proliferation in the human cerebellum.

Haldipur P(1), Bharti U, Govindan S, Sarkar C, Iyengar S, Gressens P, Mani S.

Author information: 
(1)National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, India.

The regulation of cell proliferation in the external granular layer (EGL) of the 
developing cerebellum is important for its normal patterning. An important signal
that regulates EGL cell proliferation is Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Shh is secreted by
the Purkinje cells (PC) and has a mitogenic effect on the granule cell precursors
of the EGL. Deregulation of Shh signaling has been associated with abnormal
development, and been implicated in medulloblastomas, which are tumors that arise
from the cerebellum. Given the importance of the Shh pathway in cerebellum
development and disease, there has been no systematic study of its expression
pattern during human cerebellum development. In this study, we describe the
expression pattern of Shh, its receptor patched, smoothened, and its effectors
that belong to the Gli family of transcription factors, during normal human
cerebellum development from 10 weeks of gestational age, and in medulloblastomas 
that represents a case of abnormal cell proliferation in the cerebellum. This
expression pattern is compared to equivalent stages in the normal development of 
cerebellum in mouse, as well as in tumors. Important differences between human
and mouse that reflect differences in the normal developmental program between
the 2 species are observed. First, in humans there appears to be a stage of Shh
signaling within the EGL, when the PC are not yet the source of Shh. Second,
unlike in the postnatal mouse cerebellum, expression of Shh in the PC in the
postnatal human cerebellum is downregulated. Finally, medulloblastomas in the
human but not in patched heterozygote mouse express Shh. These results highlight 
cross-species differences in the regulation of the Shh signaling pathway.

PMID: 21732818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Nov;112(11):3140-50. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23240.

shRNA-mediated silencing of Gli2 gene inhibits proliferation and sensitizes human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells towards TRAIL-induced apoptosis.

Zhang D(1), Liu J, Wang Y, Chen J, Chen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital of Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, Guangdong Province, China.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been reported in
various cancer types including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). As a key effector 
of this signaling, Gli2 plays a crucial role in carcinogenesis, including the
activation of genes encoding apoptosis inhibitors and cell-cycle regulators. In
this study, we examined the role of Gli2 proliferation and survival of HCC cells.
First, the expression levels of Hh pathway components were detected in a subset
of HCC cell lines. To establish the role of Gli2 in maintaining the tumorigenic
properties of HCC cells, we developed small hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting Gli2
and transfected it into SMMC-7721 cell, which was selected with high level of Hh 
signaling expression. Next, effects of Gli2 gene silencing, on cell proliferation
and on the expression of cell cycle-related proteins were evaluated, then,
whether down-regulation of Gli2 renders HCC cell susceptible to TRAIL was
examined in vitro. Knockdown of Gli2 inhibited cell proliferation and induced G1 
phase arrest of cell cycle in SMMC-7721 cell through down-regulation of cyclin
D1, cyclinE2, and up-regulation of p21-WAF1. Also, Gli2 gene siliencing
sensitized SMMC-7721 cell to tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand-induced apoptosis by reducing the expression of the long and short isoform
of c-FLIP and Bcl-2, and then augmented the activation of initiator caspases-8/-9
and effector caspases-3, which induces PARP cleavage. In conclusion, our data
suggest that Gli2 plays a predominant role in the proliferation and apoptosis
resistance of HCC cells, and that knockdown of Gli2 may be a novel anticancer
strategy for the treatment of HCC.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21695716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 Aug;122(2):231-40. doi: 10.1007/s00401-011-0846-7. Epub
2011 Jun 17.

Pediatric and adult sonic hedgehog medulloblastomas are clinically and
molecularly distinct.

Northcott PA(1), Hielscher T, Dubuc A, Mack S, Shih D, Remke M, Al-Halabi H,
Albrecht S, Jabado N, Eberhart CG, Grajkowska W, Weiss WA, Clifford SC, Bouffet
E, Rutka JT, Korshunov A, Pfister S, Taylor MD.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Center, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Recent integrative genomic approaches have defined molecular subgroups of
medulloblastoma that are genetically and clinically distinct. Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) medulloblastomas account for one-third of all cases and comprise the
majority of infant and adult medulloblastomas. To discern molecular heterogeneity
among Shh-medulloblastomas, we analyzed transcriptional profiles from four
independent Shh-medulloblastoma expression datasets (n = 66). Unsupervised
clustering analyses demonstrated a clear distinction between infant and adult
Shh-medulloblastomas, which was reliably replicated across datasets. Comparison
of transcriptomes from infant and adult Shh-medulloblastomas revealed
deregulation of multiple gene families, including genes implicated in cellular
development, synaptogenesis, and extracellular matrix maintenance. Furthermore,
metastatic dissemination is a marker of poor prognosis in adult, but not in
pediatric Shh-medulloblastomas. Children with desmoplastic Shh-medulloblastomas
have a better prognosis than those with Shh-medulloblastomas and classic
histology. Desmoplasia is not prognostic for adult Shh-medulloblastoma.
Cytogenetic analysis of a large, non-overlapping cohort of Shh-medulloblastomas
(n = 151) revealed significant over-representation of chromosome 10q deletion (P 
< 0.001) and MYCN amplification (P < 0.05) in pediatric Shh cases compared with
adults. Adult Shh-medulloblastomas harboring chromosome 10q deletion, 2 gain, 17p
deletion, 17q gain, and/or GLI2 amplification have a much worse prognosis as
compared to pediatric cases exhibiting the same aberrations. Collectively, our
data demonstrate that pediatric and adult Shh-medulloblastomas are clinically,
transcriptionally, genetically, and prognostically distinct.

PMCID: PMC4538327
PMID: 21681522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Int J Oncol. 2011 Oct;39(4):899-906. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1076. Epub 2011 Jun
14.

Pharmacological inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway prevents human
rhabdomyosarcoma cell growth.

Kawabata N(1), Ijiri K, Ishidou Y, Yamamoto T, Nagao H, Nagano S, Maeda S, Komiya
S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.

The Hedgehog pathway functions as an organizer in embryonic development. Recent
studies have shown that mutation of the PTCH1 gene involved in the Hedgehog
pathway affects rhabdomyosarcoma development. However, the expression of Hedgehog
pathway molecules in human rhabdomyosarcoma cells has not been well clarified. In
addition, the effect of pharmacological inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway is not
known. We investigated the expression of the genes involved in the Hedgehog
pathway using human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines and biopsy specimens. Further, we
evaluated the effect of pharmacological inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway using 
cyclopamine or GANT61 by WST assay, cell proliferation assay and cell death
detection assay. Real-time PCR revealed that human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines
and biopsy specimens overexpressed the following genes: Sonic hedgehog, Indian
hedgehog, Desert hedgehog, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2 and ULK3. Immunohistochemistry 
revealed that rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines and biopsy specimens expressed SMO and 
GLI2. Inhibition of SMO by cyclopamine slowed the growth of human
rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines. Similarly, inhibition of GLI by GANT61 slowed the
growth of human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines. Inhibition of cell proliferation and
apoptotic cell death together prevented the growth of rhabdomyosarcoma cells by
cyclopamine and GANT61 treatment. Our findings suggest that pharmacological
inhibition of the Hedgehog pathway may be a useful approach for treating
rhabdomyosarcoma patients.

PMID: 21674124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Dev Cell. 2011 Jun 14;20(6):775-87. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.04.018.

Overlapping roles and collective requirement for the coreceptors GAS1, CDO, and
BOC in SHH pathway function.

Allen BL(1), Song JY, Izzi L, Althaus IW, Kang JS, Charron F, Krauss RS, McMahon 
AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, 48109, USA. benallen@umich.edu

Secreted Hedgehog (HH) ligands signal through the canonical receptor Patched
(PTCH1). However, recent studies implicate three additional HH-binding,
cell-surface proteins, GAS1, CDO, and BOC, as putative coreceptors for HH
ligands. A central question is to what degree these coreceptors function
similarly and what their collective requirement in HH signal transduction is.
Here we provide evidence that GAS1, CDO, and BOC play overlapping and essential
roles during HH-mediated ventral neural patterning of the mammalian neural tube. 
Specifically, we demonstrate two important roles for these molecules: an early
role in cell fate specification of multiple neural progenitors and a later role
in motor neuron progenitor maintenance. Most strikingly, genetic loss-of-function
experiments indicate an obligatory requirement for GAS1, CDO, and BOC in HH
pathway activity in multiple tissues.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3121104
PMID: 21664576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Oct 1;20(19):3725-37. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr241. Epub 2011 Jun 
8.

A novel murine allele of Intraflagellar Transport Protein 172 causes a syndrome
including VACTERL-like features with hydrocephalus.

Friedland-Little JM(1), Hoffmann AD, Ocbina PJ, Peterson MA, Bosman JD, Chen Y,
Cheng SY, Anderson KV, Moskowitz IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Chicago, 900 East 57th Street,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The primary cilium is emerging as a crucial regulator of signaling pathways
central to vertebrate development and human disease. We identified
atrioventricular canal 1 (avc1), a mouse mutation that caused VACTERL association
with hydrocephalus, or VACTERL-H. We showed that avc1 is a hypomorphic mutation
of intraflagellar transport protein 172 (Ift172), required for ciliogenesis and
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. Phenotypically, avc1 caused VACTERL-H but not
abnormalities in left-right (L-R) axis formation. Avc1 resulted in structural
cilia defects, including truncated cilia in vivo and in vitro. We observed a
dose-dependent requirement for Ift172 in ciliogenesis using an allelic series
generated with Ift172(avc1) and Ift172(wim), an Ift172 null allele: cilia were
present on 42% of avc1 mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) and 28% of avc1/wim MEFs,
in contrast to >90% of wild-type MEFs. Furthermore, quantitative cilium length
analysis identified two specific cilium populations in mutant MEFS: a normal
population with normal IFT and a truncated population, 50% of normal length, with
disrupted IFT. Cells from wild-type embryos had predominantly full-length cilia, 
avc1 embryos, with Hh signaling abnormalities but not L-R abnormalities, had
cilia equally divided between full-length and truncated, and avc1/wim embryos,
with both Hh signaling and L-R abnormalities, were primarily truncated. Truncated
Ift172 mutant cilia showed defects of the distal ciliary axoneme, including
disrupted IFT88 localization and Hh-dependent Gli2 localization. We propose a
model in which mutation of Ift172 results in a specific class of abnormal cilia, 
causing disrupted Hh signaling while maintaining L-R axis determination, and
resulting in the VACTERL-H phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3168284
PMID: 21653639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;47(1):99-107. doi: 10.1530/JME-10-0177.

Organization of the Indian hedgehog--parathyroid hormone-related protein system
in the postnatal growth plate.

Chau M(1), Forcinito P, Andrade AC, Hegde A, Ahn S, Lui JC, Baron J, Nilsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Cartilage Unit, Center for Molecular Medicine and Division of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Womens and Childrens Health, Karolinska 
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

In embryonic growth cartilage, Indian hedgehog (Ihh) and parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) participate in a negative feedback loop that
regulates chondrocyte differentiation. Postnatally, this region undergoes major
structural and functional changes. To explore the organization of the IhhPTHrP
system in postnatal growth plate, we microdissected growth plates of 7-day-old
rats into their constituent zones and assessed expression of genes participating 
in the hPTHrP feedback loop. Ihh, Patched 1, Smoothened, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and
Pthr1 were expressed in regions analogous to the expression domains in embryonic 
growth cartilage. However, PTHrP was expressed in resting zone cartilage, a site 
that differs from the embryonic source, the periarticular cells. We then used
mice in which lacZ has replaced coding sequences of Gli1 and thus serves as a
marker for active hedgehog signaling. At 1, 4, 8, and 12 weeks of age, lacZ
expression was detected in a pattern analogous to that of embryonic cartilage.
The findings support the hypothesis that the embryonic IhhPTHrP feedback loop is
maintained in the postnatal growth plate except that the source of PTHrP has
shifted to a more proximal location in the resting zone.

PMID: 21642420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020271. Epub 2011 May 25.

GLI1 confers profound phenotypic changes upon LNCaP prostate cancer cells that
include the acquisition of a hormone independent state.

Nadendla SK(1), Hazan A, Ward M, Harper LJ, Moutasim K, Bianchi LS, Naase M,
Ghali L, Thomas GJ, Prowse DM, Philpott MP, Neill GW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular
Science, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, United Kingdom.

The GLI (GLI1/GLI2) transcription factors have been implicated in the development
and progression of prostate cancer although our understanding of how they
actually contribute to the biology of these common tumours is limited. We
observed that GLI reporter activity was higher in normal (PNT-2) and tumourigenic
(DU145 and PC-3) androgen-independent cells compared to androgen-dependent LNCaP 
prostate cancer cells and, accordingly, GLI mRNA levels were also elevated.
Ectopic expression of GLI1 or the constitutively active <U+0394>NGLI2 mutant induced a
distinct cobblestone-like morphology in LNCaP cells that, regarding the former,
correlated with increased GLI2 as well as expression of the basal/stem-like
markers CD44, ß1-integrin, <U+0394>Np63 and BMI1, and decreased expression of the
luminal marker AR (androgen receptor). LNCaP-GLI1 cells were viable in the
presence of the AR inhibitor bicalutamide and gene expression profiling revealed 
that the transcriptome of LNCaP-GLI1 cells was significantly closer to DU145 and 
PC-3 cells than to control LNCaP-pBP (empty vector) cells, as well as identifying
LCN2/NGAL as a highly induced transcript which is associated with hormone
independence in breast and prostate cancer. Functionally, LNCaP-GLI1 cells
displayed greater clonal growth and were more invasive than control cells but
they did not form colonies in soft agar or prostaspheres in suspension suggesting
that they do not possess inherent stem cell properties. Moreover, targeted
suppression of GLI1 or GLI2 with siRNA did not reverse the transformed phenotype 
of LNCaP-GLI1 cells nor did double GLI1/GLI2 knockdowns activate AR expression in
DU145 or PC-3 cells. As such, early targeting of the GLI oncoproteins may hinder 
progression to a hormone independent state but a more detailed understanding of
the mechanisms that maintain this phenotype is required to determine if their
inhibition will enhance the efficacy of anti-hormonal therapy through the
induction of a luminal phenotype and increased dependency upon AR function.

PMCID: PMC3102098
PMID: 21633508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Magn Reson Med. 2012 Jan;67(1):251-7. doi: 10.1002/mrm.22991. Epub 2011 May 16.

In utero phenotyping of mouse embryonic vasculature with MRI.

Berrios-Otero CA(1), Nieman BJ, Parasoglou P, Turnbull DH.

Author information: 
(1)The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine at the Skirball Institute of
Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA.

The vasculature is the earliest developing organ in mammals and its proper
formation is critical for embryonic survival. MRI approaches have been used
previously to analyze complex three-dimensional vascular patterns and defects in 
fixed mouse embryos. Extending vascular imaging to an in utero setting with
potential for longitudinal studies would enable dynamic analysis of the
vasculature in normal and genetically engineered mouse embryos, in vivo. In this 
study, we employed an in utero MRI approach that corrects for motion, using a
combination of interleaved gated acquisition and serial coregistration of rapidly
acquired three-dimensional images. We tested the potential of this method by
acquiring and analyzing images from wildtype and Gli2 mutant embryos,
demonstrating a number of Gli2 phenotypes in the brain and cerebral vasculature. 
These results show that in utero MRI can be used for in vivo phenotype analysis
of a variety of mutant mouse embryos.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3445259
PMID: 21590728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Endocrinology. 2011 Jul;152(7):2894-903. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-0263. Epub 2011 May
17.

The role of sonic hedgehog-Gli2 pathway in the masculinization of external
genitalia.

Miyagawa S(1), Matsumaru D, Murashima A, Omori A, Satoh Y, Haraguchi R, Motoyama 
J, Iguchi T, Nakagata N, Hui CC, Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto,
Japan. gensan@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

During embryogenesis, sexually dimorphic organogenesis is achieved by hormones
produced in the gonad. The external genitalia develop from a single primordium,
the genital tubercle, and their masculinization processes depend on the androgen 
signaling. In addition to such hormonal signaling, the involvement of nongonadal 
and locally produced masculinization factors has been unclear. To elucidate the
mechanisms of the sexually dimorphic development of the external genitalia,
series of conditional mutant mouse analyses were performed using several mutant
alleles, particularly focusing on the role of hedgehog signaling pathway in this 
manuscript. We demonstrate that hedgehog pathway is indispensable for the
establishment of male external genitalia characteristics. Sonic hedgehog is
expressed in the urethral plate epithelium, and its signal is mediated through
glioblastoma 2 (Gli2) in the mesenchyme. The expression level of the sexually
dimorphic genes is decreased in the glioblastoma 2 mutant embryos, suggesting
that hedgehog signal is likely to facilitate the masculinization processes by
affecting the androgen responsiveness. In addition, a conditional mutation of
Sonic hedgehog at the sexual differentiation stage leads to abnormal male
external genitalia development. The current study identified hedgehog signaling
pathway as a key factor not only for initial development but also for sexually
dimorphic development of the external genitalia in coordination with androgen
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3115609
PMID: 21586556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2011 Jun;70(6):430-7. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31821b94db.

GLI2 is a potential therapeutic target in pediatric medulloblastoma.

Buczkowicz P(1), Ma J, Hawkins C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Canada.

To determine whether the zinc finger transcription factors GLI1 to GLI3 and
suppressor of fused (SUFU) components of the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway may
be prognostic markers and potential therapeutic targets in pediatric
medulloblastoma (MB), we investigated the relationship of the expression of these
proteins to prognosis in the MB of 124 patients who had undergone surgery at the 
Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Ontario, Canada). The expressions of GLI1 (p
= 0.011) and GLI2 (p = 0.003), but not of GLI3 (p = 0.774) or SUFU (p = 0.137),
in the MB were associated with a worse overall survival by Kaplan-Meier analysis.
Overall survival of patients positive for GLI1 and GLI2 was 6.01 ± 0.85 years and
5.27 ± 1.44 years, respectively, versus 10.11 ± 1.52 years and 10.18 ± 0.22 years
for patients negative for GLI1 and GLI2, respectively. Knockdown of GLI2 in 3 MB 
cell lines resulted in decreased cell number and viability, as determined by the 
MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay;
knockdown of GLI1 had no effect. The decrease in cell number with GLI2 knockdown 
was caused by G0 cell cycle arrest; there was no induction of apoptosis. These
results suggest that targeting the Sonic hedgehog pathway in positive patients
may be a useful adjuvant therapeutic strategy for MB.

PMID: 21572341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019174.

Ascl1/Mash1 is a novel target of Gli2 during Gli2-induced neurogenesis in P19 EC 
cells.

Voronova A(1), Fischer A, Ryan T, Al Madhoun A, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is important for neurogenesis in vivo.
Gli transcription factors, effector proteins of the Shh signaling pathway, have
neurogenic properties in vivo, which are still poorly understood. To study the
molecular basis of neurogenic properties of Gli2, we used a well-established
embryonic stem cell model, the P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell line, which can 
be induced to differentiate into neurons in the presence of retinoic acid (RA).
We found that, in the absence of RA, overexpression of Gli2 induced P19 EC cells 
to differentiate into neurons, but not astrocytes during the first ten days of
differentiation. To our knowledge, this is the first indication that the
expression of Gli factors can convert EC cells into neurons. Furthermore, Gli2
upregulated expression of the neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors,
such as NeuroD, Neurog1 and Ascl1/Mash1 in P19 EC cells. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we showed that Gli2 bound to multiple regulatory
regions in the Ascl1 gene, including promoter and enhancer regions during
Gli2-induced neurogenesis. In addition, Gli2 activated the Ascl1/Mash1 promoter
in vitro. Using the expression of a dominant-negative form of Gli2, fused to the 
Engrailed repression domain, we observed a reduction in gliogenesis and a
significant downregulation of the bHLH factors Ascl1/Mash1, Neurog1 and NeuroD,
leading to delayed neurogenesis in P19 EC cells, further supporting the
hypothesis that Ascl1/Mash1 is a direct target of Gli2. In summary, Gli2 is
sufficient to induce neurogenesis in P19 stem cells at least in part by directly 
upregulating Ascl1/Mash1. Our results provide mechanistic insight into the
neurogenic properties of Gli2 in vitro, and offer novel plausible explanations
for its in vivo neurogenic properties.

PMCID: PMC3084770
PMID: 21559470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Sep;26(9):2052-67. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.419.

Microtubule assembly affects bone mass by regulating both osteoblast and
osteoclast functions: stathmin deficiency produces an osteopenic phenotype in
mice.

Liu H(1), Zhang R, Ko SY, Oyajobi BO, Papasian CJ, Deng HW, Zhang S, Zhao M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, China.

Cytoskeleton microtubules regulate various cell signaling pathways that are
involved in bone cell function. We recently reported that inhibition of
microtubule assembly by microtubule-targeting drugs stimulates osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation. To further elucidate the role of microtubules
in bone homeostasis, we characterized the skeletal phenotype of mice null for
stathmin, an endogenous protein that inhibits microtubule assembly. In vivo
micro-computed tomography (µCT) and histology revealed that stathmin deficiency
results in a significant reduction of bone mass in adult mice concurrent with
decreased osteoblast and increased osteoclast numbers in bone tissues. Phenotypic
analyses of primary calvarial cells and bone marrow cells showed that stathmin
deficiency inhibited osteoblast differentiation and induced osteoclast formation.
In vitro overexpression studies showed that increased stathmin levels enhanced
osteogenic differentiation of preosteoblast MC3T3-E1<U+2009>cells and mouse bone
marrow-derived cells and attenuated osteoclast formation from osteoclast
precursor Raw264.7<U+2009>cells and bone marrow cells. Results of immunofluorescent
studies indicated that overexpression of stathmin disrupted radial microtubule
filaments, whereas deficiency of stathmin stabilized the microtubule network
structure in these bone cells. In addition, microtubule-targeting drugs that
inhibit microtubule assembly and induce osteoblast differentiation lost these
effects in the absence of stathmin. Collectively, these results suggest that
stathmin, which alters microtubule dynamics, plays an essential role in
maintenance of postnatal bone mass by regulating both osteoblast and osteoclast
functions in bone. \

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 21557310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Pathol Oncol Res. 2011 Sep;17(3):765-9. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9384-9. Epub 2011
May 9.

Study of the differentially expressed genes in pleomorphic adenoma using cDNA
microarrays.

Song M(1), Xiao C, Wang T, Pei Q, Wang S, Xu L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. smgjzh160@sohu.com

Recent studies have determined that gene expression profiling using microarray
technology can be used to identify tumor-related molecules. The objective of this
study was to screen the differentially expressed genes between pleomorphic
adenoma (PA) and the normal tissue adjacent to PA using cDNA microarrays and to
further validate the differentially expressed genes by real-time PCR. In this
study, we selected five pairs of PA and the surrounding normal salivary gland
tissues. The total RNA was isolated from tumor and normal tissues and purified to
mRNA. The mRNA was reverse-transcribed to cDNA with the incorporation of
fluorescent-labeled dUTP to prepare the hybridization probes. The mixed probes
were hybridized to Whole Human Gene Expression Microarrays by Agilent.
Tumor-related genes were screened by analyzing the fluorescence intensity. As a
result, a total of 447 genes were found to be differentially expressed between PA
and normal tissue adjacent to PA. Among them, 185 genes were up-regulated and 262
genes were down-regulated in PA. By constructing a network from the
differentially expressed genes, some genes, such as Gli2 and CTNNB1, were
identified as being at the core of the network. In addition, differential gene
expression was validated for 2 up-regulated genes, Gli2 and LOX, using real-time 
PCR and the results were consistent with those of the cDNA microarray analysis
thus verifying the credibility of the microarray data. Therefore, our microarray 
data may provide clues for finding novel genes involved in the development of PA,
and shed light on finding new targets for diagnosis and therapy of PA. Further
characterization of these differentially expressed genes will be useful in
understanding the genetic basis for PA.

PMID: 21553343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Pathol. 2011 Jul;224(3):401-10. doi: 10.1002/path.2888. Epub 2011 May 5.

Increased production of sonic hedgehog by ballooned hepatocytes.

Rangwala F(1), Guy CD, Lu J, Suzuki A, Burchette JL, Abdelmalek MF, Chen W, Diehl
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Therapy, Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Ballooned hepatocytes distinguish non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) from
steatosis. Such cells contain dilated endoplasmic reticulum and ubiquitin
aggregates, characteristics of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Hepatocyte
ballooning increases the risk for fibrosis in NASH, suggesting that ballooned
hepatocytes release pro-fibrogenic factors. Hedgehog ligands function as
pro-fibrogenic factors in liver diseases, but mechanisms for hedgehog ligand
production remain poorly understood. We evaluated the hypothesis that endoplasmic
reticulum stress induces hepatocyte production of hedgehog ligands that provide
paracrine pro-fibrogenic signals to neighbouring cells. In livers from NASH
patients, keratin 8/18 and ubiquitin staining demonstrated enlarged, keratin
8/18-negative/ubiquitin-positive hepatocytes (ballooned hepatocytes) that were
positive for Sonic hedgehog. In order to model endoplasmic reticulum stress in
vitro, primary mouse hepatocytes were treated with tunicamycin. Compared to
vehicle, tunicamycin significantly increased Sonic hedgehog and Indian hedgehog
expression. Furthermore, conditioned medium from tunicamycin-treated hepatocytes 
increased Gli-luciferase reporter activity 14-fold more than conditioned medium
from vehicle-treated hepatocytes. Cyclopamine (hedgehog signalling inhibitor)
abrogated the effect of conditioned medium from tunicamycin-treated hepatocytes, 
verifying that soluble hepatocyte-derived factors activate hedgehog signalling.
Ballooned hepatocytes in NASH patients did not express the hedgehog target gene, 
Gli2, a-smooth muscle actin or vimentin, but were surrounded by Gli2-positive
stromal cells expressing these myofibroblast markers. Trichrome staining
demonstrated the accumulation of ballooned hepatocytes in areas of matrix
deposition, and numbers of Sonic hedgehog-positive hepatocytes correlated with
the degree of ballooning and fibrosis stage. Hepatocytes undergoing endoplasmic
reticiulum stress generate hedgehog ligands which act as paracrine pro-fibrogenic
factors for hedgehog-responsive stromal cells. These results help to explain why 
fibrosis stage correlates with hepatocyte ballooning in NASH.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3628812
PMID: 21547909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Oral Oncol. 2011 Jun;47(6):504-9. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.03.027. Epub
2011 May 4.

HH/GLI signalling as a new therapeutic target for patients with oral squamous
cell carcinoma.

Yan M(1), Wang L, Zuo H, Zhang Z, Chen W, Mao L, Zhang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital, School 
of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology and Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, 639
Zhizaoju Road, Shanghai 200011, China.

Aberrant activation of HH/GLI has recently been reported in multiple cancer
types, yet its role in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has not been
investigated. In this study, we aimed to determine the role of HH/GLI in OSCC.
Expression of GLI1 and GLI2 was examined in OSCC samples from 136 patients by
immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinicopathology parameters and clinical
outcomes of the patients. Two HH/GLI specific small molecule inhibitors
cyclopamine and GANT61, were used to test the potential role of HH/GLI in OSCC.
We found that GLI2, one of the main transcriptional activators of HH/GLI
signalling, was expressed in 60 (44%) of the 136 OSCC samples and the expression 
was significantly associated with poor clinical outcomes. Only 44% of the
patients whose tumours expressed GLI2 survived at 5years after surgery compared
to 77% of those whose tumours lacked the GLI2 expression (P<0.0001). Both
cyclopamine and GANT61 effectively inhibited GLI expression, slowed cell growth, 
promoted G1 arrest, increased apoptosis and inhibited migration of OSCC cells.
Our results demonstrate that activation of HH/GLI pathway plays an important role
in OSCC progression. Together with the finding that expression of GLI2 is
strongly associated with a poor clinic outcome of OSCC patients, the data suggest
that a subset of OSCC patients may benefit from anti-HH/GLI therapies.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21536478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Hum Pathol. 2011 Nov;42(11):1643-52. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.023. Epub
2011 Apr 29.

Glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3, a hedgehog transcription factor, is
highly expressed in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells of classical Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Greaves WO(1), Kim JE, Singh RR, Drakos E, Kunkalla K, Sánchez-Espiridión B,
Garcia JF, Medeiros LJ, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The hedgehog signaling pathway has been shown to play a pathogenic role in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and anaplastic large cell lymphoma, but has not
been assessed in classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Glioma-associated oncogene
homologues 1, 2, and 3 are transcriptional effectors of the hedgehog pathway. In 
this study, we first used real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction to
investigate the expressions of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 in 3 classical Hodgkin
lymphoma cell lines. GLI1 and GLI2 were variably expressed, but GLI3 was highly
expressed in all cell lines. We then used immunohistochemistry to assess
glioma-associated oncogene homologues 1, 2, and 3 in 39 classical Hodgkin
lymphoma patient samples. Glioma-associated oncogene homologues 1 and 2 were
weakly to variably expressed in a subset of classical Hodgkin lymphoma patient
samples. In contrast, glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 showed strong,
uniform nuclear expression in virtually all Hodgkin/Reed-Stenberg cells. We then 
performed an immunohistochemical survey of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3
expression in 13 cases of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and 218
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Most other lymphoma types showed variable or no expression
of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3, with a minor subset of cases of
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, ALK-positive and ALK-negative
anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable with features
intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and classical Hodgkin lymphoma
showing a glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 staining pattern
indistinguishable from classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Our data provide a rationale
to further investigate the biologic significance of glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 3 in classical Hodgkin lymphoma biology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3165071
PMID: 21531006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Clin Invest. 2011 May;121(5):1768-81. doi: 10.1172/JCI46307. Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Basal cell carcinomas in mice arise from hair follicle stem cells and multiple
epithelial progenitor populations.

Grachtchouk M(1), Pero J, Yang SH, Ermilov AN, Michael LE, Wang A, Wilbert D,
Patel RM, Ferris J, Diener J, Allen M, Lim S, Syu LJ, Verhaegen M, Dlugosz AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 May;121(5):1681-3.

Uncontrolled Hedgehog (Hh) signaling leads to the development of basal cell
carcinoma (BCC), the most common human cancer, but the cell of origin for BCC is 
unclear. While Hh pathway dysregulation is common to essentially all BCCs, there 
exist multiple histological subtypes, including superficial and nodular variants,
raising the possibility that morphologically distinct BCCs may arise from
different cellular compartments in skin. Here we have shown that induction of a
major mediator of Hh signaling, GLI2 activator (GLI2<U+0394>N), selectively in stem
cells of resting hair follicles in mice, induced nodular BCC development from a
small subset of cells in the lower bulge and secondary hair germ compartments.
Tumorigenesis was markedly accelerated when GLI2<U+0394>N was induced in growing hair
follicles. In contrast, induction of GLI2<U+0394>N in epidermis led to the formation of 
superficial BCCs. Expression of GLI2<U+0394>N at reduced levels in mice yielded lesions 
resembling basaloid follicular hamartomas, which have previously been linked to
low-level Hh signaling in both mice and humans. Our data show that the cell of
origin, tissue context (quiescent versus growing hair follicles), and level of
oncogenic signaling can determine the phenotype of Hh/Gli-driven skin tumors,
with high-level signaling required for development of superficial BCC-like tumors
from interfollicular epidermis and nodular BCC-like tumors from hair follicle
stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3083781
PMID: 21519145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):166-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.047. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

A novel mutation of the PTCH1 gene activates the Shh/Gli signaling pathway in a
Chinese family with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.

Zhang T(1), Chen M, Lü Y, Xing Q, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China.

OBJECTIVE: Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is an autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by a predisposition to neoplasms and developmental
abnormalities. Mutation of the PTCH1 gene, which is considered to be responsible 
for NBCCS, was investigated in a Chinese NBCCS family in this study.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was isolated from blood samples of all eight living
individuals in this family. Mutation analysis of PTCH1 was done by amplified
polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing. Biophysical predictions of the
altered protein were made using various bioinformatics tools. To determine the
action of the mutated protein, the expression of Gli1 and Gli2 was investigated
by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: A novel PTCH1 mutation at 897G<U+2192>A in exon4 was identified in all four
affected members. This mutation was not found in any unaffected members of this
family or in 100 unrelated healthy Chinese people. The mutation causes amino acid
replacement 237E<U+2192>K in the first large extracellular loop of the PTCH1 protein
which is required for Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) binding. This mutation changes the
protein's biochemical properties and protein activity, resulting in subsequent
activation of transcription factors, Gli1 and Gli2, in the Shh/Gli signaling
pathway. Immunohistochemistry showed overexpression of Gli1 and Gli2 in the
keratocystic odontogenic tumor (KCOT) tissues.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21514272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Pathol. 2011 Jun;224(2):169-79. doi: 10.1002/path.2880. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Role of GLI2 in the growth of human osteosarcoma.

Nagao H(1), Ijiri K, Hirotsu M, Ishidou Y, Yamamoto T, Nagano S, Takizawa T,
Nakashima K, Komiya S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Japan.

The Hedgehog pathway functions as an organizer in embryonic development. Aberrant
activation of the Hedgehog pathway has been reported in various types of
malignant tumours. The GLI2 transcription factor is a key mediator of Hedgehog
pathway but its contribution to neoplasia is poorly understood. To establish the 
role of GLI2 in osteosarcoma, we examined its expression by real-time PCR using
biopsy tissues. To examine the function of GLI2, we evaluated the growth of
osteosarcoma cells and their cell cycle after GLI2 knockdown. To study the effect
of GLI2 activation, we examined mesenchymal stem cell growth and the cell cycle
after forced expression of GLI2. We found that GLI2 was aberrantly over-expressed
in human osteosarcoma biopsy specimens. GLI2 knockdown by RNA interferences
prevented osteosarcoma growth and anchorage-independent growth. Knockdown of GLI2
promoted the arrest of osteosarcoma cells in G(1) phase and was accompanied by
reduced protein expression of the cell cycle accelerators cyclin D1, SKP2 and
phosphorylated Rb. On the other hand, knockdown of GLI2 increased the expression 
of p21(cip1) . In addition, over-expression of GLI2 promoted mesenchymal stem
cell proliferation and accelerated their cell cycle progression. Finally,
evaluation of mouse xenograft models showed that GLI2 knockdown inhibited the
growth of osteosarcoma in nude mice. Our findings suggest that inhibition of GLI2
may represent an effective therapeutic approach for patients with osteosarcoma.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21506130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 31;6(3):e18330. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018330.

Hedgehog inhibition promotes a switch from Type II to Type I cell death receptor 
signaling in cancer cells.

Kurita S(1), Mott JL, Cazanave SC, Fingas CD, Guicciardi ME, Bronk SF, Roberts
LR, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Gores GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States of America.

TRAIL is a promising therapeutic agent for human malignancies. TRAIL often
requires mitochondrial dysfunction, referred to as the Type II death receptor
pathway, to promote cytotoxicity. However, numerous malignant cells are TRAIL
resistant due to inhibition of this mitochondrial pathway. Using
cholangiocarcinoma cells as a model of TRAIL resistance, we found that Hedgehog
signaling blockade sensitized these cancer cells to TRAIL cytotoxicity
independent of mitochondrial dysfunction, referred to as Type I death receptor
signaling. This switch in TRAIL requirement from Type II to Type I death receptor
signaling was demonstrated by the lack of functional dependence on Bid/Bim and
Bax/Bak, proapoptotic components of the mitochondrial pathway. Hedgehog signaling
modulated expression of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP), which serves to
repress the Type I death receptor pathway. siRNA targeted knockdown of XIAP
mimics sensitization to mitochondria-independent TRAIL killing achieved by
Hedgehog inhibition. Regulation of XIAP expression by Hedgehog signaling is
mediated by the glioma-associated oncogene 2 (GLI2), a downstream transcription
factor of Hedgehog. In conclusion, these data provide additional mechanisms
modulating cell death by TRAIL and suggest Hedgehog inhibition as a therapeutic
approach for TRAIL-resistant neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC3069071
PMID: 21483830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 17;286(24):21524-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.234146. Epub
2011 Mar 18.

GLI2 transcription factor mediates cytokine cross-talk in the tumor
microenvironment.

Elsawa SF(1), Almada LL, Ziesmer SC, Novak AJ, Witzig TE, Ansell SM,
Fernandez-Zapico ME.

Author information: 
(1)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Tumor cells interact with their surrounding microenvironment to survive and
persist within the host. Cytokines play a key role in regulating this crosstalk
between malignant cells and surrounding cells in the microenvironment. Although
this phenomenon is clearly established, the molecular mechanisms mediating this
cellular event remain elusive. Here, using as a model bone marrow stromal cells, 
we describe a novel signaling mechanism initiated by CCL5 in these cells leading 
to up-regulation of immunoglobulin secretion by malignant B cells. CCL5 increases
IL-6 expression and secretion in bone marrow stromal cells. IL-6 in turn induces 
Ig secretion by malignant B cells. Analysis of the mechanism reveals that CCL5
signaling induces GLI2 through a PI3K-AKT-I<U+03BA>Ba-p65 pathway and requires GLI2
transcriptional activity to modulate IL-6 expression and Ig secretion in vitro
and in vivo. Together, these results identify a novel signaling pathway mediating
the stromal-cancer cell interactions, leading to increased Ig production by
malignant cells.

PMCID: PMC3122211
PMID: 21454528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cancer Sci. 2011 Jul;102(7):1306-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.01943.x. Epub 
2011 May 3.

Essential role of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in human glioma-initiating
cells.

Takezaki T(1), Hide T, Takanaga H, Nakamura H, Kuratsu J, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell Lineage Modulation, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe, Japan.

Recent findings have demonstrated that malignant tumors, including glioblastoma
multiforme, contain cancer-initiating cells (also known as cancer stem cells),
which self-renew and are malignant, with features of tissue-specific stem cells. 
As these cells are resistant to irradiation and anti-cancer drugs, it is
important to characterize them and find targeting therapies. In this study, we
established two primary human glioma cell lines from anaplastic oligodendroglioma
and glioblastoma multiforme. These lines were enriched in glioma-initiating
cells, as just 10 cells formed malignant glioma when injected into mouse brain.
We used these cell lines to examine the roles of the Notch, Hedgehog and Wnt
signaling pathways, which are involved in stem-cell maintenance and
tumorigenesis, to determine which of these pathways are crucial to
glioma-initiating cells and their regulation. Here we show that the Hedgehog
pathway is indispensable for glioma-initiating cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis; the Hedgehog signaling inhibitors prevented glioma-initiating cell
proliferation, while signaling inhibitors for Notch or Wnt did not.
Overexpression of Gli2<U+0394>C, a C-terminal-truncated form of Gli2 that antagonizes
Gli transcription factor functions, blocked glioma-initiating cell proliferation 
in culture and tumorigenesis in vivo. Knockdown of the Gli downstream factor Cdc2
also prevented glioma-initiating cell proliferation. Taken together, these
results show that the Hedgehog<U+2192> Gli<U+2192>Cdc2 signaling cascade plays a role in the
proliferation and malignancy of glioma-initiating cells.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21453386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 30;31(13):5169-80. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5495-10.2011.

Suppressor of fused is required to maintain the multipotency of neural progenitor
cells in the retina.

Cwinn MA(1), Mazerolle C, McNeill B, Ringuette R, Thurig S, Hui CC, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6,
Canada.

The morphogen sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays a crucial role in development of the
CNS, including the neural retina. Suppressor of fused (Sufu) has been recently
identified as a critical regulator of Hh signaling in mammals. However, the
precise roles that Sufu plays in the regulation of proliferation and cell-fate
decisions in neural progenitors is unknown. Here, we have addressed these
questions by conditionally deleting Sufu in mouse multipotent retinal progenitor 
cells (RPCs). Sufu deletion in RPCs results in transient increases in Hh activity
and proliferation followed by developmentally premature cell-cycle exit.
Importantly, we demonstrate a novel role for Sufu in the maintenance of
multipotency in RPCs. Sufu-null RPCs downregulate transcription factors required 
to specify or maintain RPC identity (Rax, Vsx2) and multipotency (Pax6) but
continue to express the neural progenitor marker Sox2. These cells fail to
express retinal lineage-specific transcription factors, such as Math5, and adopt 
an amacrine or horizontal cell fate at the expense of all other classes of
retinal neurons. Genetic elimination of Gli2 in Sufu-null RPCs attenuates Hh
pathway activity and restores multipotency in neural progenitors. These data
provide novel evidence that Sufu-mediated antagonism of Hh/Gli2 signaling is
required to maintain RPC multipotency and identity.

PMID: 21451052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Dent Res. 2011 Apr;90(4):483-8. doi: 10.1177/0022034510391797.

Sonic hedgehog stimulates proliferation of human periodontal ligament stem cells.

Martínez C(1), Smith PC, Rodriguez JP, Palma V.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Center for Genomics of the Cell,
Las Palmeras 3425, Santiago, Chile.

Regulation of cell renewal in the periodontium is a critical cell function that
has not been clarified. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted signaling molecule
that plays a key role during development and adult tissue homeostasis. In the
present study, we have analyzed the role played by Shh in human periodontal
ligament stem cell (HPLSC) proliferation. HPLSC were isolated with anti-STRO-1
antibodies. Shh increased the expression of GLI1 and PTC-1 and selectively
stimulated cell proliferation in STRO-1(+) derived from adult periodontal
ligament. Shh components were localized to primary cilia in STRO-1(+) cells after
Shh stimulation. STRO-1(+) also expressed Shh, suggesting an autocrine-regulated 
phenomenon. Thus, we propose that Shh plays a critical role in the regulation of 
cell proliferation in STRO-1(+)/HPLSC.

PMID: 21441223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e17884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017884.

The p53 inhibitor MDM2 facilitates Sonic Hedgehog-mediated tumorigenesis and
influences cerebellar foliation.

Malek R(1), Matta J, Taylor N, Perry ME, Mendrysa SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, United States of America.

Disruption of cerebellar granular neuronal precursor (GNP) maturation can result 
in defects in motor coordination and learning, or in medulloblastoma, the most
common childhood brain tumor. The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) pathway is important for
GNP proliferation; however, the factors regulating the extent and timing of GNP
proliferation, as well as GNP differentiation and migration are poorly
understood. The p53 tumor suppressor has been shown to negatively regulate the
activity of the Shh effector, Gli1, in neural stem cells; however, the
contribution of p53 to the regulation of Shh signaling in GNPs during cerebellar 
development has not been determined. Here, we exploited a hypomorphic allele of
Mdm2 (Mdm2(puro)), which encodes a critical negative regulator of p53, to alter
the level of wild-type MDM2 and p53 in vivo. We report that mice with reduced
levels of MDM2 and increased levels of p53 have small cerebella with shortened
folia, reminiscent of deficient Shh signaling. Indeed, Shh signaling in
Mdm2-deficient GNPs is attenuated, concomitant with decreased expression of the
Shh transducers, Gli1 and Gli2. We also find that Shh stimulation of GNPs
promotes MDM2 accumulation and enhances phosphorylation at serine 166, a
modification known to increase MDM2-p53 binding. Significantly, loss of MDM2 in
Ptch1(+/-) mice, a model for Shh-mediated human medulloblastoma, impedes
cerebellar tumorigenesis. Together, these results place MDM2 at a major nexus
between the p53 and Shh signaling pathways in GNPs, with key roles in cerebellar 
development, GNP survival, cerebellar foliation, and MB tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3060880
PMID: 21437245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2011 Jun;9(2):89-95. doi: 10.1007/s11914-011-0052-5.

Bone structural components regulating sites of tumor metastasis.

Sterling JA(1), Guelcher SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs: Tennessee Valley Healthcare System (VISN 9),
Nashville, TN, USA. Julie.sterling@vanderbilt.edu

Tumors such as breast, lung, and prostate frequently metastasize to bone, where
they can cause intractable pain and increase the risk of fracture in patients.
When tumor cells metastasize to bone, they interact with the microenvironment to 
promote bone destruction primarily through the secretion of osteolytic factors by
the tumor cells and the subsequent release of growth factors from the bone. Our
recent data suggest that the differential rigidity of the mineralized bone
microenvironment relative to that of soft tissue regulates the expression of
osteolytic factors by the tumor cells. The concept that matrix rigidity regulates
tumor growth is well established in solid breast tumors, where increased rigidity
stimulates tumor cell invasion and metastasis. Our studies have indicated that a 
transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) and Rho-associated kinase (ROCK)-dependent
mechanism is involved in the response of metastatic tumor cells to the rigid
mineralized bone matrix. In this review, we will discuss the interactions between
ROCK and TGF-ß signaling, as well as potential new therapies that target these
pathways.

PMCID: PMC3430076
PMID: 21424744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):860-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33903. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

Holoprosencephaly in a family segregating novel variants in ZIC2 and GLI2.

Wannasilp N(1), Solomon BD, Warren-Mora N, Clegg NJ, Delgado MR, Lacbawan F, Hu
P, Winder TL, Roessler E, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common malformation of the human forebrain.
Typical manifestations in affected patients include a characteristic pattern of
structural brain and craniofacial anomalies. HPE may be caused by mutations in
over 10 identified genes; the inheritance is traditionally viewed as autosomal
dominant with highly variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance. We present 
the description of a family simultaneously segregating two novel variants in the 
HPE-associated genes, ZIC2 and GLI2, as well as the results of extensive
population-based studies of the variant region in GLI2. This is the first time
that multiple HPE-associated variants in these genes have been reported in one
family, and raises important questions about how clinicians and researchers
should view the inheritance of conditions such as HPE.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21416594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Development. 2011 Apr;138(7):1433-44. doi: 10.1242/dev.058016.

Conditional ablation of Pten in osteoprogenitors stimulates FGF signaling.

Guntur AR(1), Reinhold MI, Cuellar J Jr, Naski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN) is a direct
antagonist of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase. Pten is a well recognized tumor
suppressor and is one of the most commonly mutated genes in human malignancies.
More recent studies of development and stem cell behavior have shown that PTEN
regulates the growth and differentiation of progenitor cells. Significantly, PTEN
is found in osteoprogenitor cells that give rise to bone-forming osteoblasts;
however, the role of PTEN in bone development is incompletely understood. To
define how PTEN functions in osteoprogenitors during bone development, we
conditionally deleted Pten in mice using the cre-deleter strain Dermo1cre, which 
targets undifferentiated mesenchyme destined to form bone. Deletion of Pten in
osteoprogenitor cells led to increased numbers of osteoblasts and expanded bone
matrix. Significantly, osteoblast development and synthesis of osteoid in the
nascent bone collar was uncoupled from the usual tight linkage to chondrocyte
differentiation in the epiphyseal growth plate. The expansion of osteoblasts and 
osteoprogenitors was found to be due to augmented FGF signaling as evidenced by
(1) increased expression of FGF18, a potent osteoblast mitogen, and (2) decreased
expression of SPRY2, a repressor of FGF signaling. The differentiation of
osteoblasts was autonomous from the growth plate chondrocytes and was correlated 
with an increase in the protein levels of GLI2, a transcription factor that is a 
major mediator of hedgehog signaling. We provide evidence that increased GLI2
activity is also a consequence of increased FGF signaling through downstream
events requiring mitogen-activated protein kinases. To test whether FGF signaling
is required for the effects of Pten deletion, we deleted one allele of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2). Significantly, deletion of FGFR2 caused a
partial rescue of the Pten-null phenotype. This study identifies activated FGF
signaling as the major mediator of Pten deletion in osteoprogenitors.

PMCID: PMC3050668
PMID: 21385768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Neurooncol. 2011 Sep;104(3):697-704. doi: 10.1007/s11060-011-0552-2. Epub 2011 
Mar 5.

Role of sonic hedgehog signaling in migration of cell lines established from
CD133-positive malignant glioma cells.

Uchida H(1), Arita K, Yunoue S, Yonezawa H, Shinsato Y, Kawano H, Hirano H,
Hanaya R, Tokimura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1, Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima, 890-8520, Japan.

The sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is essential for normal development
and embryogenic morphogenesis. In malignant neoplasms its inappropriate
activation correlates with tumorigenesis, proliferation, and migration. However, 
the role of SHH in infiltrative growth of glioblastoma remains to be elucidated. 
CD133 is a marker of tumor stem cells in glioblastoma, which are thought to play 
important roles in tumorigenesis, drug resistance, and tumor recurrence. We
investigated the role of the SHH signaling pathway in migration of glioblastoma
cell lines derived from CD133-positive cells. Two cell lines, GBM1 and GBM2, were
established from CD133-positive cells sorted on an automagnetic cell separator
from dispersed human glioblastoma cells. Both cell lines exhibited sphere-like
growth in serum-free medium containing growth factor. Expression of patched
(PTCH)-, a receptor of SHH, of smoothened (SMO)-, a 7 transmembrane receptor, and
of GLI1- and GLI2, PTCH cascade signal proteins, was evaluated by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The effects of
recombinant SHH in the medium, and of knockdown of SMO-, GLI1- or GLI2 messenger 
RNA (mRNA) on the migratory ability of neoplastic cells were evaluated by scratch
assays. RT-PCR revealed the presence of PTCH-, SMO-, GLI1-, and GLI2 mRNA in
these cells. Their migratory ability was significantly enhanced (P < 0.05) by
addition of recombinant SHH to the medium. Knockdown of SMO-, GLI1- or GLI2 mRNA 
resulted in significant decrease in the mobility of the neoplastic cells. Our
study suggests that the SHH pathway plays an important role in the migratory
ability of cells derived from CD133-positive human glioblastoma cells.

PMID: 21380601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Mar;127(3):1182-90. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3182043a07.

Role of Indian hedgehog signaling in palatal osteogenesis.

Levi B(1), James AW, Nelson ER, Brugmann SA, Sorkin M, Manu A, Longaker MT.

Author information: 
(1)Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery,
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Division, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, Calif., USA. benlevimd@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Cleft lip-cleft palate is a common congenital disability and
represents a large biomedical burden. Through the use of animal models, the
molecular underpinnings of cleft palate are becoming increasingly clear. Indian
hedgehog (Ihh) has been shown to be associated with craniofacial development and 
to be active in the palatine bone. The authors hypothesize that Indian hedgehog
activity plays a role in osteogenesis within the secondary palate and that
defects in this pathway may inhibit osteogenesis of the secondary palate.
METHODS: Palates were isolated from wild-type mice during the period of palate
development (embryonic days 9.5 to 17.5). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction was used for detecting gene expression during osteogenic differentiation
and cellular differentiation (Shh, Ihh, Ptc1, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, Runx2, Alp, and
Col1a1). Next, palates were analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin, aniline blue,
pentachrome, and in situ hybridization to assess osteogenesis of the palatal
shelf and expression of hedgehog pathway genes. Finally, the palates of Indian
hedgehog-null mice were analyzed to determine the effect of genetic deficiency on
palatal development osteogenesis.
RESULTS: Increased Indian hedgehog and osteogenic signaling coincided with
ossification and fusion of the palate in wild-type mice. This included a fivefold
to 150-fold peak in expression of hedgehog elements, including Ihh, at embryonic 
day 15.5 as compared with embryonic day 9.5. Contrarily, loss of Indian hedgehog 
by genetic knockout (Ihh-/-) resulted in decreased secondary palate ossification.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors' results suggest a role for hedgehog signaling during
palatal ossification. The hedgehog pathway is activated during palatal fusion,
and deletion of Indian hedgehog leads to diminished ossification of the secondary
hard palate.

PMCID: PMC3078688
PMID: 21364421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1995-2007. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0494. Epub 2011 
Apr 6.

Mesenchymal stromal cells from neonatal tracheal aspirates demonstrate a pattern 
of lung-specific gene expression.

Bozyk PD(1), Popova AP, Bentley JK, Goldsmith AM, Linn MJ, Weiss DJ, Hershenson
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-5688, USA.

We have previously isolated mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) from the tracheal
aspirates of premature neonates with respiratory distress. Although isolation of 
MSCs correlates with the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, the
physiologic role of these cells remains unclear. To address this, we further
characterized the cells, focusing on the issues of gene expression, origin, and
cytokine expression. Microarray comparison of early passage neonatal lung MSC
gene expression to cord blood MSCs and human fetal and neonatal lung fibroblast
lines demonstrated that the neonatal lung MSCs differentially expressed 971 gene 
probes compared with cord blood MSCs, including the transcription factors Tbx2,
Tbx3, Wnt5a, FoxF1, and Gli2, each of which has been associated with lung
development. Compared with lung fibroblasts, 710 gene probe transcripts were
differentially expressed by the lung MSCs, including IL-6 and IL-8/CXCL8.
Differential chemokine expression was confirmed by protein analysis. Further,
neonatal lung MSCs exhibited a pattern of Hox gene expression distinct from cord 
blood MSCs but similar to human fetal lung fibroblasts, consistent with a lung
origin. On the other hand, limiting dilution analysis showed that fetal lung
fibroblasts form colonies at a significantly lower rate than MSCs, and
fibroblasts failed to undergo differentiation along adipogenic, osteogenic, and
chondrogenic lineages. In conclusion, MSCs isolated from neonatal tracheal
aspirates demonstrate a pattern of lung-specific gene expression, are distinct
from lung fibroblasts, and secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3202893
PMID: 21341990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Dev Dyn. 2011 Apr;240(4):766-74. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22578. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Increased proteolytic processing of full-length Gli2 transcription factor reduces
the hedgehog pathway activity in vivo.

Li J(1), Wang C, Pan Y, Bai Z, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Immunology, College of Life Science, Shandong
University, Jinan, P. R. China.

The proteolytic processing of Gli2 and Gli3 full-length transcription factors
into repressors is a key step of the regulation in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. The
differential Gli2 and Gli3 processing is controlled by the processing determinant
domain or PDD, but its significance is not clear. We generated a Gli2 mutant
allele, Gli2(3PDD) , in which the Gli3PDD substitutes for the Gli2PDD. As
expected, Gli2(3PDD) is processed more efficiently and at a different position as
compared to Gli2, indicating that PDD also determines the extent and site of Gli2
and Gli3 processing in vivo. The increase in levels of the Gli2 repressor in
Gli2(3PDD) mutant reduces the Hh pathway activity. Gli2(3PDD) processing is still
regulated by Hh signaling. These results indicate that the proper balance between
the Gli2 full-length activator and repressor is essential for Hh signaling.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3071291
PMID: 21337666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 15;286(15):13502-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.217604. Epub
2011 Feb 11.

Dual Phosphorylation of suppressor of fused (Sufu) by PKA and GSK3beta regulates 
its stability and localization in the primary cilium.

Chen Y(1), Yue S, Xie L, Pu XH, Jin T, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiansu 210029, China.

Suppressor of fused (Sufu) is an essential negative regulator of the sonic
hedgehog (Shh) pathway, but little is known about how Sufu itself is normally
regulated. Here, we report that Sufu is phosphorylated at Ser-342 and Ser-346 by 
GSK3ß and cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), respectively, and
phosphorylation at this dual site stabilizes Sufu against Shh signaling-induced
degradation. We further show that localization of Sufu in the primary cilium is
induced by Shh signaling and is required for the turnover of both phosphorylated 
and total Sufu. Perturbing Sufu phosphorylation with PKA inhibitors or replacing 
Ser-346 with alanine reduced the stay and replacing Ser-342 and Ser-346 with
aspartic acid prolonged the stay of Sufu in the cilia. Finally, ciliary
localization of Gli2/3 also required Smo and was similarly influenced by
perturbations of PKA activity or mutations at the dual Sufu phosphorylation site.
Thus, Shh likely induced trafficking of phospho-Sufu into the primary cilium in a
complex with Gli2/3, and dephosphorylation triggered a retrograde export,
allowing Sufu to be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

PMCID: PMC3075696
PMID: 21317289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Development. 2011 Mar;138(6):1207-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.054114. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Multiple developmental programs are altered by loss of Zic1 and Zic4 to cause
Dandy-Walker malformation cerebellar pathogenesis.

Blank MC(1), Grinberg I, Aryee E, Laliberte C, Chizhikov VV, Henkelman RM, Millen
KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

Heterozygous deletions encompassing the ZIC1;ZIC4 locus have been identified in a
subset of individuals with the common cerebellar birth defect Dandy-Walker
malformation (DWM). Deletion of Zic1 and Zic4 in mice produces both cerebellar
size and foliation defects similar to human DWM, confirming a requirement for
these genes in cerebellar development and providing a model to delineate the
developmental basis of this clinically important congenital malformation. Here,
we show that reduced cerebellar size in Zic1 and Zic4 mutants results from
decreased postnatal granule cell progenitor proliferation. Through genetic and
molecular analyses, we show that Zic1 and Zic4 have Shh-dependent function
promoting proliferation of granule cell progenitors. Expression of the
Shh-downstream genes Ptch1, Gli1 and Mycn was downregulated in Zic1/4 mutants,
although Shh production and Purkinje cell gene expression were normal. Reduction 
of Shh dose on the Zic1(+/-);Zic4(+/-) background also resulted in cerebellar
size reductions and gene expression changes comparable with those observed in
Zic1(-/-);Zic4(-/-) mice. Zic1 and Zic4 are additionally required to pattern
anterior vermis foliation. Zic mutant folial patterning abnormalities correlated 
with disrupted cerebellar anlage gene expression and Purkinje cell topography
during late embryonic stages; however, this phenotype was Shh independent. In
Zic1(+/-);Zic4(+/-);Shh(+/-), we observed normal cerebellar anlage patterning and
foliation. Furthermore, cerebellar patterning was normal in both Gli2-cko and
Smo-cko mutant mice, where all Shh function was removed from the developing
cerebellum. Thus, our data demonstrate that Zic1 and Zic4 have both Shh-dependent
and -independent roles during cerebellar development and that multiple
developmental disruptions underlie Zic1/4-related DWM.

PMCID: PMC3042874
PMID: 21307096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 3;6(2):e16798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016798.

Inhibition of hedgehog signaling decreases proliferation and clonogenicity of
human mesenchymal stem cells.

Plaisant M(1), Giorgetti-Peraldi S, Gabrielson M, Loubat A, Dani C, Peraldi P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR6543, Institute of Biology, Development and Cancer, Faculté de
Médecine, Nice, France.

Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) have the ability to differentiate into
osteoblasts, adipocytes and chondrocytes. We have previously shown that hMSC were
endowed with a basal level of Hedgehog signaling that decreased after
differentiation of these cells. Since hMSC differentiation is associated with
growth-arrest we investigated the function of Hh signaling on cell proliferation.
Here, we show that inhibition of Hh signaling, using the classical inhibitor
cyclopamine, or a siRNA directed against Gli-2, leads to a decrease in hMSC
proliferation. This phenomenon is not linked to apoptosis but to a block of the
cells in the G0/G1 phases of the cell cycle. At the molecular level, it is
associated with an increase in the active form of pRB, and a decrease in cyclin A
expression and MAP kinase phosphorylation. Inhibition of Hh signaling is also
associated with a decrease in the ability of the cells to form clones. By
contrast, inhibition of Hh signaling during hMSC proliferation does not affect
their ability to differentiate. This study demonstrates that hMSC are endowed
with a basal Hedgehog signaling activity that is necessary for efficient
proliferation and clonogenicity of hMSC. This observation unravels an unexpected 
new function for Hedgehog signaling in the regulation of human mesenchymal stem
cells and highlights the critical function of this morphogen in hMSC biology.

PMCID: PMC3033417
PMID: 21304817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):116-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.025. Epub 2011
Jan 27.

Altered differentiation and paracrine stimulation of mammary epithelial cell
proliferation by conditionally activated Smoothened.

Visbal AP(1), LaMarca HL, Villanueva H, Toneff MJ, Li Y, Rosen JM, Lewis MT.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling network is critical for patterning and organogenesis 
in mammals, and has been implicated in a variety of cancers. Smoothened (Smo),
the gene encoding the principal signal transducer, is overexpressed frequently in
breast cancer, and constitutive activation in MMTV-SmoM2 transgenic mice caused
alterations in mammary gland morphology, increased proliferation, and changes in 
stem/progenitor cell number. Both in transgenic mice and in clinical specimens,
proliferative cells did not usually express detectable Smo, suggesting the
hypothesis that Smo functioned in a non-cell autonomous manner to stimulate
proliferation. Here, we employed a genetically tagged mouse model carrying a
Cre-recombinase-dependent conditional allele of constitutively active Smo (SmoM2)
to test this hypothesis. MMTV-Cre- or adenoviral-Cre-mediated SmoM2 expression in
the luminal epithelium, but not in the myoepithelium, was required for the
hyper-proliferative phenotypes. High levels of proliferation were observed in
cells adjacent or in close-proximity to Smo expressing cells demonstrating that
SmoM2 expressing cells were stimulating proliferation via a paracrine or
juxtacrine mechanism. In contrast, Smo expression altered luminal cell
differentiation in a cell-autonomous manner. SmoM2 expressing cells, purified by 
fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) via the genetic fluorescent tag,
expressed high levels of Ptch2, Gli1, Gli2, Jag2 and Dll-1, and lower levels of
Notch4 and Hes6, in comparison to wildtype cells. These studies provide insight
into the mechanism of Smo activation in the mammary gland and its possible roles 
in breast tumorigenesis. In addition, these results also have potential
implications for the interpretation of proliferative phenotypes commonly observed
in other organs as a consequence of hedgehog signaling activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3057274
PMID: 21276786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1560-73. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr033. Epub 2011 Jan 
25.

APP-dependent up-regulation of Ptch1 underlies proliferation impairment of neural
precursors in Down syndrome.

Trazzi S(1), Mitrugno VM, Valli E, Fuchs C, Rizzi S, Guidi S, Perini G,
Bartesaghi R, Ciani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and General Physiology, University of Bologna, Italy.

Mental retardation in Down syndrome (DS) appears to be related to severe
neurogenesis impairment during critical phases of brain development. Recent lines
of evidence in the cerebellum of a mouse model for DS (the Ts65Dn mouse) have
shown a defective responsiveness to Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a potent mitogen that
controls cell division during brain development, suggesting involvement of the
Shh pathway in the neurogenesis defects of DS. Based on these premises, we sought
to identify the molecular mechanisms underlying derangement of the Shh pathway in
neural precursor cells (NPCs) from Ts65Dn mice. By using an in vitro model of
NPCs obtained from the subventricular zone and hippocampus, we found that
trisomic NPCs had an increased expression of the Shh receptor Patched1 (Ptch1), a
membrane protein that suppresses the action of a second receptor, Smoothened
(Smo), thereby maintaining the pathway in a repressed state. Partial silencing of
Ptch1 expression in trisomic NPCs restored cell proliferation, indicating that
proliferation impairment was due to Ptch1 overexpression. The overexpression of
Ptch1 in trisomic NPCs resulted from increased levels of AICD [a
transcription-promoting fragment of amyloid precursor protein (APP)] and
increased AICD binding to the Ptch1 promoter. Our data provide novel evidence
that Ptch1 overexpression underlies derangement of the Shh pathway in trisomic
NPCs with consequent proliferation impairment. The demonstration that Ptch1
overexpression in trisomic NPCs is due to an APP fragment provides a link between
this trisomic gene and the defective neuronal production that characterizes the
DS brain.

PMID: 21266456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Development. 2011 Feb;138(4):755-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.062521.

Integration of Hedgehog and BMP signalling by the engrailed2a gene in the
zebrafish myotome.

Maurya AK(1), Tan H, Souren M, Wang X, Wittbrodt J, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673.

Erratum in
    Development. 2012 May;139(10):1885.

Different levels and timing of Hedgehog (Hh) signalling activity have been
proposed to specify three distinct cell types in the zebrafish myotome. Two of
these, the medial fast-twitch fibres (MFFs) and the slow-twitch muscle pioneers
(MPs) are characterised by expression of eng1a, -1b and -2a and require the
highest levels of Hh for their specification. We have defined a minimal eng2a
element sufficient to drive reporter expression specifically in MPs and MFFs.
This element binds both Gli2a, a mediator of Hh signalling, and activated Smads
(pSmads), mediators of bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signalling, in vivo. We
found a strict negative correlation between nuclear accumulation of pSmad, and
eng2a expression in myotomal cells and show that abrogation of pSmad accumulation
results in activation of eng2a, even when Hh signalling is attenuated.
Conversely, driving nuclear accumulation of pSmad suppresses the induction of eng
expression even when Hh pathway activity is maximal. Nuclear accumulation of
pSmads is depleted by maximal Hh pathway activation. We show that a synthetic
form of the Gli2 repressor interacts with Smad1 specifically in the nuclei of
myotomal cells in the developing embryo and that this interaction depends upon
BMP signalling activity. Our results demonstrate that the eng2a promoter
integrates repressive and activating signals from the BMP and Hh pathways,
respectively, to limit its expression to MPs and MFFs. We suggest a novel basis
for crosstalk between the Hh and BMP pathways, whereby BMP-mediated repression of
Hh target genes is promoted by a direct interaction between Smads and truncated
Glis, an interaction that is abrogated by Hh induced depletion of the latter.

PMID: 21266411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Aquat Toxicol. 2011 Jan 25;101(2):335-41. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2010.11.008.
Epub 2010 Nov 19.

Effects of benzo(a)pyrene on the skeletal development of Sebastiscus marmoratus
embryos and the molecular mechanism involved.

He C(1), Zuo Z, Shi X, Li R, Chen D, Huang X, Chen Y, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Subtropical Wetland Ecosystem
Research, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are widespread environmental
contaminants, which have been known to be carcinogenic and teratogenic. However, 
the skeletal development toxicity of PAHs and the mechanism involved remain
unclear. In fishes, the neurocranial and craniofacial skeleton develop as
cartilage. The signaling molecules of hedgehog (Hh) family play crucial roles in 
regulating skeletal development. In the present study, rockfish (Sebastiscus
marmoratus) embryos were exposed to benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) for 7 days at
environmental levels (0.05, 0.5 and 5nmol/L) which resulted in craniofacial
skeleton deformities. BaP exposure reduced the cell proliferation activity in the
craniofacial skeleton as detected by quantitative PCR and in situ hybridization. 
The expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), rather than Indian hedgehog (Ihh), was
down-regulated in the craniofacial skeleton in the 0.5 and 5nmol/L groups.
Consistent with the Shh results, the expression of Ptch1 and Gli2 was decreased
by BaP exposure and BMP4 was presented on changes in the 0.5 and 5nmol/L groups. 
These results suggested that BaP could impair the expression and function of Shh 
signaling pathway, perturbing the proliferation of chondrocytes and so disturbing
craniofacial skeletal development.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21216343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 1;351(1):120-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.037. Epub 2011
Jan 4.

A role for Zic1 and Zic2 in Myf5 regulation and somite myogenesis.

Pan H(1), Gustafsson MK, Aruga J, Tiedken JJ, Chen JC, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

Zic genes encode a conserved family of zinc finger proteins with essential
functions in neural development and axial skeletal patterning in the vertebrate
embryo. Zic proteins also function as Gli co-factors in Hedgehog signaling. Here,
we report that Zic genes have a role in Myf5 regulation for epaxial somite
myogenesis in the mouse embryo. In situ hybridization studies show that Zic1, 2, 
and 3 transcripts are expressed in Myf5-expressing epaxial myogenic progenitors
in the dorsal medial dermomyotome of newly forming somites, and
immunohistological studies show that Zic2 protein is co-localized with Myf5 and
Pax3 in the dorsal medial lip of the dermomyotome, but is not expressed in the
forming myotome. In functional reporter assays, Zic1 and Zic2, but not Zic3,
potentiate the transactivation of Gli-dependent Myf5 epaxial somite-specific (ES)
enhancer activity in 3T3 cells, and Zic1 activates endogenous Myf5 expression in 
10T1/2 cells and in presomitic mesoderm explants. Zic2 also co-immunoprecipitates
with Gli2, indicating that Zic2 forms complexes with Gli2 to promote Myf5
expression. Genetic studies show that, although Zic2 and Zic1 are activated
normally in sonic hedgehog(-/-) mutant embryos, Myf5 expression in newly forming 
somites is deficient in both sonic hedgehog(-/-) and in Zic2(kd/kd) mutant mouse 
embryos, providing further evidence that these Zic genes are upstream regulators 
of Hedgehog-mediated Myf5 activation. Myf5 activation in newly forming somites is
delayed in Zic2 mutant embryos until the time of Zic1 activation, and both Zic2
and Myf5 require noggin for their activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3045035
PMID: 21211521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e15900. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015900.

Coordinated translocation of mammalian Gli proteins and suppressor of fused to
the primary cilium.

Zeng H(1), Jia J, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Intracellular transduction of Hedgehog (Hh) signals in mammals requires
functional primary cilia. The Hh signaling effectors, the Gli family of
transcription factors, and their negative regulator, Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), 
accumulate at the tips of cilia; however, the molecular mechanism regulating this
localization remains elusive. In the current study, we show that the ciliary
localization of mammalian Gli proteins depends on both their N-terminal domains
and a central region lying C-terminal to the zinc-finger DNA-binding domains.
Invertebrate Gli homologs Ci and Tra1, when over-expressed in ciliated mouse
fibroblasts, fail to localize to the cilia, suggesting the lack of a
vertebrate-specific structural feature required for ciliary localization. We
further show that activation of protein kinase A (PKA) efficiently inhibits
ciliary localization of Gli2 and Gli3, but only moderately affects the ciliary
localization of Gli1. Interestingly, variants of Gli2 mimicking the
phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated states of Gli2 are both localized to the
cilia, and their ciliary localizations are subjected to the inhibitory effect of 
PKA activation, suggesting a likely indirect mechanism underlying the roles of
PKA in Gli ciliary localization. Finally, we show that ciliary localization of
Sufu is dependent on ciliary-localized Gli proteins, and is inhibited by PKA
activation, suggesting a coordinated mechanism for the ciliary translocation of
Sufu and Gli proteins.

PMCID: PMC3012114
PMID: 21209912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):894-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088997. Epub 2011 
Jan 5.

Redundant and differential roles of transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 in the
development of mouse fetal Leydig cells.

Barsoum I(1), Yao HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, 
IL, USA.

Appearance of mouse fetal Leydig cells requires activation of the Hedgehog
pathway. Upon binding to the membrane-bound receptor patched, Hedgehog ligands
induce intracellular responses via a combined effect of Gli transcription
factors. Szczepny et al. (Biol Reprod 2009; 80:258-263) found that Gli1, one of
the three Gli transcription factors, is present in the fetal testis and that its 
expression is suppressed by the Hedgehog inhibitor cyclopamine. In this study, we
investigated the involvement of the Gli1 and Gli2 factors in mouse fetal Leydig
cell differentiation. The Gli1 and Gli2 transcription factors showed an
overlapping expression pattern in the testis interstitium at the time when fetal 
Leydig cells appear. Despite their similar expression, Gli1 and Gli2 patterns
were differentially regulated. Initial Gli1 and Gli2 expression depends upon an
active Hedgehog pathway; however, maintenance of only Gli1, but not Gli2,
expression requires activation of the pathway. Inactivation of either the Gli1 or
Gli2 gene did not affect fetal Leydig cell development and testis morphology,
suggesting a functional redundancy. When the transcriptional activity of both
GLI1 and GLI2 was suppressed by a selective inhibitor, GANT61, in cultured fetal 
testes before the appearance of fetal Leydig cells, Gli1 and Gli2 expression and 
steroidogenic marker activity were completely abolished. However at later stages 
when Leydig cells were already present, GANT61 treatment inhibited Gli1
expression but had no effects on Gli2 expression and fetal Leydig cell
appearance. Our results reveal overlapping and redundant Gli1 and Gli2 roles in
fetal Leydig cell differentiation and a novel regulation of Gli2 expression in
the fetal testis.

PMCID: PMC4574634
PMID: 21209421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 25;108(4):1456-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1011410108. Epub 2011 Jan 5.

Intraflagellar transport protein 122 antagonizes Sonic Hedgehog signaling and
controls ciliary localization of pathway components.

Qin J(1), Lin Y, Norman RX, Ko HW, Eggenschwiler JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Primary cilia are required for proper Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling in mammals. 
However, their role in the signal transduction process remains unclear. We have
identified sister of open brain (sopb), a null allele of mouse Intraflagellar
transport protein 122 (Ift122). IFT122 negatively regulates the Shh pathway in
the cilium at a step downstream of the Shh ligand and the transmembrane protein
Smoothened, but upstream of the Gli2 transcription factor. Ift122(sopb) mutants
generate primary cilia, but they show features of defective retrograde
intraflagellar transport. IFT122 controls the ciliary localization of Shh pathway
regulators in different ways. Disruption of IFT122 leads to accumulation of Gli2 
and Gli3 at cilia tips while blocking the ciliary localization of the antagonist 
TULP3. Suppressor of Fused and Smoothened localize to the cilium through an
IFT122-independent mechanism. We propose that the balance between positive and
negative regulators of the Shh pathway at the cilium tip controls the output of
the pathway and that Shh signaling regulates this balance through intraflagellar 
transport.

PMCID: PMC3029728
PMID: 21209331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Clin Genet. 2012 Jan;81(1):70-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01606.x. Epub 2011
Jan 19.

Clinical findings in patients with GLI2 mutations--phenotypic variability.

Bertolacini CD(1), Ribeiro-Bicudo LA, Petrin A, Richieri-Costa A, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, USP, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

Mutations in the human GLI2 gene were first reported in association with
defective anterior pituitary formation, panhypopituitarism, and forebrain
anomalies represented by typical holoprosencephaly (HPE) and
holoprosencephaly-like (HPE-L) phenotypes and postaxial polydactyly.
Subsequently, anophthalmia plus orbital anomalies, heminasal aplasia, branchial
arch anomalies and polydactyly have also been incorporated into the general
phenotype. Here we described six Brazilian patients with phenotypic
manifestations that range from isolated cleft lip/palate with polydactyly,
branchial arch anomalies to semi-lobar holoprosencephaly. Novel sequence variants
were found in the GLI2 gene in patients with marked involvement of the
temporomandibular joint (TMJ), a new clinical finding observed with mutations of 
this gene. Clinical, molecular and genetic aspects are discussed.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3135662
PMID: 21204792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 1;71(3):822-31. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2993. Epub
2010 Dec 28.

TGF-beta promotion of Gli2-induced expression of parathyroid hormone-related
protein, an important osteolytic factor in bone metastasis, is independent of
canonical Hedgehog signaling.

Johnson RW(1), Nguyen MP, Padalecki SS, Grubbs BG, Merkel AR, Oyajobi BO,
Matrisian LM, Mundy GR, Sterling JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs: Tennessee Valley Healthcare System (VISN 9),
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Breast cancer frequently metastasizes to bone, in which tumor cells receive
signals from the bone marrow microenvironment. One relevant factor is TGF-ß,
which upregulates expression of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling molecule, Gli2, which
in turn increases secretion of important osteolytic factors such as parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP). PTHrP inhibition can prevent tumor-induced bone 
destruction, whereas Gli2 overexpression in tumor cells can promote osteolysis.
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that Hh inhibition in bone metastatic
breast cancer would decrease PTHrP expression and therefore osteolytic bone
destruction. However, when mice engrafted with human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells were treated with the Hh receptor antagonist cyclopamine, we observed no
effect on tumor burden or bone destruction. In vitro analyses revealed that
osteolytic tumor cells lack expression of the Hh receptor, Smoothened, suggesting
an Hh-independent mechanism of Gli2 regulation. Blocking Gli signaling in
metastatic breast cancer cells with a Gli2-repressor gene (Gli2-rep) reduced
endogenous and TGF-ß-stimulated PTHrP mRNA expression, but did not alter tumor
cell proliferation. Furthermore, mice inoculated with Gli2-Rep-expressing cells
exhibited a decrease in osteolysis, suggesting that Gli2 inhibition may block
TGF-ß propagation of a vicious osteolytic cycle in this MDA-MB-231 model of bone 
metastasis. Accordingly, in the absence of TGF-ß signaling, Gli2 expression was
downregulated in cells, whereas enforced overexpression of Gli2 restored PTHrP
activity. Taken together, our findings suggest that Gli2 is required for TGF-ß to
stimulate PTHrP expression and that blocking Hh-independent Gli2 activity will
inhibit tumor-induced bone destruction.

PMCID: PMC3077118
PMID: 21189326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Panminerva Med. 2010 Dec;52(4):345-54.

Etiopathogenetic advances and management of holoprosencephaly: from bench to
bedside.

Bellone S(1), De Rienzo F, Prodam F, Savastio S, Busti A, Genoni G, Aimaretti G, 
Bona G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Piemonte
Orientale, Novara, Italy.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a complex brain malformation caused by impaired or
incomplete midline division of the prosencephalon. It's characterized by cerebral
and facial anomalies of different levels of severity. Both genetic and
environmental factors are known to cause HPE, but they cover only few cases.
Genetic causes are responsible for about 20% of cases: they are chromosomal
abnormalities and gene mutations: up to date, nine genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, 
PATCHED1, TDGF1/CRIPTO, FAST1, GLI2 and DHCR) are definitely associated with HPE,
but many others candidate gene are under investigation. The diagnosis of HPE is
usually prenatal and is based on systematic ultrasound scan (US) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). Children with HPE have many medical problems in
agreement with the severity of the brain malformation: craniofacial
abnormalities, neurological signs, endocrine disorders, oromotor and dysautonomic
dysfunction, thus requiring a multidisciplinary team for symptomatic treatment of
manifestations, prevention of complications and parental support. Genetic
counselling is an important step, often made difficult by extreme phenotypic
variability, genetic heterogeneity, and a high risk of recurrence in apparently
sporadic cases. In conclusion it can be concluded that we are far from a complete
explanation of the etiopathogenesis. Future researches on genomic rearrangements 
all over the genome with techniques like the CGH array should lead to the
identification of other causal genes and could improve diagnosis and prognosis. A
skill multidisciplinary approach is mandatory to offer the better clinical
assistance to patients and their parents.

PMID: 21183895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 2;5(12):e15240. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015240.

Kif3a deficiency reverses the skeletal abnormalities in Pkd1 deficient mice by
restoring the balance between osteogenesis and adipogenesis.

Qiu N(1), Cao L, David V, Quarles LD, Xiao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan,
China.

Pkd1 localizes to primary cilia in osteoblasts and osteocytes. Targeted deletion 
of Pkd1 in osteoblasts results in osteopenia and abnormalities in Runx2-mediated 
osteoblast development. Kif3a, an intraflagellar transport protein required for
cilia function, is also expressed in osteoblasts. To assess the relationship
between Pkd1 and primary cilia function on bone development, we crossed
heterozygous Pkd1- and Kif3a-deficient mice to create compound Pkd1 and
Kif3a-deficient mice. Pkd1 haploinsufficiency (Pkd1(+/<U+0394>)) resulted in osteopenia,
characterized by decreased bone mineral density, trabecular bone volume, and
cortical thickness. In addition, deficiency of Pkd1 resulted in impaired
osteoblastic differentiation and enhanced adipogenesis in both primary
osteoblasts and/or bone marrow stromal cell cultures. These changes were
associated with decreased Runx2 expression, increased PPAR<U+03B3> expression, and
impaired hedgehog signaling as evidenced by decreased Gli2 expression in bone and
osteoblast cultures. In contrast, heterozygous Kif3a(+/<U+0394>) mice display no
abnormalities in skeletal development or osteoblast function, but exhibited
decreased adipogenic markers in bone and impaired adipogenesis in vitro in
association with decreased PPAR<U+03B3> expression and upregulation of Gli2.
Superimposed Kif3a deficiency onto Pkd1(+/<U+0394>) mice paradoxically corrected the
effects of Pkd1 deficiency on bone mass, osteoblastic differentiation, and
adipogenesis. In addition, Runx2, PPAR<U+03B3> and Gli2 expression in bone and
osteoblasts were normalized in compound double Pkd1(+/<U+0394>) and Kif3a(+/<U+0394>)
heterozygous mice. The administration of sonic hedgehog, overexpression of Gli2, 
and the PC1 C-tail construct all increased Gli2 and Runx2-II expression, but
decreased PPAR<U+03B3>2 gene expression in C3H10T1/2 cells. Our findings suggest a role 
for Pkd1 and Kif3a to counterbalance the regulation of osteogenesis and
adipogenesis through differential regulation of Runx2 and PPAR<U+03B3> by Gli2.

PMCID: PMC2996304
PMID: 21151991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 1;71(3):1092-102. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2315. Epub
2010 Dec 6.

Hedgehog signaling drives cellular survival in human colon carcinoma cells.

Mazumdar T(1), DeVecchio J, Shi T, Jones J, Agyeman A, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (HH) signaling is implicated in many human
cancers. Classical HH signaling is characterized by Smoothened (Smo)-dependent
activation of Gli1 and Gli2, which transcriptionally regulate target genes. A
small molecule inhibitor of Gli1 and Gli2, GANT61, was used to block HH signaling
in human colon carcinoma cell lines that express HH signaling components. GANT61 
administration induced robust cytotoxicity in 5 of 6 cell lines and moderate
cytotoxicity in the remaining 1 cell line. In comparison, the classical Smo
inhibitor, cyclopamine, induced modest cytotoxicity. Further, GANT61 treatment
abolished the clonogenicity of all six human colon carcinoma cell lines. Analysis
of the molecular mechanisms of GANT61-induced cytotoxicity in HT29 cells showed
increased Fas expression and decreased expression of PDGFRa, which also regulates
Fas. Furthermore, DR5 expression was increased whereas Bcl-2 (direct target of
Gli2) was downregulated following GANT61 treatment. Suppression of Gli1 by shRNA 
mimicked the changes in gene expression observed in GANT61-treated cells.
Overexpression of dominant-negative FADD (to abrogate Fas/DR5-mediated death
receptor signaling) and/or Bcl-2 (to block mitochondria-mediated apoptosis)
partially rescued GANT61-induced cytotoxicity in HT29 cells. Thus, activated GLI 
genes repress DR5 and Fas expressions while upregulating Bcl-2 and PDGFRa
expressions to inhibit Fas and facilitate cell survival. Collectively, these
results highlight the importance of Gli activation downstream of Smo as a
therapeutic target in models of human colon carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3032813
PMID: 21135115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 15;71(2):435-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2876. Epub
2010 Dec 1.

Small molecule inhibition of GDC-0449 refractory smoothened mutants and
downstream mechanisms of drug resistance.

Dijkgraaf GJ(1), Alicke B, Weinmann L, Januario T, West K, Modrusan Z, Burdick D,
Goldsmith R, Robarge K, Sutherlin D, Scales SJ, Gould SE, Yauch RL, de Sauvage
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco,
California 94080, USA.

Inappropriate Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been directly linked to medulloblastoma
(MB), a common malignant brain tumor in children. GDC-0449 is an Hh pathway
inhibitor (HPI) currently under clinical investigation as an anticancer agent.
Treatment of a MB patient with GDC-0449 initially regressed tumors, but this
individual ultimately relapsed with a D473H resistance mutation in Smoothened
(SMO), the molecular target of GDC-0449. To explore the role of the mutated
aspartic acid residue in SMO function, we substituted D473 with every amino acid 
and found that all functional mutants were resistant to GDC-0449, with positively
charged residues conferring potential oncogenic properties. Alanine scan
mutagenesis of SMO further identified E518 as a novel prospective mutation site
for GDC-0449 resistance. To overcome this form of acquired resistance, we
screened a panel of chemically diverse HPIs and identified several antagonists
with potent in vitro activity against these GDC-0449-resistant SMO mutants. The
bis-amide compound 5 was of particular interest, as it was able to inhibit tumor 
growth mediated by drug resistant SMO in a murine allograft model of MB. However,
focal amplifications of the Hh pathway transcription factor Gli2 and the Hh
target gene cyclin D1 (Ccnd1) were observed in two additional resistant models,
indicating that resistance may also occur downstream of SMO. Importantly, these
HPI resistant MB allografts retained their sensitivity to PI3K inhibition,
presenting additional opportunities for the treatment of such tumors.

© 2010 AACR.

PMID: 21123452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mol Cell. 2010 Nov 24;40(4):533-47. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.10.027.

Primary cilium-dependent and -independent Hedgehog signaling inhibits p16(INK4A).

Bishop CL(1), Bergin AM, Fessart D, Borgdorff V, Hatzimasoura E, Garbe JC,
Stampfer MR, Koh J, Beach DH.

Author information: 
(1)Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AT, UK.
c.l.bishop@qmul.ac.uk

In a genome-wide siRNA analysis of p16(INK4a) (p16) modulators, we identify the
Hedgehog (Hh) pathway component SUFU and formally demonstrate that Hh signaling
promotes mitogenesis by suppression of p16. A fragment of the Hh-responsive GLI2 
transcription factor directly binds and inhibits the p16 promoter and senescence 
is associated with the loss of nuclear GLI2. Hh components partially reside in
the primary cilium (PC), and the small fraction of cells in mass culture that
elaborate a PC have the lowest expression of p16. Suppression of p16 is effected 
by both PC-dependent and -independent routes, and ablation of p16 renders cells
insensitive to an Hh inhibitor and increases PC formation. These results directly
link a well-established developmental mitogenic pathway with a key tumor
suppressor and contribute to the molecular understanding of replicative
senescence, Hh-mediated oncogenesis, and potentially the role of p16 in aging.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21095584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Mech Dev. 2011 Jan-Feb;128(1-2):90-103. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.11.002. Epub 2010
Nov 17.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 positively and negatively regulate Shh signalling to specify
ventral midbrain progenitor identity.

Mavromatakis YE(1), Lin W, Metzakopian E, Ferri AL, Yan CH, Sasaki H, Whisett J, 
Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Foxa2, a member of the Foxa family of forkhead/winged helix family of
transcription factors, has previously been shown to be an upstream positive
regulator of Shh expression in many different tissues. Recent studies also
strongly suggest that Foxa2 specify cell fate by inhibiting the expression of
cell fate determinants such as Helt1 and Nkx2.2. In this paper, phenotypic
analyses of Wnt1cre; Foxa2flox/flox embryos in the midbrain have demonstrated a
novel role for Foxa2 and its related family member, Foxa1, to attenuate Shh
signalling by inhibiting the expression of its intracellular transducer, Gli2, at
the transcriptional level. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments indicate
that Foxa2 binds to genomic regions of Gli2 and likely regulates its expression
in a direct manner. Our studies, involving loss and gain of function studies in
mice, also provided further insights into the gene regulatory interactions among 
Foxa1, Foxa2 and Shh in ventral midbrain progenitors that contribute to midbrain 
patterning. Altogether, these data indicate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 contribute to
the specification of ventral midbrain progenitor identity by regulating Shh
signalling in a positive and negative manner.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21093585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Hedgehog signalling in T-cell development: a non-redundant role for Gli1.

Bommhardt U.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52.

PMID: 21088480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428-9. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Dissecting the functions of Gli transcription factors in T-cell development.

Varas A, Sacedón R.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52.

PMID: 21088481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Dis Model Mech. 2011 Jan;4(1):43-56. doi: 10.1242/dmm.006262. Epub 2010 Nov 2.

Disruption of Mks1 localization to the mother centriole causes cilia defects and 
developmental malformations in Meckel-Gruber syndrome.

Cui C(1), Chatterjee B, Francis D, Yu Q, SanAgustin JT, Francis R, Tansey T,
Henry C, Wang B, Lemley B, Pazour GJ, Lo CW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Department of Developmental Biology, 8111 Rangos
Research Center, 530 45th Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15201, USA.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a recessive disorder resulting in multiple birth 
defects that are associated with mutations affecting ciliogenesis. We recovered a
mouse mutant with a mutation in the Mks1 gene (Mks1(del64-323)) that caused a
260-amino-acid deletion spanning nine amino acids in the B9 domain, a protein
motif with unknown function conserved in two other basal body proteins. We showed
that, in wild-type cells, Mks1 was localized to the mother centriole from which
the cilium was generated. However, in mutant Mks1(del64-323) cells, Mks1 was not 
localized to the centriole, even though it maintained a punctate distribution.
Resembling MKS patients, Mks1 mutants had craniofacial defects, polydactyly,
congenital heart defects, polycystic kidneys and randomized left-right
patterning. These defects reflected disturbance of functions subserved by motile 
and non-motile cilia. In the kidney, glomerular and tubule cysts were observed
along with short cilia, and cilia were reduced in number to a near-complete loss.
Underlying the left-right patterning defects were fewer and shorter nodal cilia, 
and analysis with fluorescent beads showed no directional flow at the embryonic
node. In the cochlea, the stereocilia were mal-patterned, with the kinocilia
being abnormally positioned. Together, these defects suggested disruption of
planar cell polarity, which is known to regulate node, kidney and cochlea
development. In addition, we also showed that Shh signaling was disrupted. Thus, 
in the neural tube, the floor plate was not specified posteriorly even as
expression of the Shh mediator Gli2 increased. By contrast, the Shh signaling
domain was expanded in the anterior neural tube and anterior limb bud, consistent
with reduced Gli3-repressor (Gli3R) function. The latter probably accounted for
the preaxial digit duplication exhibited by the Mks1(del64-323) mutants. Overall,
these findings indicate that centriole localization of Mks1 is required for
ciliogenesis of motile and non-motile cilia, but not for centriole assembly. On
the basis of these results, we hypothesize a role for the B9 domain in mother
centriole targeting, a possibility that warrants further future investigations.

PMCID: PMC3008963
PMID: 21045211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Aug 3;90(29):2078-81.

[The study about expression of Gli2 in vein grafts].

[Article in Chinese]

Li FH(1), Xin SJ, Yang D, Cui ZS, Yang Y, Zhang J, Duan ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of cell cycle related factor Gli2 in
autogenous vein graft and its relation with neointima formation.
METHOD: Autogenous vein graft model were established in 36 male wistar rats of 8 
weeks old, 140 g, by transplanting the left jugular vein to intra renal abdominal
aorta with microsurgical technique. Graft veins were harvest at 14, 28 days after
transplantation. The IF and W-B were used to detect the protein expression in the
vein graft. At the same time Gli2- mRNA was measured by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Immunofluorescent staining showed that the Gli2+ cells was only 3.2% ±
0.4% in the normal vein, but was much more in the vein graft after surgery, was
41.3% ± 0.6%, 58.3 ± 0.6% respectively; The expression of Gli2 and PCNA were both
elevated in the vein graft. There is a positive correlation between them which
indicated by W-B, the relation index was 0.826; the Gli2 mRNA content was also
increased in vein graft, was 8.9, 13.6 fold compared with normal vein as 1
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Gli2 is upregulated in autogenous vein grafts and may correlated with
the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells.

PMID: 21029651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Oncogene. 2011 Feb 10;30(6):714-23. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.459. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

GLI1 facilitates the migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells through
MUC5AC-mediated attenuation of E-cadherin.

Inaguma S(1), Kasai K, Ikeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

The Krüppel-like zinc-finger protein GLI1 functions as a downstream transcription
factor of Hedgehog signaling and plays a pivotal role in the cellular
proliferation of many types of tumors, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA). PDA develops from dysplastic lesions called pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanIN) through a multistep carcinogenesis process that changes its
cellular characteristics, including a mucin expression profile. Increased
expression of a gel-forming mucin, MUC5AC, was previously revealed as a major
biomarker for the poor prognosis of PDA patients, but the molecular mechanisms
responsible for its expression and correlation with poor prognosis are not fully 
understood. Here we show that MUC5AC is a direct transcriptional target of GLI1
in PDA cells. Overexpression of GLI1 enhanced MUC5AC expression, and a double
knockdown of GLI1 and GLI2 suppressed endogenous MUC5AC expression in PDA cells. 
Luciferase reporter assays revealed that GLI1 and GLI2 can activate the MUC5AC
promoter through its conserved CACCC-box-like cis-regulatory elements. We also
found that GLI1-upregulated MUC5AC was expressed in the intercellular junction
between cultured PDA cells and interfered with the membrane localization of
E-cadherin, leading to decreased E-cadherin-dependent cell-cell adhesion and
promoting the migration and invasion of PDA cells. Consistently, GLI1 induced the
nuclear accumulation and target gene expression of ß-catenin in a
MUC5AC-dependent manner. Finally, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that GLI1
expression statistically correlated with MUC5AC expression and also with altered 
subcellular localization of E-cadherin and ß-catenin in PanIN lesions and PDA.
This evidence revealed a new aspect of GLI1 function in modulating
E-cadherin/ß-catenin-regulated cancer cell properties through the expression of a
gel-forming mucin.

PMID: 20972463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 1;5(10). pii: e13054. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013054.

cDNA microarray gene expression profiling of hedgehog signaling pathway
inhibition in human colon cancer cells.

Shi T(1), Mazumdar T, Devecchio J, Duan ZH, Agyeman A, Aziz M, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (HH) signaling plays a critical role in normal cellular
processes, in normal mammalian gastrointestinal development and differentiation, 
and in oncogenesis and maintenance of the malignant phenotype in a variety of
human cancers. Increasing evidence further implicates the involvement of HH
signaling in oncogenesis and metastatic behavior of colon cancers. However,
genomic approaches to elucidate the role of HH signaling in cancers in general
are lacking, and data derived on HH signaling in colon cancer is extremely
limited.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify unique downstream targets of the GLI 
genes, the transcriptional regulators of HH signaling, in the context of colon
carcinoma, we employed a small molecule inhibitor of both GLI1 and GLI2, GANT61, 
in two human colon cancer cell lines, HT29 and GC3/c1. Cell cycle analysis
demonstrated accumulation of GANT61-treated cells at the G1/S boundary. cDNA
microarray gene expression profiling of 18,401 genes identified Differentially
Expressed Genes (DEGs) both common and unique to HT29 and GC3/c1. Analyses using 
GenomeStudio (statistics), Matlab (heat map), Ingenuity (canonical pathway
analysis), or by qRT-PCR, identified p21(Cip1) (CDKN1A) and p15(Ink4b) (CDKN2B), 
which play a role in the G1/S checkpoint, as up-regulated genes at the G1/S
boundary. Genes that determine further cell cycle progression at G1/S including
E2F2, CYCLIN E2 (CCNE2), CDC25A and CDK2, and genes that regulate passage of
cells through G2/M (CYCLIN A2 [CCNA2], CDC25C, CYCLIN B2 [CCNB2], CDC20 and CDC2 
[CDK1], were down-regulated. In addition, novel genes involved in stress
response, DNA damage response, DNA replication and DNA repair were identified
following inhibition of HH signaling.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study identifies genes that are involved in
HH-dependent cellular proliferation in colon cancer cells, and following its
inhibition, genes that regulate cell cycle progression and events downstream of
the G1/S boundary.

PMCID: PMC2948497
PMID: 20957031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mov Disord. 2010 Dec 15;25(16):2809-17. doi: 10.1002/mds.23377.

Evidence for association of the GLI2 gene with tardive dyskinesia in patients
with chronic schizophrenia.

Greenbaum L(1), Alkelai A, Rigbi A, Kohn Y, Lerer B.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Psychiatry Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, Hadassah, Hebrew
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Tardive dyskinesia (TD) occurs in approximately 20% of patients exposed to
long-term antipsychotic treatment and may be influenced by genetic
predisposition, in addition to clinical risk factors. In this study, we
implemented a two-step approach to identify susceptibility genes for TD. First,
we performed a secondary analysis of the Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of
Intervention Effectiveness (CATIE) genome-wide association study (GWAS) dataset
to identify candidate genes for TD severity. A total of 327 schizophrenia
patients treated with antipsychotics who participated in the CATIE trial were
included in a TD severity GWAS (approximately 495,000 SNPs). Cases were defined
as demonstrating involuntary movements of a mild degree in two or more body
regions or of a moderate to severe degree in at least one body region on at least
two separate evaluations, whereas controls were completely free of abnormal
involuntary movement on all evaluations. Using logistic regression and
controlling for population stratification and relevant clinical risk factors,
none of the associated SNPs reached GWAS significance; however, several promising
SNPs were identified for follow-up investigation. In the second step, we
performed an association study of the top 25 SNPs in an independent sample of 170
Jewish, Israeli, schizophrenia patients (retrospective, cross-sectional design). 
Association of the SNP rs3943552 T allele in the GLI2 gene with TD was observed
in a subsample of Ashkenazi Jewish patients (N = 96, P = 0.018; P = 6.2 × 10<U+207B>5 in
the CATIE sample). The GLI2 gene encodes a transcription factor that participates
in the development of the dopaminergic system during embryogenesis. Taken
together, our findings support a possible contribution of GLI2 to TD
susceptibility.

© 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

PMID: 20939080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Non-redundant role for the transcription factor Gli1 at multiple stages of
thymocyte development.

Drakopoulou E(1), Outram SV, Rowbotham NJ, Ross SE, Furmanski AL, Saldana JI,
Hager-Theodorides AL, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428-9.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway influences multiple stages of murine T-cell
development. Hh signaling mediates transcriptional changes by the activity of the
Gli family of transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Both Gli2 and Gli3 are 
essential for mouse development and can be processed to function as
transcriptional repressors or transcriptional activators, whereas Gli1, itself a 
transcriptional target of Hh pathway activation, can only function as a
transcriptional activator and is not essential for mouse development.
Gli1-deficient mice are healthy and appear normal and nonredundant functions for 
Gli1 have been difficult to identify. Here we show that Gli1 is non-redundant in 
the regulation of T-cell development in the thymus, at multiple developmental
stages. Analysis of Gli1-deficient embryonic mouse thymus shows a role for Gli1
to promote the differentiation of CD4<U+207B>CD8<U+207B> double negative (DN) thymocytes before
pre- TCR signal transduction, and a negative regulatory function after pre-TCR
signaling. In addition, introduction of a Class I-restricted transgenic TCR into 
the adult Gli1-deficient and embryonic Gli2-deficient thymus showed that both
Gli1 and Gli2 influence its selection to the CD8 lineage.

PMCID: PMC3055198
PMID: 20935514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Dev Biol. 2010 Dec 15;348(2):199-209. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.09.024. Epub 2010
Oct 8.

Direct and indirect requirements of Shh/Gli signaling in early pituitary
development.

Wang Y(1), Martin JF, Bai CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Induction of early pituitary progenitors is achieved through combined activities 
of signals from adjacent embryonic tissues. Previous studies have identified a
requirement for oral ectoderm derived Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) in specification
and/or proliferation of early pituitary progenitors, however how different Gli
genes mediate Shh signaling to control pituitary progenitor development has not
yet been determined. Here we show that Gli2, which encodes a major Gli activator,
is required for proliferation of specific groups of pituitary progenitors but not
for initial dorsoventral patterning. We further show that the action of Gli2
occurs prior to the closure of Rathke' pouch. Lastly, we show that Shh/Gli2
signaling controls the diencephalic expression of Bone morphogenetic protein 4
(Bmp4) and Fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8), two genes that are known to play
critical roles in patterning and growth of Rathke's pouch. Our results therefore 
suggest both cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous requirements for Gli2 in
regulation of pituitary progenitor specification, proliferation and
differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3200223
PMID: 20934421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Neurosurgery. 2010 Oct;67(4):998-1019; discussion 1019. doi:
10.1227/NEU.0b013e3181ec7b71.

Global gene expression profiling and tissue microarray reveal novel candidate
genes and down-regulation of the tumor suppressor gene CAV1 in sporadic
vestibular schwannomas.

Aarhus M(1), Bruland O, Sætran HA, Mork SJ, Lund-Johansen M, Knappskog PM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway. mads.aarhus@helse-bergen.no

BACKGROUND: The vestibular nerve is the predilection site for schwannomas. Few
transcriptomic studies have been performed on solely sporadic vestibular
schwannomas (VSs).
OBJECTIVE: To detect genes with altered expression levels in sporadic VSs.
METHODS: We studied 25 VSs and 3 tibial nerves (controls) with the ABI 1700
microarray platform. Significance analysis of microarrays was performed to
explore differential gene expression. Selected genes were validated with
quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. A tissue microarray
was constructed for immunohistochemistry. Neurofibromatosis type II cDNA was
sequenced for mutations.
RESULTS: The VSs formed 2 clusters based on the total expression of 23,055 genes.
Tumor size, previous Gamma Knife surgery, neurofibromatosis type II mutations,
and cystic tumors were distributed equally in both. Significance analysis of
microarrays detected 1650 differentially expressed genes. On the top 500 list,
several cancer-related genes with an unrecognized role in VSs were
down-regulated: CAV1, TGFB3, VCAM1, GLI1, GLI2, PRKAR2B, EPHA4, and FZD1.
Immunohistochemistry showed no CAV1 expression in the VSs. The ERK pathway was
the central core in the network linking the differentially expressed genes. The
previously reported VS candidate genes SPARC, PLAT, and FGF1 were up-regulated.
Nineteen of 25 VSs had NF2 mutations.
CONCLUSION: Using microarray technology, we identified novel genes and pathways
with a putative role in VSs, confirmed previous candidate genes, and found
cancer-related genes with no reported role in VSs. Among these, down-regulation
of CAV1 at both the mRNA and protein levels is of particular interest because
this tumor suppressor normally is expressed in Schwann cells.

PMID: 20881564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Sep 29;2(51):51ra70. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001599.

Interfering with resistance to smoothened antagonists by inhibition of the PI3K
pathway in medulloblastoma.

Buonamici S(1), Williams J, Morrissey M, Wang A, Guo R, Vattay A, Hsiao K, Yuan
J, Green J, Ospina B, Yu Q, Ostrom L, Fordjour P, Anderson DL, Monahan JE,
Kelleher JF, Peukert S, Pan S, Wu X, Maira SM, García-Echeverría C, Briggs KJ,
Watkins DN, Yao YM, Lengauer C, Warmuth M, Sellers WR, Dorsch M.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The malignant brain cancer medulloblastoma is characterized by mutations in
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway genes, which lead to constitutive activation of
the G protein (heterotrimeric guanosine triphosphate-binding protein)-coupled
receptor Smoothened (Smo). The Smo antagonist NVP-LDE225 inhibits Hh signaling
and induces tumor regression in animal models of medulloblastoma. However,
evidence of resistance was observed during the course of treatment. Molecular
analysis of resistant tumors revealed several resistance mechanisms. We noted
chromosomal amplification of Gli2, a downstream effector of Hh signaling, and,
more rarely, point mutations in Smo that led to reactivated Hh signaling and
restored tumor growth. Analysis of pathway gene expression signatures also,
unexpectedly, identified up-regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
signaling in resistant tumors as another potential mechanism of resistance.
Probing the relevance of increased PI3K signaling, we demonstrated that addition 
of the PI3K inhibitor NVP-BKM120 or the dual PI3K-mTOR (mammalian target of
rapamycin) inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 to the initial treatment with the Smo antagonist 
markedly delayed the development of resistance. Our findings may be useful in
informing treatment strategies for medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3422576
PMID: 20881279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Dec;95(12):5330-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-0637. Epub 
2010 Sep 29.

Indian Hedgehog and its targets in human endometrium: menstrual cycle expression 
and response to CDB-2914.

Wei Q(1), Levens ED, Stefansson L, Nieman LK.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Building 10, CRC, Room 1-3140, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

CONTEXT: Progesterone is critical for secretory endometrial differentiation in
women, but its downstream mediators are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate endometrial expression of Indian
Hedgehog (IHH) and genes involved in its signaling [smoothened (SMO), patched-1
(PTCH1), glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), and GLI2] during the
menstrual cycle and the effects of the selective progesterone receptor modulator 
CDB-2914 on its expression.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Comparisons between normally cycling volunteers and women
with symptomatic fibroids who received CDB-2914 or placebo were made at a
clinical research center.
PATIENTS AND INTERVENTIONS: Endometrial biopsy was performed on 34 volunteers, 17
additional women with fibroids.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Endometrial expression of IHH, SMO, PTCH1, GLI1, and GLI2 
by in situ hybridization and/or RT-PCR and IHH, GLI1, and PTCH1
immunohistochemistry were evaluated.
RESULTS: RT-PCR showed expression of IHH, SMO, PTCH1, GLI1, and GLI2, with
significant increases in IHH (5.2-fold) and GLI1 (3.6-fold) in endometrium
exposed to CDB-2914 compared with placebo. In situ hybridization showed IHH mRNA 
expression in glands and stroma that was stronger in secretory samples. Among
volunteers, IHH and GLI1 immunohistochemistry scores were higher in the secretory
than proliferative phase in the nuclei and cytoplasm of glands and stroma
(P=0.0002-0.04). Compared with follicular-phase controls, women exposed to
CDB-2914 showed increased IHH expression in all compartments except stromal
cytoplasm (P=0.0199-0.0423); GLI1 was up-regulated in glandular nuclei and
cytoplasm compared with both volunteers and women receiving placebo (P=0.0416).
CONCLUSIONS: The temporal increase in endometrial IHH and GLI1 during the
secretory phase, and their modulation by CDB-2914, suggests progestin regulation 
and a potential role in endometrial differentiation and implantation.

PMCID: PMC2999967
PMID: 20881264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Oncol Rep. 2010 Nov;24(5):1225-32.

Differential expression of hedgehog signaling components and Snail/E-cadherin in 
human brain tumors.

Chou CH(1), Lieu AS, Wu CH, Chang LK, Loh JK, Lin RC, Chen WJ, Liao HD, Fu WS,
Chang CS, Lin CC, Hsu CM, Chio CC, Howng SL, Hong YR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.

The hedgehog (Hh) transcription factor Gli induces transformation of epithelial
cells via induction of Snail, a repressor of E-cadherin. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition is also a determinant of the progression of tumorigenesis, following
down-regulation of E-cadherin. However, the role of Hh signaling components and
Snail/E-cadherin in brain tumors is not yet fully understood. We analyzed the
expression of Hh signaling components and Snail/E-cadherin in 69 brain tumors by 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The data showed that
overexpression of Smo (35/69), Ptch (50/69), Gli1 (56/69), Gli2 (29/69) and N-myc
(39/69) might contribute to brain tumorigenesis. Our results also indicated that 
Snail and E-cadherin showed opposing expression in malignant tumors (high grade
astrocytoma and metastasis). Snail and E-cadherin showed less correlation in
benign brain tumors. We further investigated mutations of Gli2 and Snail by
RT-PCR and direct sequencing. No mutation was observed on Gli2 but several
sporadic mutations on Snail were found, including S96G, S111L, S111L/S119Y and
one nonsense mutation at codon 158 (Y158*). An in vitro E-cadherin promoter assay
showed that S96G, S111L, S111L/S119Y Snail mutants were decreased by 15, 25 and
50%, respectively, whereas Y158* was increased by 40% compared to wild-type.
Furthermore, our data showed that wild-type Snail and S96G, S111L, S111L/S119Y
translocated to the nucleus, while the Y158* mutant failed to translocate to the 
nucleus. Taken together, our results demonstrate that Hh signaling components,
the expression and mutations of Snail and the expression of E-cadherin may play
an important role in human brain tumorigenesis.

PMID: 20878114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Nat Genet. 2010 Oct;42(10):910-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.665. Epub 2010 Sep 26.

Keratin 17 promotes epithelial proliferation and tumor growth by polarizing the
immune response in skin.

Depianto D(1), Kerns ML, Dlugosz AA, Coulombe PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Basaloid skin tumors, including basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and basaloid
follicular hamartoma, are associated with aberrant Hedgehog (Hh) signaling and,
in the case of BCC, an expanding set of genetic variants including keratin 5
(encoded by KRT5), an intermediate filament-forming protein. We here show that
genetic ablation of keratin 17 (Krt17) protein, which is induced in basaloid skin
tumors and co-polymerizes with Krt5 in vivo, delays basaloid follicular hamartoma
tumor initiation and growth in mice with constitutive Hh signaling in epidermis. 
This delay is preceded by a reduced inflammation and a polarization of
inflammatory cytokines from a Th1- and Th17-dominated profile to a Th2-dominated 
profile. Absence of Krt17 also attenuates hyperplasia and inflammation in models 
of acute dermatitis. Re-expression of Krt17 in Gli2(tg); Krt17(-/-) keratinocytes
induces select Th1 chemokines that have established roles in BCC. Our findings
establish an immunomodulatory role for Krt17 in Hh driven basaloid skin tumors
that could impact additional tumor settings, psoriasis and wound repair.

PMCID: PMC2947596
PMID: 20871598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010 Oct;3(10):1235-45. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0035. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Genetic variations in the sonic hedgehog pathway affect clinical outcomes in
non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer.

Chen M(1), Hildebrandt MA, Clague J, Kamat AM, Picornell A, Chang J, Zhang X,
Izzo J, Yang H, Lin J, Gu J, Chanock S, Kogevinas M, Rothman N, Silverman DT,
Garcia-Closas M, Grossman HB, Dinney CP, Malats N, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway genetic variations may affect bladder cancer risk
and clinical outcomes. Therefore, we genotyped 177 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) in 11 Shh pathway genes in a study including 803 bladder
cancer cases and 803 controls. We assessed SNP associations with cancer risk and 
clinical outcomes in 419 cases of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) and 
318 cases of muscle-invasive and metastatic bladder cancer (MiMBC). Only three
SNPs (GLI3 rs3823720, rs3735361, and rs10951671) reached nominal significance in 
association with risk (P = 0.05), which became nonsignificant after adjusting for
multiple comparisons. Nine SNPs reached a nominally significant individual
association with recurrence of NMIBC in patients who received transurethral
resection (TUR) only (P = 0.05), of which two (SHH rs1233560 and GLI2 rs11685068)
were replicated independently in 356 TUR-only NMIBC patients, with P values of
1.0 × 10(-3) (SHH rs1233560) and 1.3 × 10(-3) (GLI2 rs11685068). Nine SNPs also
reached a nominally significant individual association with clinical outcome of
NMIBC patients who received Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG; P = 0.05), of which
two, the independent GLI3 variants rs6463089 and rs3801192, remained significant 
after adjusting for multiple comparisons (P = 2 × 10(-4) and 9 × 10(-4),
respectively). The wild-type genotype of either of these SNPs was associated with
a lower recurrence rate and longer recurrence-free survival (versus the
variants). Although three SNPs (GLI2 rs735557, GLI2 rs4848632, and SHH rs208684) 
showed nominal significance in association with overall survival in MiMBC
patients (P = 0.05), none remained significant after multiple-comparison
adjustments. Germ-line genetic variations in the Shh pathway predicted clinical
outcomes of TUR and BCG for NMIBC patients.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2955764
PMID: 20858759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Head Neck. 2011 Feb;33(2):244-50. doi: 10.1002/hed.21437.

Expression of the Sonic hedgehog pathway in squamous cell carcinoma of the skin
and the mucosa of the head and neck.

Schneider S(1), Thurnher D, Kloimstein P, Leitner V, Petzelbauer P, Pammer J,
Brunner M, Erovic BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the hedgehog pathway may contribute to carcinogenesis. 
This study characterizes the expression pattern in squamous cell carcinoma of the
skin and the head and neck.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays were constructed with samples of squamous cell
carcinoma of the skin and the head and neck. All tissue samples were
immunohistochemically stained for 7 Hedgehog pathway molecules.
RESULTS: Significant (p < .0001) overexpression of all evaluated molecules could 
be observed in the tumor samples compared with healthy control tissues.
Expression of Gli-2 showed significant upregulation and that of Smoothened and
Patched significant downregulation in head and neck compared with skin carcinoma.
High expression of Sonic hedgehog correlates significantly (p = .001) with poor
overall survival in patients with head and neck cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Hedgehog signaling is differentially regulated in squamous cell
carcinomas of the skin and the head and neck. Sonic hedgehog expression may serve
as a prognostic factor in patients with head and neck cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20848446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Histochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;134(4):327-35. doi: 10.1007/s00418-010-0738-2. Epub
2010 Sep 7.

Expression of SHH signaling pathway components in the developing human lung.

Zhang M(1), Wang H, Teng H, Shi J, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Neurobiology, College of
Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Qishan Campus, Fuzhou, 350108 Fujian,
People's Republic of China.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) cascade is crucial for the patterning of the early lung 
morphogenesis in mice, but its role in the developing human lung remains to be
determined. In the present study, the expression patterns of SHH signaling
pathway components, including SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 were examined 
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, and compared with the
equivalent patterns in mice. Our results showed that, as in mice, SHH was
expressed in the epithelium of the developing human lung. However, SHH receptors 
(PTCH1 and SMO) and SHH signaling effectors (GLI1-3) were strongly detected in
the human lung epithelium, but weakly in the mesenchyme, slightly different from 
their expressions in mice. Furthermore, the expression levels of SHH signaling
pathway genes in human lung, but not that of GLI1, were subsequently
downregulated at the canalicular stage evaluated by real-time PCR, coincident
with a decline in the developing murine lung. In conclusion, in spite of slight
differences, the considerable similarities of gene expression in human and mice
suggest that conserved molecular networks regulate mammalian lung development.

PMID: 20821230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Hum Pathol. 2010 Dec;41(12):1718-25. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.05.007.

Comprehensive keratin profiling reveals different histopathogenesis of
keratocystic odontogenic tumor and orthokeratinized odontogenic cyst.

Aragaki T(1), Michi Y, Katsube K, Uzawa N, Okada N, Akashi T, Amagasa T,
Yamaguchi A, Sakamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Keratocystic odontogenic tumor is a cystic lesion that behaves more aggressively 
than other jaw cysts. One of its characteristic histologic features is a
parakeratinized uniform layer of lining epithelium. A jaw cyst lined with
orthokeratinized epithelium is called an orthokeratinized odontogenic cyst. These
keratinized jaw cysts are thought to be separate entities, although their
histopathogenesis has not been fully assessed. To better understand these
lesions, we performed comprehensive immunohistochemical profiling of the keratin 
expression of each. Orthokeratinized odontogenic cysts expressed keratin 1,
keratin 2, keratin 10, and loricrin, suggesting differentiation toward normal
epidermis. Keratocystic odontogenic tumors expressed keratin 4, keratin 13,
keratin 17, and keratin 19, which is a unique expression pattern reminiscent of a
mucosal squamous epithelium and an epithelial appendage. In neonatal rat tooth
germ, cells strongly positive for keratin 17 and keratin 19 were observed,
specifically in the dental lamina, implying the origin of keratocystic
odontogenic tumor. GLI2, a downstream effector of hedgehog signaling, was
significantly expressed in keratocystic odontogenic tumor and basal cell
carcinoma, accompanied with robust expression of keratin 17, mammalian target of 
rapamycin, and BCL2. The expression of these GLI2- or keratin 17-related factors 
was not significantly observed in orthokeratinized odontogenic cysts. These
findings provide evidence to support the viewpoint that keratocystic odontogenic 
tumor and orthokeratinized odontogenic cyst are separate entities, and
furthermore suggest their characteristic histology, pathogenesis, and biological 
behaviors.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20801488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Sep;30(9):1787-94. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.208520.

Sonic hedgehog signaling induces vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation via
induction of the G1 cyclin-retinoblastoma axis.

Li F(1), Duman-Scheel M, Yang D, Du W, Zhang J, Zhao C, Qin L, Xin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, 1st Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

OBJECTIVE: Proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is a crucial
event in the pathogenesis of intimal hyperplasia, the main cause of restenosis
following vascular reconstruction. Here, the impact of sonic hedgehog (Shh)/Gli
family zinc finger 2 (Gli2) signaling on VSMC proliferation was assessed.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Increased Shh signaling was detected in VSMCs in the
neointima of vein grafts obtained from mice undergoing restenosis. Comparable
results were found in primary cultured human VSMCs (hVSMCs) obtained from
patients undergoing coronary bypass surgery, which were used to further assess
the impacts of Shh signaling on VSMC proliferation. Inhibition of Shh signaling
in hVSMCs through treatment with cyclopamine or knockdown of Gli2 results in G(1)
arrest and reduced cyclin D1, cyclin E, and phosphorylated retinoblastoma (pRB)
levels. In contrast, activation of Shh/Gli2 signaling in hVSMCs results in
increased levels of G(1) cyclins and promotes G(1)-S transition. Stimulation of
hVSMC proliferation by Shh is abolished by cyclin D1 knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined, these results demonstrate that Shh/Gli2 signaling
stimulates VSMC proliferation via regulation of the G(1) cyclin-retinoblastoma
axis and suggest that antagonists that target the Shh pathway may be
therapeutically beneficial in the prevention of intimal hyperplasia.

PMID: 20720195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Histol Histopathol. 2010 Oct;25(10):1269-75.

Nuclear accumulation of glioma-associated oncogene 2 protein and enhanced
expression of forkhead-box transcription factor M1 protein in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lin M(1), Guo LM, Liu H, Du J, Yang J, Zhang LJ, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing,
China.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been reported to be crucial in human
carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Glioma-associated oncogenes (Gli), are zinc
finger transcription factors which mediate the transcriptional response to Hh
signaling. To explore the role of Gli in the development and progression of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), we investigated the expression of Gli2 and FoxM1 
(forkhead-box transcription factor M1) which is one of the Gli downstream target 
genes modulating cell cycle progression in 91 specimens of human HCCs with
immunohistochemistry. These immunostaining results were compared with various
clinicopathologic parameters. Immunoreactivity of Gli2 and FoxM1 was observed
respectively in 84.6% (77/91) and 80.2% (73/91) cases of HCC tumor tissues, and
this was considerably higher than expression in the peritumoral tissues.
Distribution of Gli2 and FoxM1 proteins in tumor cells was nuclear with or
without cytoplasmic staining, or cytoplasmic alone. Statistically, increased
nuclear immunopositivity of Gli2 protein correlated significantly with poorer
tumor differentiation (P<0.05), as well as with portal vein tumor thrombosis
(P<0.05). In addition, overexpression of FoxM1 protein was significantly
associated with increased tumor grade (P<0.01) and advanced tumor stage (P<0.05).
Moreover, there was a significant association between the expressions of Gli2 and
FoxM1 proteins in HCC (r=0.464, P=0.000). This is consistent with the concept
that in human HCC, the Hh signaling pathway is involved in the differentiation
and proliferation of tumor cells, in part through inducing nuclear accumulation
of Gli2 protein and subsequent upregulation of FoxM1 protein.

PMID: 20712011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;95(11):E384-91. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1050. Epub
2010 Aug 4.

Novel heterozygous nonsense GLI2 mutations in patients with hypopituitarism and
ectopic posterior pituitary lobe without holoprosencephaly.

França MM(1), Jorge AA, Carvalho LR, Costalonga EF, Vasques GA, Leite CC,
Mendonca BB, Arnhold IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e
Genetica Molecular LIM/42, Disciplina de Endocrinologia, Hospital das Clinicas da
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

CONTEXT: GLI2 is a transcription factor downstream in Sonic Hedgehog signaling,
acting early in ventral forebrain and pituitary development. GLI2 mutations were 
reported in patients with holoprosencephaly (HPE) and pituitary abnormalities.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to report three novel frameshift/nonsense GLI2 mutations
and the phenotypic variability in the three families.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a university hospital.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The GLI2 coding region of patients with isolated GH
deficiency (IGHD) or combined pituitary hormone deficiency was amplified by PCR
using intronic primers and sequenced.
RESULTS: Three novel heterozygous GLI2 mutations were identified: c.2362_2368del 
p.L788fsX794 (family 1), c.2081_2084del p.L694fsX722 (family 2), and c.1138 G>T
p.E380X (family 3). All predict a truncated protein with loss of the C-terminal
activator domain. The index case of family 1 had polydactyly, hypoglycemia, and
seizures, and GH, TSH, prolactin, ACTH, LH, and FSH deficiencies. Her mother and 
seven relatives harboring the same mutation had polydactyly, including two uncles
with IGHD and one cousin with GH, TSH, LH, and FSH deficiencies. In family 2, a
boy had cryptorchidism, cleft lip and palate, and GH deficiency. In family 3, a
girl had hypoglycemia, seizures, excessive thirst and polyuria, and GH, ACTH,
TSH, and antidiuretic hormone deficiencies. Magnetic resonance imaging of four
patients with GLI2 mutations and hypopituitarism showed a hypoplastic anterior
pituitary and an ectopic posterior pituitary lobe without HPE.
CONCLUSION: We describe three novel heterozygous frameshift or nonsense GLI2
mutations, predicting truncated proteins lacking the activator domain, associated
with IGHD or combined pituitary hormone deficiency and ectopic posterior
pituitary lobe without HPE. These phenotypes support partial penetrance, variable
polydactyly, midline facial defects, and pituitary hormone deficiencies,
including diabetes insipidus, conferred by heterozygous frameshift or nonsense
GLI2 mutations.

PMID: 20685856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Neurosci. 2010 Jul 28;30(30):10015-24. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0653-10.2010.

Engrailed homeobox genes regulate establishment of the cerebellar afferent
circuit map.

Sillitoe RV(1), Vogel MW, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10021, USA. roy.sillitoe@einstein.yu.edu

The spatial organization of the cerebellar afferent map has remarkable
correspondence to two aspects of intrinsic patterning within the cerebellum
embodied by a series of lobules and Purkinje cell (PC)-striped gene expression.
Using male and female mice, we tested whether the Engrailed (En) homeobox genes
are a common genetic substrate regulating all three systems, since they are
expressed in spatially restricted domains within the cerebellum and are critical 
for patterning PC gene expression and foliation. Indeed, we discovered that En1/2
are necessary for the precise targeting of mossy fibers to distinct lobules, as
well as their subsequent resolution into discrete parasagittal bands. Moreover,
each En gene coordinately regulates afferent targeting and the striped pattern of
PC protein expression (e.g., ZebrinII/AldolaseC) independent of regulating
foliation. We further found that En1/2, rather than the presence of a full
complement of lobules, are critical for generating PC protein stripes and mossy
fiber bands, and that PC striped gene expression is determined before afferent
banding. Thus, the En transcription factors not only regulate cerebellum circuit 
topography, but they also link afferent and efferent neurons precisely enough
that alterations in PC protein expression can be used as a read out for
underlying defects in circuitry. In summary, our data suggest that En1/2 are
master regulators of three-dimensional organization of the cerebellum and
coordinately regulate morphology, patterned gene expression, and afferent
topography.

PMCID: PMC2921890
PMID: 20668186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):1103-4. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djq267. Epub
2010 Jul 21.

The ups and downs of transcription factors in melanoma.

Santiago-Walker A, Herlyn M.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):1148-59.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):1148-59.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):1131-47.

PMID: 20660367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):1148-59. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djq257. Epub
2010 Jul 21.

GLI2-mediated melanoma invasion and metastasis.

Alexaki VI(1), Javelaud D, Van Kempen LC, Mohammad KS, Dennler S, Luciani F, Hoek
KS, Juàrez P, Goydos JS, Fournier PJ, Sibon C, Bertolotto C, Verrecchia F, Saule 
S, Delmas V, Ballotti R, Larue L, Saiag P, Guise TA, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Curie Institute, INSERM U1021/CNRS UMR3347, University Center, Orsay Cedex,
France.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):1103-4.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Aug 4;102(15):1103-4.

BACKGROUND: The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) pathway, which has
both tumor suppressor and pro-oncogenic activities, is often constitutively
active in melanoma and is a marker of poor prognosis. Recently, we identified
GLI2, a mediator of the hedgehog pathway, as a transcriptional target of TGF-beta
signaling.
METHODS: We used real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and western blotting to determine GLI2 expression in human melanoma cell
lines and subsequently classified them as GLI2high or as GLI2low according to
their relative GLI2 mRNA and protein expression levels. GLI2 expression was
reduced in a GLI2high cell line with lentiviral expression of short hairpin RNA
targeting GLI2. We assessed the role of GLI2 in melanoma cell invasiveness in
Matrigel assays. We measured secretion of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and
MMP-9 by gelatin zymography and expression of E-cadherin by western blotting and 
RT-PCR. The role of GLI2 in development of bone metastases was determined
following intracardiac injection of melanoma cells in immunocompromised mice (n =
5-13). Human melanoma samples (n = 79) at various stages of disease progression
were analyzed for GLI2 and E-cadherin expression by immunohistochemistry, in situ
hybridization, or RT-PCR. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Among melanoma cell lines, increased GLI2 expression was associated with
loss of E-cadherin expression and with increased capacity to invade Matrigel and 
to form bone metastases in mice (mean osteolytic tumor area: GLI2high vs GLI2low,
2.81 vs 0.93 mm(2), difference = 1.88 mm(2), 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.16 
to 2.60, P < .001). Reduction of GLI2 expression in melanoma cells that had
expressed high levels of GLI2 substantially inhibited both basal and
TGF-beta-induced cell migration, invasion (mean number of Matrigel invading
cells: shGLI2 vs shCtrl (control), 52.6 vs 100, difference = 47.4, 95% CI = 37.0 
to 57.8, P = .024; for shGLI2 + TGF-beta vs shCtrl + TGF-beta, 31.0 vs 161.9,
difference = -130.9, 95% CI = -96.2 to -165.5, P = .002), and MMP secretion in
vitro and the development of experimental bone metastases in mice. Within human
melanoma lesions, GLI2 expression was heterogeneous, associated with tumor
regions in which E-cadherin was lost and increased in the most aggressive tumors.
CONCLUSION: GLI2 was directly involved in driving melanoma invasion and
metastasis in this preclinical study.

PMCID: PMC2914763
PMID: 20660365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 24;285(39):30079-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133991. Epub
2010 Jul 19.

Dual function of UNC-51-like kinase 3 (Ulk3) in the Sonic hedgehog signaling
pathway.

Maloverjan A(1), Piirsoo M, Kasak L, Peil L, Østerlund T, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tallinn
University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 15, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway controls a variety of developmental
processes and is implicated in tissue homeostasis maintenance and neurogenesis in
adults. Recently, we identified Ulk3 as an active kinase able to positively
regulate Gli proteins, mediators of the Shh signaling in mammals. Here, we
provide several lines of evidence that Ulk3 participates in the transduction of
the Shh signal also independently of its kinase activity. We demonstrate that
Ulk3 through its kinase domain interacts with Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), a
protein required for negative regulation of Gli proteins. Sufu blocks Ulk3
autophosphorylation and abolishes its ability to phosphorylate and positively
regulate Gli proteins. We show that Shh signaling destabilizes the Sufu-Ulk3
complex and induces the release of Ulk3. We demonstrate that the Sufu-Ulk3
complex, when co-expressed with Gli2, promotes generation of the Gli2 repressor
form, and that reduction of the Ulk3 mRNA level in Shh-responsive cells results
in higher potency of the cells to transmit the Shh signal. Our data suggests a
dual function of Ulk3 in the Shh signal transduction pathway and propose an
additional way of regulating Gli proteins by Sufu, through binding to and
suppression of Ulk3.

PMCID: PMC2943318
PMID: 20643644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 27;107(30):13432-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1006822107. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Arsenic antagonizes the Hedgehog pathway by preventing ciliary accumulation and
reducing stability of the Gli2 transcriptional effector.

Kim J(1), Lee JJ, Kim J, Gardner D, Beachy PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Aberrant Hedgehog (Hh) pathway activation has been implicated in cancers of
diverse tissues and organs, and the tumor growth-inhibiting effects of pathway
antagonists in animal models have stimulated efforts to develop pathway
antagonists for human therapeutic purposes. These efforts have focused largely on
cyclopamine derivatives or other compounds that mimic cyclopamine action in
binding to and antagonizing Smoothened, a membrane transductory component. We
report here that arsenicals, in contrast, antagonize the Hh pathway by targeting 
Gli transcriptional effectors; in the short term, arsenic blocks Hh-induced
ciliary accumulation of Gli2, the primary activator of Hh-dependent
transcription, and with prolonged incubation arsenic reduces steady-state levels 
of Gli2. Arsenicals active in Hh pathway antagonism include arsenic trioxide
(ATO), a curative agent in clinical use for acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL);
in our studies, ATO inhibited growth of Hh pathway-driven medulloblastoma
allografts derived from Ptch+/-p53-/- mice within a range of serum levels
comparable to those achieved in treatment of human APL. Arsenic thus could be
tested rapidly as a therapeutic agent in malignant diseases associated with Hh
pathway activation and could be particularly useful in such diseases that are
inherently resistant or have acquired resistance to cyclopamine mimics.

PMCID: PMC2922148
PMID: 20624968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 20;107(29):12907-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000979107. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Sonic hedgehog in temporal control of somite formation.

Resende TP(1), Ferreira M, Teillet MA, Tavares AT, Andrade RP, Palmeirim I.

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute, School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.

Vertebrate embryo somite formation is temporally controlled by the cyclic
expression of somitogenesis clock genes in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM). The
somitogenesis clock is believed to be an intrinsic property of this tissue,
operating independently of embryonic midline structures and the signaling
molecules produced therein, namely Sonic hedgehog (Shh). This work revisits the
notochord signaling contribution to temporal control of PSM segmentation by
assessing the rate and number of somites formed and somitogenesis molecular clock
gene expression oscillations upon notochord ablation. The absence of the
notochord causes a delay in somite formation, accompanied by an increase in the
period of molecular clock oscillations. Shh is the notochord-derived signal
responsible for this effect, as these alterations are recapitulated by Shh
signaling inhibitors and rescued by an external Shh supply. We have characterized
chick smoothened expression pattern and have found that the PSM expresses both
patched1 and smoothened Shh signal transducers. Upon notochord ablation,
patched1, gli1, and fgf8 are down-regulated, whereas gli2 and gli3 are
overexpressed. Strikingly, notochord-deprived PSM segmentation rate recovers over
time, concomitant with raldh2 overexpression. Accordingly, exogenous RA
supplement rescues notochord ablation effects on somite formation. A model is
presented in which Shh and RA pathways converge to inhibit PSM Gli activity,
ensuring timely somite formation. Altogether, our data provide evidence that a
balance between different pathways ensures the robustness of timely somite
formation and that notochord-derived Shh is a component of the molecular network 
regulating the pace of the somitogenesis clock.

PMCID: PMC2919945
PMID: 20615943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Bioorg Med Chem. 2010 Jul 1;18(13):4801-11. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.05.001. Epub 
2010 May 7.

Amide conjugates of ketoprofen and indole as inhibitors of Gli1-mediated
transcription in the Hedgehog pathway.

Mahindroo N(1), Connelly MC, Punchihewa C, Yang L, Yan B, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

We have previously reported small-molecule inhibitors of Gli1-mediated
transcription, an essential down-stream element of the Hh pathway. We created new
derivatives of the previous compounds aiming to improve the druggable properties.
The new compounds, amide conjugates of ketoprofen and indole, showed inhibitory
activity and membrane permeability, while also improving the microsome stability.
Among them, 33 and 42 inhibited Gli-luciferase reporter in C3H10T1/2 cells that
were exogenously transfected with Gli1 with 2.6 µM and 1.6 µM of IC50,
respectively, and in Rh30 cells that endogenously overexpress Gli1, and were
selective to Gli1 over Gli2.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2952073
PMID: 20605720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jul;152A(7):1688-94. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33466.

Holoprosencephaly and holoprosencephaly-like phenotype and GAS1 DNA sequence
changes: Report of four Brazilian patients.

Ribeiro LA(1), Quiezi RG, Nascimento A, Bertolacini CP, Richieri-Costa A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory and Clinical Genetic Service, Hospital for
Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, USP, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is genetically heterogeneous. Variable phenotypic
manifestations within families with normal and affected patients have been
attributed to the number and type of HPE gene mutations. Environmental agents may
also contribute to the severity as well as the requirement of multiple hits.
Clinical expression is extremely variable ranging from minor facial signs to
complex craniofacial anomalies such as cyclopia. Main genes involved include SHH,
GLI2, PTCH1, TGIF, ZIC2, TDGF1, SIX3; however, several other candidates have been
proposed. Recently it was established that the human growth arrest specific gene 
1 (GAS1) is a potential locus for several human craniofacial malformations. Here,
we report on four Brazilian patients with GAS1 DNA sequence change who presented 
variable phenotypical manifestations ranging from classic HPE to HPE-like signs. 
Two patients had single DNA sequence change in the GAS1 gene, while in other two,
an additional mutation in the SHH gene was observed. Clinical manifestations
presented by these patients suggest that GAS1 could be considered a candidate
locus for one of the types of human HPE.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20583177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2646-58. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.131. Epub 2010 Jun 25.

Hedgehog controls neural stem cells through p53-independent regulation of Nanog.

Po A(1), Ferretti E, Miele E, De Smaele E, Paganelli A, Canettieri G, Coni S, Di 
Marcotullio L, Biffoni M, Massimi L, Di Rocco C, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2475-6.

Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has a pivotal function in development and tumorigenesis,
processes sustained by stem cells (SCs). The transcription factor Nanog controls 
stemness acting as a key determinant of both embryonic SC self-renewal and
differentiated somatic cells reprogramming to pluripotency, in concert with the
loss of the oncosuppressor p53. How Nanog is regulated by microenvironmental
signals in postnatal SC niches has been poorly investigated. Here, we show that
Nanog is highly expressed in SCs from postnatal cerebellum and medulloblastoma,
and acts as a critical mediator of Hh-driven self-renewal. Indeed, the downstream
effectors of Hh activity, Gli1 and Gli2, bind to Nanog-specific cis-regulatory
sequences both in mouse and human SCs. Loss of p53, a key event promoting cell
stemness, activates Hh signalling, thereby contributing to Nanog upregulation.
Conversely, Hh downregulates p53 but does not require p53 to control Nanog. Our
data reveal a mechanism for the function of Hh in the control of stemness that
represents a crucial component of an integrated circuitry determining cell fate
decision and involved in the maintenance of cancer SCs.

PMCID: PMC2928686
PMID: 20581804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Oncogene. 2010 Aug 26;29(34):4848-58. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.235. Epub 2010 Jun
21.

GLI3-dependent repression of DR4 mediates hedgehog antagonism of TRAIL-induced
apoptosis.

Kurita S(1), Mott JL, Almada LL, Bronk SF, Werneburg NW, Sun SY, Roberts LR,
Fernandez-Zapico ME, Gores GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) induces apoptosis
through its cognate receptors death receptor 4 (DR4) and death receptor 5 (DR5), 
preferentially in malignant cells. However, many malignant cells remain resistant
to TRAIL cytotoxicity by poorly characterized mechanisms. Here, using
cholangiocarcinoma cells, as a model for TRAIL resistance, we identified a role
for the oncogenic Hedgehog (Hh)-GLI pathway in the regulation of TRAIL
cytotoxicity. Blockade of Hh using pharmacological and genetic tools sensitizes
the cells to TRAIL cytotoxicity. Restoration of apoptosis sensitivity coincided
with upregulation of DR4 expression, while expression of other death effector
proteins remained unaltered. Knockdown of DR4 mimics Hh-mediated resistance to
TRAIL cytotoxicity. Hh regulates the expression of DR4 by modulating the activity
of its promoter. Luciferase, chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression assays 
show that the transcription factor GLI3 binds to the DR4 promoter and Hh requires
an intact GLI3-repression activity to silence DR4 expression. Finally, small
interfering RNA (siRNA)-targeted knockdown of GLI3, but not GLI1 or GLI2,
restores DR4 expression and TRAIL sensitivity, indicating that the Hh effect is
exclusively mediated by this transcription factor. In conclusion, these data
provide evidence of a regulatory mechanism, which modulates TRAIL signaling in
cancer cells and suggest new therapeutic approaches for TRAIL-resistant
neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2928864
PMID: 20562908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Differentiation. 2010 Sep-Oct;80(2-3):106-17. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.05.004.
Epub 2010 Jun 12.

Smooth muscle differentiation and patterning in the urinary bladder.

Tasian G(1), Cunha G, Baskin L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, Frank Hinman
Jr. Urological Research Laboratory, 513 Parnassus Avenue, HSW 1434, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. gtasian@urology.ucsf.edu

Smooth muscle differentiation and patterning is a fundamental process in urinary 
bladder development that involves a complex array of local environmental factors,
epithelial-mesenchymal interaction, and signaling pathways. An epithelial signal 
is necessary to induce smooth muscle differentiation in the adjacent bladder
mesenchyme. The bladder epithelium (urothelium) also influences the spatial
organization of the bladder wall. Sonic hedgehog (Shh), which is expressed by the
urothelium, promotes mesenchymal proliferation and induces differentiation of
smooth muscle from embryonic bladder mesenchyme. Shh, whose signal is mediated
through various transcription factors including Gli2 and BMP4, is likely also
important in the patterning of bladder smooth muscle. However, it is not known to
what extent early mediators of mesenchymal migration, other Shh-associated
transcription factors, and crosstalk between the Shh signaling cascade and other 
pathways are involved in the patterning of bladder smooth muscle. Here we review 
the role of epithelial-mesenchymal interaction and Shh signaling in smooth muscle
differentiation and patterning in the bladder. We also discuss emerging signaling
molecules, transcription factors, and mesenchyme properties that might be
fruitful areas of future research in the process of smooth muscle formation in
the bladder.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3712869
PMID: 20541860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Br J Cancer. 2010 Jun 29;103(1):43-51. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605715. Epub 2010 Jun
1.

Betulinic acid induces apoptosis and inhibits hedgehog signalling in
rhabdomyosarcoma.

Eichenmüller M(1), Hemmerlein B, von Schweinitz D, Kappler R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Lindwurmstrasse 4, Munich 80337, Federal
Republic of Germany.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in
childhood with the ability to resist apoptosis by the activation of survival
promoting and anti-apoptotic proteins.
METHODS: Efficacy of the apoptosis-inducing agent betulinic acid (BA) was
determined in RMS cell cultures and in vivo by measuring cell viability,
survival, apoptosis, hedgehog signalling activity, and neovascularisation.
RESULTS: Betulinic acid had a strong cytotoxic effect on RMS cells in a
dose-dependent manner. The BA treatment caused a massive induction of apoptosis
mediated by the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway, which could be inhibited by the 
broad-range caspase inhibitor zVAD.fmk. Exposure of hedgehog-activated RMS-13
cells to BA resulted in a strong decrease in GLI1, GLI2, PTCH1, and IGF2
expression as well as hedgehog-responsive luciferase activity. Intraperitoneal
injection of 20 mg BA per kg per day significantly retarded growth of RMS-13
xenografts in association with markedly higher counts of apoptotic cells and
down-regulation of GLI1 expression compared with control tumours, while leaving
microvascular density, cell proliferation, and myogenic differentiation
unaffected.
CONCLUSION: Our data show that induction of apoptosis and inhibition of hedgehog 
signalling are important features of the anti-tumourigenic effect of BA in RMS
and advices this compound for the use in a multimodal therapy of this highly
aggressive paediatric tumour.

PMCID: PMC2905279
PMID: 20517313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Jun;17(6):718-25. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1833. Epub 2010 May
30.

DYRK1B-dependent autocrine-to-paracrine shift of Hedgehog signaling by mutant
RAS.

Lauth M(1), Bergström A, Shimokawa T, Tostar U, Jin Q, Fendrich V, Guerra C,
Barbacid M, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Center for Biosciences, Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Huddinge, Sweden.

Synergism between the RAS and Hedgehog (HH) pathways has been suggested for
carcinogenesis in the pancreas, lung and colon. We investigated the molecular
cross-talk between RAS and HH signaling and found that, although mutant RAS
induces or enhances SHH expression and favors paracrine HH signaling, it
antagonizes autocrine HH signal transduction. Activated RAS can be found in
primary cilia, the central organelle of HH signal transduction, but functions in 
a cilium-independent manner and interferes with Gli2 function and Gli3
processing. In addition, the cell-autonomous negative regulation of HH signal
transduction involves the RAS effector molecule dual specificity tyrosine
phosphorylated and regulated kinase 1B (DYRK1B). In line with a redirection of
autocrine toward paracrine HH signaling by a KRAS-DYRK1B network, we find high
levels of GLI1 expression restricted to the stromal compartment and not to
SHH-expressing tumor cells in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 20512148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jun;239(6):1818-26. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22301.

Gli2 activator function in preosteoblasts is sufficient to mediate Ihh-dependent 
osteoblast differentiation, whereas the repressor function of Gli2 is dispensable
for endochondral ossification.

Kesper DA(1), Didt-Koziel L, Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Duisburg-Essen, Center of Medical Biotechnology, Essen, Germany.

Signaling of Indian hedgehog (Ihh), one of the key regulators of endochondral
ossification is mediated by transcription factors of the Gli family, Gli1, Gli2, 
and Gli3. Gli3 and to a lesser extent Gli2 can be proteolytically processed into 
short repressor proteins. Upon Ihh signaling, processing is inhibited and the
full-length proteins function as activators of transcription. Gli3 has been shown
to mainly act as a repressor of Ihh target genes in chondrocytes, but the role of
other Gli isoforms is less clear. Analyzing mouse mutants deficient for Ihh;Gli2 
or Gli3;Gli2, we show here that the Gli2 repressor has no detectable function in 
chondrocyte or osteoblast differentiation. Instead, Gli2 seems to act as an
activator to fully induce the expression of Ihh target genes in skeletal tissues.
Furthermore, we show that, in the absence of Gli3, the activator function of Gli2
is sufficient to induce Ihh-dependent osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 20503377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Urol. 2010 Jul;184(1):344-51. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.03.007. Epub 2010 May
20.

Gli2 expression and human bladder transitional carcinoma cell invasiveness.

Mechlin CW(1), Tanner MJ, Chen M, Buttyan R, Levin RM, Mian BM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Albany Medical College, Albany, New York, USA.
mianb@mail.amc.edu

PURPOSE: Hedgehog signaling regulates Gli transcription factors. Aberrant
hedgehog signaling can be oncogenic and drugs that block hedgehog are being
tested as anticancer agents. We considered whether hedgehog/Gli signaling may be 
involved in human bladder transitional cell carcinoma proliferative or invasive
behavior.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We stratified the human bladder transitional cell
carcinoma lines RT4 (ATCC), 253JP, 253BV, UMUC6 and UMUC3 for relative growth
rate by cell counting and for in vitro invasiveness by Matrigel invasion assay.
Cells were tested for growth inhibition by the hedgehog blocking drug cyclopamine
or the inactive mimic tomatidine. Cell RNA was characterized for hedgehog
signaling component expression, including ligands, receptors and signaling
mediators, by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Gli2 
expression or activity was modified by Gli2 expression lentiviruses or the Gli
inhibitor GANT61. We measured effects on proliferation and invasiveness.
RESULTS: Cell growth rates and invasiveness were stratified into an equivalent
order (RT4 <243JP <253BV <UMUC6 <UMUC3). All cells were weakly growth inhibited
by tomatidine and cyclopamine. Gli2 was the only hedgehog signaling molecule of
which expression correlated with stratification. Manipulation of Gli2 expression 
or activity significantly affected cell invasiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: Weak growth suppression by cyclopamine suggests that hedgehog
signaling is not involved in bladder cancer cell proliferation but Gli2
expression strongly correlated with invasive behavior. Increased Gli2 expression 
increased low Gli2 cell invasiveness while Gli inhibition by GANT61 decreased
high Gli2 cell invasiveness. Results suggest that Gli2 expression by noncanonical
signaling contributes to bladder cancer cell invasiveness.

Copyright (c) 2010 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20488474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. BMC Biol. 2010 Apr 19;8:65. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-65.

Gli2a protein localization reveals a role for Iguana/DZIP1 in primary
ciliogenesis and a dependence of Hedgehog signal transduction on primary cilia in
the zebrafish.

Kim HR(1), Richardson J, van Eeden F, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental & Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Comment in
    BMC Biol. 2010;8:102.

BACKGROUND: In mammalian cells, the integrity of the primary cilium is critical
for proper regulation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction pathway. Whether
or not this dependence on the primary cilium is a universal feature of vertebrate
Hedgehog signalling has remained contentious due, in part, to the apparent
divergence of the intracellular transduction pathway between mammals and teleost 
fish.
RESULTS: Here, using a functional Gli2-GFP fusion protein, we show that, as in
mammals, the Gli2 transcription factor localizes to the primary cilia of cells in
the zebrafish embryo and that this localization is modulated by the activity of
the Hh pathway. Moreover, we show that the Igu/DZIP1protein, previously
implicated in the modulation of Gli activity in zebrafish, also localizes to the 
primary cilium and is required for its proper formation.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate a conserved role of the primary cilium in
mediating Hedgehog signalling activity across the vertebrate phylum and validate 
the use of the zebrafish as a representative model for the in vivo analysis of
vertebrate Hedgehog signalling.

PMCID: PMC2890509
PMID: 20487519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 1;107(22):10109-14. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909900107. Epub 2010 May 17.

Primary cilia regulate Gli/Hedgehog activation in pancreas.

Cervantes S(1), Lau J, Cano DA, Borromeo-Austin C, Hebrok M.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Previous studies have suggested that defects in pancreatic epithelium caused by
activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway are secondary to changes in the
differentiation state of the surrounding mesenchyme. However, recent results
describe a role of the pathway in pancreatic epithelium, both during development 
and in adult tissue during neoplastic transformation. To determine the
consequences of epithelial Hh activation during pancreas development, we employed
a transgenic mouse model in which an activated version of GLI2, a transcriptional
mediator of the pathway, is overexpressed specifically in the pancreatic
epithelium. Surprisingly, efficient Hh activation was not observed in these
transgenic mice, indicating the presence of physiological mechanisms within
pancreas epithelium that prevent full Hh activation. Additional studies revealed 
that primary cilia regulate the level of Hh activation, and that ablation of
these cellular organelles is sufficient to cause significant up-regulation of the
Hh pathway in pancreata of mice overexpressing GLI2. As a consequence of overt Hh
activation, we observe profound morphological changes in both the exocrine and
endocrine pancreas. Increased Hh activity also induced the expansion of an
undifferentiated cell population expressing progenitor markers. Thus, our
findings suggest that Hh signaling plays a critical role in regulating pancreatic
epithelial plasticity.

PMCID: PMC2890485
PMID: 20479231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Development. 2010 Jun;137(12):2001-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.052126. Epub 2010 May 12.

Suppressor of fused and Spop regulate the stability, processing and function of
Gli2 and Gli3 full-length activators but not their repressors.

Wang C(1), Pan Y, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Gli2 and Gli3 are primary transcriptional regulators that mediate hedgehog (Hh)
signaling. Mechanisms that stabilize and destabilize Gli2 and Gli3 are essential 
for the proteins to promptly respond to Hh signaling or to be inactivated
following the activation. In this study, we show that loss of suppressor of fused
(Sufu; an inhibitory effector for Gli proteins) results in destabilization of
Gli2 and Gli3 full-length activators but not of their C-terminally processed
repressors, whereas overexpression of Sufu stabilizes them. By contrast, RNAi
knockdown of Spop (a substrate-binding adaptor for the cullin3-based ubiquitin E3
ligase) in Sufu mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) can restore the levels 
of Gli2 and Gli3 full-length proteins, but not those of their repressors, whereas
introducing Sufu into the MEFs stabilizes Gli2 and Gli3 full-length proteins and 
rescues Gli3 processing. Consistent with these findings, forced Spop expression
promotes Gli2 and Gli3 degradation and Gli3 processing. The functions of Sufu and
Spop oppose each other through their competitive binding to the N- and C-terminal
regions of Gli3 or the C-terminal region of Gli2. More importantly, the Gli3
repressor expressed by a Gli3 mutant allele (Gli3(Delta699)) can mostly rescue
the ventralized neural tube phenotypes of Sufu mutant embryos, indicating that
the Gli3 repressor can function independently of Sufu. Our study provides a new
insight into the regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 stability and processing by Sufu and
Spop, and reveals the unexpected Sufu-independent Gli3 repressor function.

PMCID: PMC2875842
PMID: 20463034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cancer. 2010 Apr 26;9:89. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-89.

Hedgehog/Gli supports androgen signaling in androgen deprived and androgen
independent prostate cancer cells.

Chen M(1), Feuerstein MA, Levina E, Baghel PS, Carkner RD, Tanner MJ, Shtutman M,
Vacherot F, Terry S, de la Taille A, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)The Ordway Research Institute, Albany, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) develops as a consequence
of hormone therapies used to deplete androgens in advanced prostate cancer
patients. CRPC cells are able to grow in a low androgen environment and this is
associated with anomalous activity of their endogenous androgen receptor (AR)
despite the low systemic androgen levels in the patients. Therefore, the
reactivated tumor cell androgen signaling pathway is thought to provide a target 
for control of CRPC. Previously, we reported that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling was
conditionally activated by androgen deprivation in androgen sensitive prostate
cancer cells and here we studied the potential for cross-talk between Hh and
androgen signaling activities in androgen deprived and androgen independent (AI) 
prostate cancer cells.
RESULTS: Treatment of a variety of androgen-deprived or AI prostate cancer cells 
with the Hh inhibitor, cyclopamine, resulted in dose-dependent modulation of the 
expression of genes that are regulated by androgen. The effect of cyclopamine on 
endogenous androgen-regulated gene expression in androgen deprived and AI
prostate cancer cells was consistent with the suppressive effects of cyclopamine 
on the expression of a reporter gene (luciferase) from two different
androgen-dependent promoters. Similarly, reduction of smoothened (Smo) expression
with siRNA co-suppressed expression of androgen-inducible KLK2 and KLK3 in
androgen deprived cells without affecting the expression of androgen receptor
(AR) mRNA or protein. Cyclopamine also prevented the outgrowth of AI cells from
androgen growth-dependent parental LNCaP cells and suppressed the growth of an
overt AI-LNCaP variant whereas supplemental androgen (R1881) restored growth to
the AI cells in the presence of cyclopamine. Conversely, overexpression of Gli1
or Gli2 in LNCaP cells enhanced AR-specific gene expression in the absence of
androgen. Overexpressed Gli1/Gli2 also enabled parental LNCaP cells to grow in
androgen depleted medium. AR protein co-immunoprecipitates with Gli2 protein from
transfected 293T cell lysates.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results indicate that Hh/Gli signaling supports
androgen signaling and AI growth in prostate cancer cells in a low androgen
environment. The finding that Gli2 co-immunoprecipitates with AR protein suggests
that an interaction between these proteins might be the basis for Hedgehog/Gli
support of androgen signaling under this condition.

PMCID: PMC2873440
PMID: 20420697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Oral Oncol. 2010 May;46(5):387-92. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.02.023. Epub 
2010 Apr 3.

Involvement of PTCH1 mutations in the calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor.

Peacock ZS(1), Cox D, Schmidt BL.

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

The human homologue of the Drosophila segment polarity gene PTCH1, a tumor
suppressor gene within the Sonic Hedgehog pathway has been implicated as the
mutation responsible for nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) as well as 
many other sporadic neoplasms. The calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (CEOT)
is a rare and aggressive tumor of the jaws. The objective of this study was to
investigate the role of the Sonic hedgehog pathway in the pathogenesis of the
CEOT. We evaluated the protein distribution of PTCH and the transcription factors
Gli1 and Gli2 within seven cases using immunohistochemistry. We also sought to
confirm the findings by sequencing the PTCH1 gene from DNA extracted from the
paraffin-embedded tissue of these cases. Seven cases of paraffin-embedded CEOT
specimens were analyzed with immunohistochemistry. Immunoreactivity for Sonic
hedgehog pathway proteins was evaluated using antibodies to the receptor PTCH as 
well as to the transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2. A keratocystic odontogenic
tumor (KOT) from a 12year-old with NBCCS served as our positive control. Normal
salivary gland tissue served as our negative control. PTCH gene sequencing was
completed using PCR. Immunoreactivity to PTCH was seen in 6/7 cases, to Gli1 in
6/7 cases and to Gli2 in 6/7 cases. All three proteins were positive in the
syndromic KOT and all proteins were negative in normal salivary tissue. Gene
sequencing revealed five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of which two
resulted in missense mutations. A missense mutation was also detected in the KOT.
This study is the first to implicate the Sonic hedgehog pathway in the
pathogenesis of the CEOT through sequencing. Similar to other odontogenic
neoplasms gene mutations in PTCH1 are present in the CEOT.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20371205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Oncol Lett. 2010 Mar;1(2):319-325. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Sonic Hedgehog pathway activity in prostate cancer.

Bragina O(1), Njunkova N, Sergejeva S, Järvekülg L, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Technomedicum, Tallinn
University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia.

Abnormal activation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway has been
demonstrated in a number of human tumors, including prostate cancer. The study
aimed to assess the activity of Shh pathway components (Shh, Gli1, Gli2 and
Gli3), as well as the proliferation markers FoxA1 and Notch1 during cancer
progression in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP). We
evaluated changes in respective proteins by immunohistochemistry at three time
points (12, 17 and 21 weeks of age) in the tissue of TRAMP and C57Bl/6 mice.
Moreover, the expression of mRNA of these proteins was assessed. The present
study shows a significant age-dependent increase in the number of Shh, Gli1, Gli3
and FoxA1-positive prostate cells and a decrease in Gli2-positive cells in TRAMP.
The study also supports the hypothesis that the development of prostate cancer
and its metastasis is associated with activation of the Shh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3436354
PMID: 22966302  [PubMed]


463. Dev Cell. 2010 Feb 16;18(2):237-47. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.12.014.

Broad-minded links cell cycle-related kinase to cilia assembly and hedgehog
signal transduction.

Ko HW(1), Norman RX, Tran J, Fuller KP, Fukuda M, Eggenschwiler JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Recent findings indicate that mammalian Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal transduction 
occurs within primary cilia, although the cell biological mechanisms underlying
both Shh signaling and ciliogenesis have not been fully elucidated. We show that 
an uncharacterized TBC domain-containing protein, Broad-minded (Bromi), is
required for high-level Shh responses in the mouse neural tube. We find that
Bromi controls ciliary morphology and proper Gli2 localization within the cilium.
By use of a zebrafish model, we further show that Bromi is required for proper
association between the ciliary membrane and axoneme. Bromi physically interacts 
with cell cycle-related kinase (CCRK), whose Chlamydomonas homolog regulates
flagellar length. Biochemical and genetic interaction data indicate that Bromi
promotes CCRK stability and function. We propose that Bromi and CCRK control the 
structure of the primary cilium by coordinating assembly of the axoneme and
ciliary membrane, allowing Gli proteins to be properly activated in response to
Shh signaling.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2830714
PMID: 20159594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;30(8):1910-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01089-09. Epub 2010 Feb
12.

Kinetics of hedgehog-dependent full-length Gli3 accumulation in primary cilia and
subsequent degradation.

Wen X(1), Lai CK, Evangelista M, Hongo JA, de Sauvage FJ, Scales SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in vertebrates depends on intraflagellar transport (IFT) 
within primary cilia. The Hh receptor Patched is found in cilia in the absence of
Hh and is replaced by the signal transducer Smoothened within an hour of Hh
stimulation. By generating antibodies capable of detecting endogenous pathway
transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3, we monitored their kinetics of accumulation 
in cilia upon Hh stimulation. Localization occurs within minutes of Hh addition, 
making it the fastest reported readout of pathway activity, which permits more
precise temporal and spatial localization of Hh signaling events. We show that
the species of Gli3 that accumulates at cilium tips is full-length and likely not
protein kinase A phosphorylated. We also confirmed that phosphorylation and
betaTrCP/Cul1 are required for endogenous Gli3 processing and that this is
inhibited by Hh. Surprisingly, however, Hh-dependent inhibition of processing
does not lead to accumulation of full-length Gli3, but instead renders it labile,
leading to its proteasomal degradation via the SPOP/Cul3 complex. In fact,
full-length Gli3 disappears with faster kinetics than the Gli3 repressor, the
latter not requiring SPOP/Cul3 or betaTrCP/Cul1. This may contribute to the
increased Gli3 activator/repressor ratios found in IFT mutants.

PMCID: PMC2849461
PMID: 20154143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Int Med Res. 2009 Nov-Dec;37(6):1842-50.

Down-regulation of SHH/BMP4 signalling in human anorectal malformations.

Zhang J(1), Zhang ZB, Gao H, Zhang D, Wang WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

The sonic hedgehog homologue (SHH)/bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) signalling
pathway is involved in the morphogenesis of many organ systems. This study was
designed to investigate the expression of SHH/BMP4 pathway components in human
anorectal malformations (ARMs) and the relationship between expression of their
genes and the occurrence of ARMs. Expression of SHH, GLI family zinc finger 2
(GLI2) and BMP4 mRNA in the posterior wall of the terminal rectum in 40 patients 
with ARMs (15 high-type and 25 low-type) and 10 normal controls was assessed by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Levels of SHH, GLI2 and BMP4
proteins were assessed by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. The
expressions of SHH, GLI2 and BMP4 were significantly lower in patients with
high-type compared with those with low-type anomalies and controls. Patients with
low-type ARMs differed from controls only in the expression of GLI2 mRNA. It is
concluded that down-regulation of the SHH/BMP4 signalling pathway may be related 
to the occurrence of high-type ARMs, but the mechanism responsible for low-type
ARMs remains unclear.

PMID: 20146882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2010 Feb 15;154C(1):149-57. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.30247.

Holoprosencephaly and holoprosencephaly-like phenotypes: Review of facial and
molecular findings in patients from a craniofacial hospital in Brazil.

Richieri-Costa A(1), Ribeiro LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anornalias
Craniofaciais, Universidade de São Paulo, Bauro, S.P., Brazil. richieri@usp.br

Here we report on the clinical and genetic data for a large sample of Brazilian
patients studied at the Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalas
Craniofaciais-Universidade de São Paulo (HRAC-USP) who presented with either the 
classic holoprosencephaly or the holoprosencephaly-like (HPE-L) phenotype. The
sample included patients without detected mutations in some HPE determinant genes
such as SHH, GLI2, SIX3, TGIF, and PTCH, as well as the photographic
documentation of the previously reported patients in our Center. The HPE-L
phenotype has been also called of HPE "minor forms" or "microforms." The variable
phenotype, the challenge of genetic counseling, and the similarities to patients 
with isolated cleft lip/palate are discussed.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20104612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Transgenic Res. 2010 Oct;19(5):869-87. doi: 10.1007/s11248-010-9362-0. Epub 2010 
Jan 23.

Varying phenotypes in swine versus murine transgenic models constitutively
expressing the same human Sonic hedgehog transcriptional activator, K5-HGLI2
Delta N.

McCalla-Martin AC(1), Chen X, Linder KE, Estrada JL, Piedrahita JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, 4700 Hillsborough Street, Raleigh, NC 27606,
USA.

This study was undertaken to characterize the effects of constitutive expression 
of the hedgehog transcriptional activator, Gli2, in porcine skin. The
keratinocyte-specific human transgene, K5-hGli2 Delta N, was used to produce
transgenic porcine lines via somatic cell nuclear transfer techniques. In mice,
K5-hGli2 Delta N induces epithelial downgrowths resembling basal cell carcinomas.
Our porcine model also developed these basal cell carcinoma-like lesions, however
gross tumor development was not appreciated. In contrast to the murine model,
diffuse epidermal changes as well as susceptibility to cutaneous infections were 
seen in the swine model. Histologic analysis of transgenic piglets revealed
generalized epidermal changes including: epidermal hyperplasia (acanthosis),
elongated rete ridges, parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal neutrophilic
infiltration, capillary loop dilation and hypogranulosis. By 2 weeks of age, the 
transgenic piglets developed erythematic and edematous lesions at high contact
epidermal areas and extensor surfaces of distal limb joints. Despite antibiotic
treatment, these lesions progressed to a deep bacterial pyoderma and pigs died or
were euthanized within weeks of birth. Non-transgenic littermates were
phenotypically normal by gross and histological analysis. In summary,
constitutive expression of the human hGli2 Delta N in keratinocytes, results in
cutaneous changes that have not been reported in the K5-hGli2 Delta N murine
model. These findings indicate a need for a multiple species animal model
approach in order to better understand the role of Gli2 in mammalian skin.

PMID: 20099029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 21;5(1):e8824. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008824.

Hedgehog promotes neovascularization in pancreatic cancers by regulating Ang-1
and IGF-1 expression in bone-marrow derived pro-angiogenic cells.

Nakamura K(1), Sasajima J, Mizukami Y, Sugiyama Y, Yamazaki M, Fujii R, Kawamoto 
T, Koizumi K, Sato K, Fujiya M, Sasaki K, Tanno S, Okumura T, Shimizu N, Kawabe
J, Karasaki H, Kono T, Ii M, Bardeesy N, Chung DC, Kohgo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
cancer including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Recent studies have
suggested that the oncogenic function of Hh in PDAC involves signaling in the
stromal cells rather than cell autonomous effects on the tumor cells. However,
the origin and nature of the stromal cell type(s) that are responsive to Hh
signaling remained unknown. Since Hh signaling plays a crucial role during
embryonic and postnatal vasculogenesis, we speculated that Hh ligand may act on
tumor vasculature specifically focusing on bone marrow (BM)-derived cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Cyclopamine was utilized to inhibit the Hh
pathway in human PDAC cell lines and their xenografts. BM transplants, co-culture
systems of tumor cells and BM-derived pro-angiogenic cells (BMPCs) were employed 
to assess the role of tumor-derived Hh in regulating the BM compartment and the
contribution of BM-derived cells to angiogenesis in PDAC. Cyclopamine
administration attenuated Hh signaling in the stroma rather than in the cancer
cells as reflected by decreased expression of full length Gli2 protein and Gli1
mRNA specifically in the compartment. Cyclopamine inhibited the growth of PDAC
xenografts in association with regression of the tumor vasculature and reduced
homing of BM-derived cells to the tumor. Host-derived Ang-1 and IGF-1 mRNA levels
were downregulated by cyclopamine in the tumor xenografts. In vitro co-culture
and matrigel plug assays demonstrated that PDAC cell-derived Shh induced Ang-1
and IGF-1 production in BMPCs, resulting in their enhanced migration and
capillary morphogenesis activity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We identified the BMPCs as alternative stromal targets 
of Hh-ligand in PDAC suggesting that the tumor vasculature is an attractive
therapeutic target of Hh blockade. Our data is consistent with the emerging
concept that BM-derived cells make important contributions to epithelial
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2809097
PMID: 20098680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;12(2):132-42. doi: 10.1038/ncb2013. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Histone deacetylase and Cullin3-REN(KCTD11) ubiquitin ligase interplay regulates 
Hedgehog signalling through Gli acetylation.

Canettieri G(1), Di Marcotullio L, Greco A, Coni S, Antonucci L, Infante P,
Pietrosanti L, De Smaele E, Ferretti E, Miele E, Pelloni M, De Simone G, Pedone
EM, Gallinari P, Giorgi A, Steinkühler C, Vitagliano L, Pedone C, Schinin ME,
Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, 324 viale Regina
Elena, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog signalling is crucial for development and is deregulated in several
tumours, including medulloblastoma. Regulation of the transcriptional activity of
Gli (glioma-associated oncogene) proteins, effectors of the Hedgehog pathway, is 
poorly understood. We show here that Gli1 and Gli2 are acetylated proteins and
that their HDAC-mediated deacetylation promotes transcriptional activation and
sustains a positive autoregulatory loop through Hedgehog-induced upregulation of 
HDAC1. This mechanism is turned off by HDAC1 degradation through an E3 ubiquitin 
ligase complex formed by Cullin3 and REN, a Gli antagonist lost in human
medulloblastoma. Whereas high HDAC1 and low REN expression in neural progenitors 
and medulloblastomas correlates with active Hedgehog signalling, loss of HDAC
activity suppresses Hedgehog-dependent growth of neural progenitors and tumour
cells. Consistent with this, abrogation of Gli1 acetylation enhances cellular
proliferation and transformation. These data identify an integrated HDAC- and
ubiquitin-mediated circuitry, where acetylation of Gli proteins functions as an
unexpected key transcriptional checkpoint of Hedgehog signalling.

PMID: 20081843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jan 12;9:5. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-5.

Smoothened as a new therapeutic target for human osteosarcoma.

Hirotsu M(1), Setoguchi T, Sasaki H, Matsunoshita Y, Gao H, Nagao H, Kunigou O,
Komiya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog signaling pathway functions as an organizer in embryonic
development. Recent studies have demonstrated constitutive activation of Hedgehog
pathway in various types of malignancies. However, it remains unclear how
Hedgehog pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. To explore the 
involvement of aberrant Hedgehog pathway in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma, we 
investigated the expression and activation of Hedgehog pathway in osteosarcoma
and examined the effect of SMOOTHENED (SMO) inhibition.
RESULTS: To evaluate the expression of genes of Hedgehog pathway, we performed
real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry using osteosarcoma cell lines and
osteosarcoma biopsy specimens. To evaluate the effect of SMO inhibition, we did
cell viability, colony formation, cell cycle in vitro and xenograft model in
vivo. Real-time PCR revealed that osteosarcoma cell lines over-expressed Sonic
hedgehog, Indian hedgehog, PTCH1, SMO, and GLI. Real-time PCR revealed
over-expression of SMO, PTCH1, and GLI2 in osteosarcoma biopsy specimens. These
findings showed that Hedgehog pathway is activated in osteosarcomas. Inhibition
of SMO by cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of SMO, slowed the growth of
osteosarcoma in vitro. Cell cycle analysis revealed that cyclopamine promoted G1 
arrest. Cyclopamine reduced the expression of accelerators of the cell cycle
including cyclin D1, cyclin E1, SKP2, and pRb. On the other hand, p21(cip1)
wprotein was up-regulated by cyclopamine treatment. In addition, knockdown of SMO
by SMO shRNA prevents osteosarcoma growth in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that inactivation of SMO may be a useful
approach to the treatment of patients with osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2818696
PMID: 20067614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Biosyst. 2010 Jan;6(1):44-54. doi: 10.1039/b910196a. Epub 2009 Aug 27.

Small-molecule modulators of the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway.

Stanton BZ(1), Peng LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford
Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is the most widely characterized of the three vertebrate
Hedgehog homologs, and is essential for proper embryonic development. Shh binds
to its receptor, Patched (Ptch1), resulting in the de-repression of Smoothened
(Smo). This leads to the activation of Gli2, which regulates the transcription of
target genes that include Gli1 and Ptch1. Several synthetic and naturally
occurring small-molecule modulators of Smo have been discovered. Shh-signaling
antagonists that bind to Smo include cyclopamine, SANT1, and Cur-61414. Shh
signaling agonists that bind to Smo include the synthetic small molecules
purmorphamine and SAG. Small molecules that inhibit Shh signaling downstream of
Smo, GANT58 and GANT61 have also been reported. Robotnikinin inhibits the Shh
pathway by directly targeting Shh. Although progress has been made in
understanding and modulating Shh signaling, fundamental aspects of Shh signal
transduction remain obscure, including the mechanism(s) whereby Ptch1 regulates
Smo activity. Small-molecule modulators of Shh signaling provide a means to
regulate the activity of a pathway implicated in medulloblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma (BCC), pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer and developmental disorders. 
Several Shh inhibitors have not succeeded in the clinic for unknown reasons, but 
clinical trials in BCC and pancreatic cancer with the promising Smo antagonists
GDC-0449 and IPI-926 are currently underway.

PMID: 20024066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Endocrinology. 2010 Feb;151(2):766-73. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0875. Epub 2009 Dec
11.

Use of mutant mouse lines to investigate origin of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone-1 neurons: lineage independent of the adenohypophysis.

Metz H(1), Wray S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology Section, National Institute of
Neurological Disorder and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Mutant mouse lines have been used to study the development of specific neuronal
populations and brain structures as well as behaviors. In this report, single-
and double-mutant mice were used to examine the lineage of GnRH-1 cells. GnRH is 
essential for vertebrate reproduction, with either GnRH-1 or GnRH-3 controlling
release of gonadotropins from the anterior pituitary, depending on the species.
It is clear that the neuroendocrine GnRH cells migrate from extracentral nervous 
system locations into the forebrain. However, the embryonic origin of GnRH-1 and 
GnRH-3 cells is controversial and has been suggested to be nasal placode,
adenohypophyseal (anterior pituitary) placode, or neural crest, again dependent
on the species examined. We found that mutant mice with either missing or
disrupted anterior pituitaries (Gli2(-/-), Gli1(-/-)Gli2(-/-), and Lhx3(-/-))
exhibit a normal GnRH-1 neuronal population and that these cells are still found 
associated with the developing vomeronasal organ. These results indicate that in 
mice, GnRH-1 cells develop independent of the adenohypophyseal placode and are
associated early with the formation of the nasal placode.

PMCID: PMC2817619
PMID: 20008041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21666-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912180106. Epub 2009 Dec 8.

Gli2 trafficking links Hedgehog-dependent activation of Smoothened in the primary
cilium to transcriptional activation in the nucleus.

Kim J(1), Kato M, Beachy PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.

Stimulation by the extracellular Hedgehog (Hh) protein signal has been shown to
alter ciliary localization of the mammalian Hh receptor components Smoothened
(Smo) and Patched (Ptc), and mutations that disrupt the structure and function of
the cilium also disrupt Hh-induced changes in gene expression. But how ciliary
events affect gene expression in the nucleus is not known, and to address this
question we have characterized the cellular trafficking of Gli2, the principal
mediator of Hh-dependent transcriptional activation. From a combination of
pharmacological and genetic manipulations we find in resting cells that both Gli2
and Smo appear to shuttle in and out of the cilium, with Gli2 but not Smo
requiring intact cytoplasmic microtubules for ciliary entry and both requiring
the ciliary retrograde motor, cytoplasmic dynein 2, for ciliary exit. We also
find that changes in ciliary and nuclear trafficking of Gli2 are triggered by the
Hh-dependent accumulation of activated Smo in the cilium, resulting in a shift
from primarily cytoplasmic localization to accumulation at the distal tip of the 
cilium and within the nucleus. Gli2 thus functions as a dynamic monitor of Smo
activity in the cilium and thereby links Hh pathway activation in the cilium to
transcriptional activation in the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC2790365
PMID: 19996169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):4185-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038232. Epub 2009
Dec 7.

Identification of a suppressive mechanism for Hedgehog signaling through a novel 
interaction of Gli with 14-3-3.

Asaoka Y(1), Kanai F, Ichimura T, Tateishi K, Tanaka Y, Ohta M, Seto M, Tada M,
Ijichi H, Ikenoue T, Kawabe T, Isobe T, Yaffe MB, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Gli transcription factors are central effectors of Hedgehog signaling in
development and tumorigenesis. Using a tandem affinity purification (TAP)
strategy and mass spectrometry, we have found that Gli1 interacts with
14-3-3epsilon, and that Gli2 and Gli3 also bind to 14-3-3epsilon through
homologous sites. This interaction depends on their phosphorylation, and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), a known negative regulator of Hedgehog
signaling serves as a responsible kinase. A Gli2 mutant engineered to eliminate
this interaction exhibited increased transcriptional activity (2 approximately
3x). Transcriptional repression by 14-3-3 binding was also observed with Gli3,
when its N-terminal repressor domain was deleted. The phosphorylation sites
responsible for the binding to 14-3-3 are distinct from those required for
proteolysis, the known mechanism for PKA-induced repression of Hh signaling. Our 
data propose a novel mechanism in which PKA down-regulates Hedgehog signaling by 
promoting the interaction between Gli and 14-3-3 as well as proteolysis. Given
the certain neuronal or malignant disorders in human caused by the abnormality of
17p13 encompassing 14-3-3epsilon overlap with increased Hh signaling, the
Gli-14-3-3 interaction may have pathological significance for those human
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2823557
PMID: 19996099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Science. 2009 Dec 4;326(5958):1424-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1181453.

Deletion of Atoh1 disrupts Sonic Hedgehog signaling in the developing cerebellum 
and prevents medulloblastoma.

Flora A(1), Klisch TJ, Schuster G, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2010 Mar 19;327(5972):1454.

Granule neuron precursors (GNPs) are the most actively proliferating cells in the
postnatal nervous system, and mutations in pathways that control the GNP cell
cycle can result in medulloblastoma. The transcription factor Atoh1 has been
suspected to contribute to GNP proliferation, but its role in normal and
neoplastic postnatal cerebellar development remains unexplored. We show that
Atoh1 regulates the signal transduction pathway of Sonic Hedgehog, an
extracellular factor that is essential for GNP proliferation, and demonstrate
that deletion of Atoh1 prevents cerebellar neoplasia in a mouse model of
medulloblastoma. Our data shed light on the function of Atoh1 in postnatal
cerebellar development and identify a new mechanism that can be targeted to
regulate medulloblastoma formation.

PMCID: PMC3638077
PMID: 19965762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Dec 4;5(6):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.11.003.

Oct4 and LIF/Stat3 additively induce Krüppel factors to sustain embryonic stem
cell self-renewal.

Hall J(1), Guo G, Wray J, Eyres I, Nichols J, Grotewold L, Morfopoulou S,
Humphreys P, Mansfield W, Walker R, Tomlinson S, Smith A.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, University of Cambridge, UK.

Embryonic stem cell (ESC) pluripotency is dependent on an intrinsic gene
regulatory network centered on Oct4. Propagation of the pluripotent state is
stimulated by the cytokine leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) acting through the
transcriptional regulator Stat3. Here, we show that this extrinsic stimulus
converges with the intrinsic circuitry in Krüppel-factor activation. Oct4
primarily induces Klf2 while LIF/Stat3 selectively enhances Klf4 expression.
Overexpression of either factor reduces LIF dependence, but with quantitative and
qualitative differences. Unlike Klf4, Klf2 increases ESC clonogenicity, maintains
undifferentiated ESCs in the genetic absence of Stat3, and confers resistance to 
BMP-induced differentiation. ESCs expanded with Klf2 remain capable of
contributing to adult chimeras. Postimplantation-embryo-derived EpiSCs lack both 
Klf2 and Klf4 and expression of either can reinstate naive pluripotency. These
findings indicate that Oct4 and Stat3 intersect in directing expression of Klf
transcriptional regulators with overlapping properties that additively reinforce 
ground-state ESC pluripotency, identity, and self-renewal.

PMID: 19951688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Pediatr Nephrol. 2010 Apr;25(4):625-31. doi: 10.1007/s00467-009-1368-6. Epub 2009
Dec 1.

Transcriptional networks controlling chondrocyte proliferation and
differentiation during endochondral ossification.

Wuelling M(1), Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Center for Medical Biotechnology,
University Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany.

During endochondral ossification bones are formed as cartilage templates in which
chondrocytes proliferate, differentiate into hypertrophic chondrocytes and are
gradually replaced by bone. Postnatally, remnants of embryonic chondrocytes
remain in a restricted domain between the ossified regions of the bones forming
the growth plate. The coordinated proliferation and differentiation of
chondrocytes ensures the continuous elongation of the epiphyseal growth plates.
The sequential changes between proliferation and differentiation are tightly
regulated by secreted growth factors, which activate chondrocyte-specific
transcription factors. Transcription factors that play critical roles in
regulating cell-type-specific gene expression include Sox9, Gli2/3, and Runx2.
The interaction of these transcription factors with general transcriptional
regulators like histone-modifying enzymes provides an additional level of
regulation to fine-tune the expression of target genes in different chondrocyte
populations. This review will outline recent advances in the analysis of the
complex transcriptional network that regulates the distinct steps of chondrocyte 
differentiation.

PMID: 19949815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Feb;88(2):84-93. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20639.

Testing reported associations of genetic risk factors for oral clefts in a large 
Irish study population.

Carter TC(1), Molloy AM, Pangilinan F, Troendle JF, Kirke PN, Conley MR, Orr DJ, 
Earley M, McKiernan E, Lynn EC, Doyle A, Scott JM, Brody LC, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Statistics, and Prevention Research, Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA. carterto@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Suggestive, but not conclusive, studies implicate many genetic
variants in oral cleft etiology. We used a large, ethnically homogenous study
population to test whether reported associations between nonsyndromic oral clefts
and 12 genes (CLPTM1, CRISPLD2, FGFR2, GABRB3, GLI2, IRF6, PTCH1, RARA, RYK,
SATB2, SUMO1, TGFA) could be confirmed.
METHODS: Thirty-one single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in exons, splice
sites, and conserved non-coding regions were studied in 509 patients with cleft
lip with or without cleft palate (CLP), 383 with cleft palate only (CP), 838
mothers and 719 fathers of patients with oral clefts, and 902 controls from
Ireland. Case-control and family-based statistical tests were performed using
isolated oral clefts for the main analyses.
RESULTS: In case-control comparisons, the minor allele of PTCH1 A562A (rs2066836)
was associated with reduced odds of CLP (odds ratios [OR], 0.29; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.13-0.64 for homozygotes), whereas the minor allele of PTCH1
L1315P (rs357564) was associated with increased odds of CLP (OR, 1.36; 95% CI,
1.07-1.74 for heterozygotes; and OR, 1.56; 95% CI, 1.09-2.24 for homozygotes).
The minor allele of one SUMO1 SNP, rs3769817 located in intron 2, was associated 
with increased odds of CP (OR, 1.45; 95% CI, 1.06-1.99 for heterozygotes).
Transmission disequilibrium was observed for the minor allele of TGFA V159V
(rs2166975) which was over-transmitted to CP cases (p = 0.041).
CONCLUSIONS: For 10 of the 12 genes, this is the largest candidate gene study of 
nonsyndromic oral clefts to date. The findings provide further evidence that
PTCH1, SUMO1, and TGFA contribute to nonsyndromic oral clefts.

PMCID: PMC3503531
PMID: 19937600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Development. 2009 Dec;136(24):4177-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.041624. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

The Gli2 transcriptional activator is a crucial effector for Ihh signaling in
osteoblast development and cartilage vascularization.

Joeng KS(1), Long F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
63110, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) critically regulates multiple aspects of endochondral bone 
development. Although it is generally believed that all Ihh functions are
mediated by the Gli family of transcription activators and repressors, formal
genetic proof for this notion has not been provided. Moreover, the extent to
which different Gli proteins contribute to Ihh functions is not fully understood.
Previous work has shown that de-repression of the Gli3 repressor is the
predominant mode through which Ihh controls chondrocyte proliferation and
maturation, but that osteoblast differentiation and hypertrophic cartilage
vascularization require additional mechanisms. To test the involvement of Gli2
activation in these processes, we have generated a mouse strain that expresses a 
constitutive Gli2 activator in a Cre-dependent manner, and have attempted to
rescue the Ihh-null mouse with the Gli2 activator, either alone or in combination
with Gli3 removal. Here, we report that the Gli2 activator alone is sufficient to
induce vascularization of the hypertrophic cartilage in the absence of Ihh but
requires simultaneous removal of Gli3 to restore osteoblast differentiation.
These results therefore provide direct genetic evidence that Gli2 and Gli3
collectively mediate all major aspects of Ihh function during endochondral
skeletal development.

PMCID: PMC2781053
PMID: 19906844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Feb 15;316(4):627-37. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.10.018. Epub
2009 Oct 21.

Identification of a novel serine/threonine kinase ULK3 as a positive regulator of
Hedgehog pathway.

Maloverjan A(1), Piirsoo M, Michelson P, Kogerman P, Osterlund T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, 12618 Tallinn, Estonia. alla.maloverjan@ttu.ee

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays crucial roles in embryonic development 
and is implicated in tissue homeostasis maintenance and neurogenesis in adults.
Aberrant activation of Hh signaling is associated with various developmental
abnormalities and several types of cancer. Genetic and biochemical studies
ascertain serine/threonine kinase Fused (Fu) as a protein involved in Hh
signaling in Drosophila. However, the role of Fu is not fully conserved in
mammals suggesting involvement of other kinases in the mammalian Hh signaling
pathway. In search of potential homologues to Drosophila and human Fu, we have
cloned human serine/threonine kinase ULK3 and assessed its ability to regulate
GLI transcription factors, mediators of SHH signaling. We demonstrate that ULK3
enhances endogenous and over-expressed GLI1 and GLI2 transcriptional activity in 
cultured cells, as assessed by GLI-luciferase reporter assay. Besides that, ULK3 
alters subcellular localization of GLI1, as assessed by immunofluorescent
staining and immunoblotting assays. We show that ULK3 is an autophosphorylated
kinase and phosphorylates GLI proteins in vitro. We also demonstrate that ULK3
catalytical activity is crucial for its function in SHH pathway. We show that
ULK3 is widely expressed and its expression is higher in a number of tissues
where Shh signaling is known to be active. Our data suggest that serine/threonine
kinase ULK3 is involved in the SHH pathway as a positive regulator of GLI
proteins.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19878745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Sep;9(7):873-86.

Hedgehog target genes: mechanisms of carcinogenesis induced by aberrant hedgehog 
signaling activation.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog signaling is aberrantly activated in glioma, medulloblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma, lung cancer, esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer,
breast cancer, and other tumors. Hedgehog signals activate GLI family members via
Smoothened. RTK signaling potentiates GLI activity through PI3K-AKT-mediated GSK3
inactivation or RAS-STIL1-mediated SUFU inactivation, while GPCR signaling to Gs 
represses GLI activity through adenylate cyclase-mediated PKA activation. GLI
activators bind to GACCACCCA motif to regulate transcription of GLI1, PTCH1,
PTCH2, HHIP1, MYCN, CCND1, CCND2, BCL2, CFLAR, FOXF1, FOXL1, PRDM1 (BLIMP1),
JAG2, GREM1, and Follistatin. Hedgehog signals are fine-tuned based on positive
feedback loop via GLI1 and negative feedback loop via PTCH1, PTCH2, and HHIP1.
Excessive positive feedback or collapsed negative feedback of Hedgehog signaling 
due to epigenetic or genetic alterations leads to carcinogenesis. Hedgehog
signals induce cellular proliferation through upregulation of N-Myc, Cyclin D/E, 
and FOXM1. Hedgehog signals directly upregulate JAG2, indirectly upregulate
mesenchymal BMP4 via FOXF1 or FOXL1, and also upregulate WNT2B and WNT5A.
Hedgehog signals induce stem cell markers BMI1, LGR5, CD44 and CD133 based on
cross-talk with WNT and/or other signals. Hedgehog signals upregulate BCL2 and
CFLAR to promote cellular survival, SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), ZEB1, ZEB2
(SIP1), TWIST2, and FOXC2 to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and
PTHLH (PTHrP) to promote osteolytic bone metastasis. KAAD-cyclopamine,
Mu-SSKYQ-cyclopamine, IPI-269609, SANT1, SANT2, CUR61414 and HhAntag are
small-molecule inhibitors targeted to Smoothened, GANT58, GANT61 to GLI1 and
GLI2, and Robot-nikinin to SHH. Hedgehog signaling inhibitors should be used in
combination with RTK inhibitors, GPCR modulators, and/or irradiation for cancer
therapy.

PMID: 19860666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Magn Reson Med. 2009 Dec;62(6):1431-9. doi: 10.1002/mrm.22113.

Three-dimensional micro-MRI analysis of cerebral artery development in mouse
embryos.

Berrios-Otero CA(1), Wadghiri YZ, Nieman BJ, Joyner AL, Turnbull DH.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine at the Skirball Institute of
Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York
10016, USA.

Vascular system development involves a complex, three-dimensional branching
process that is critical for normal embryogenesis. In the brain, the arterial
systems appear to develop in a stereotyped fashion, but no detailed quantitative 
analyses of the mouse embryonic cerebral arteries have been described. In this
study, a gadolinium-based contrast perfusion method was developed to selectively 
enhance the cerebral arteries in fixed mouse embryos. Three-dimensional magnetic 
resonance micro-imaging (micro-MRI) data were acquired simultaneously from
multiple embryos staged between 10 and 17 days of gestation, and a variety of
image analysis methods was used to extract and analyze the cerebral arterial
patterns. The results show that the primary arterial branches in the mouse brain 
are very similar between individuals, with the patterns established early and
growth occurring by extension of the segments, while maintaining the underlying
vascular geometry. To investigate the utility of this method for mutant mouse
phenotype analysis, contrast-enhanced micro-MRI data were acquired from Gli2(-/-)
mutant embryos and their wild-type littermates, showing several previously
unreported vascular phenotypes in Gli2(-/-) embryos, including the complete
absence of the basilar artery. These results demonstrate that contrast-enhanced
micro-MRI provides a powerful tool for analyzing vascular phenotypes in a variety
of genetically engineered mice.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2859666
PMID: 19859945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Dec;297(6):G1093-106. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00292.2009. Epub 2009 Oct 8.

Hedgehog pathway activation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions during
myofibroblastic transformation of rat hepatic cells in culture and cirrhosis.

Choi SS(1), Omenetti A, Witek RP, Moylan CA, Syn WK, Jung Y, Yang L, Sudan DL,
Sicklick JK, Michelotti GA, Rojkind M, Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Myofibroblastic hepatic stellate cells (MF-HSC) are derived from quiescent
hepatic stellate cells (Q-HSC). Q-HSC express certain epithelial cell markers and
have been reported to form junctional complexes similar to epithelial cells. We
have shown that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a key role in HSC growth. Because
Hh ligands regulate epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we determined
whether Q-HSC express EMT markers and then assessed whether these markers change 
as Q-HSC transition into MF-HSC and whether the process is modulated by Hh
signaling. Q-HSC were isolated from healthy livers and cultured to promote
myofibroblastic transition. Changes in mRNA and protein expression of epithelial 
and mesenchymal markers, Hh ligands, and target genes were monitored in HSC
treated with and without cyclopamine (an Hh inhibitor). Studies were repeated in 
primary human HSC and clonally derived HSC from a cirrhotic rat. Q-HSC activation
in vitro (culture) and in vivo (CCl(4)-induced cirrhosis) resulted in decreased
expression of Hh-interacting protein (Hhip, an Hh antagonist), the EMT inhibitors
bone morphogenic protein (BMP-7) and inhibitor of differentiation (Id2), the
adherens junction component E-cadherin, and epithelial keratins 7 and 19 and
increased expression of Gli2 (an Hh target gene) and mesenchymal markers,
including the mesenchyme-associated transcription factors Lhx2 and Msx2, the
myofibroblast marker alpha-smooth muscle actin, and matrix molecules such as
collagen. Cyclopamine reverted myofibroblastic transition, reducing mesenchymal
gene expression while increasing epithelial markers in rodent and human HSC. We
conclude that Hh signaling plays a key role in transition of Q-HSC into MF-HSC.
Our findings suggest that Q-HSC are capable of transitioning between epithelial
and mesenchymal fates.

PMCID: PMC2850083
PMID: 19815628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18297-302. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0908836106. Epub 2009 Oct 8.

Temporomandibular joint formation requires two distinct hedgehog-dependent steps.

Purcell P(1), Joo BW, Hu JK, Tran PV, Calicchio ML, O'Connell DJ, Maas RL, Tabin 
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We conducted a genetic analysis of the developing temporo-mandibular or
temporomandi-bular joint (TMJ), a highly specialized synovial joint that permits 
movement and function of the mammalian jaw. First, we used laser capture
microdissection to perform a genome-wide expression analysis of each of its
developing components. The expression patterns of genes identified in this screen
were examined in the TMJ and compared with those of other synovial joints,
including the shoulder and the hip joints. Striking differences were noted,
indicating that the TMJ forms via a distinct molecular program. Several
components of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway are among the genes identified 
in the screen, including Gli2, which is expressed specifically in the condyle and
in the disk of the developing TMJ. We found that mice deficient in Gli2 display
aberrant TMJ development such that the condyle loses its growth-plate-like
cellular organization and no disk is formed. In addition, we used a conditional
strategy to remove Smo, a positive effector of the Hh signaling pathway, from
chondrocyte progenitors. This cell autonomous loss of Hh signaling allows for
disk formation, but the resulting structure fails to separate from the condyle.
Thus, these experiments establish that Hh signaling acts at two distinct steps in
disk morphogenesis, condyle initiation, and disk-condyle separation and provide a
molecular framework for future studies of the TMJ.

PMCID: PMC2775291
PMID: 19815519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Evol Bioinform Online. 2009 May 18;5:5-13.

Evolution and functional diversification of the GLI family of transcription
factors in vertebrates.

Abbasi AA(1), Goode DK, Amir S, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320, Pakistan. abbasiam@qau.edu.pk

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates the "SONIC HEDGEHOG" signalling pathway has been
implicated in cell-fate determination, proliferation and the patterning of many
different cell types and organs. As the GLI family members (GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3) 
are key mediators of hedgehog morphogenetic signals, over the past couple of
decades they have been extensively scrutinized by genetic, molecular and
biochemical means. Thus, a great deal of information is currently available about
the functional aspects of GLI proteins in various vertebrate species. To address 
the roles of GLI genes in diversifying the repertoire of the Hh signalling and
deploying them for the vertebrate specifications, in this study we have examined 
the evolutionary patterns of vertebrate GLI sequences within and between species.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic tree analysis suggests that the vertebrate GLI1, GLI2 and
GLI3 genes diverged after the separation of urochordates from vertebrates and
before the tetrapods-bony fishes split. Lineage specific duplication events were 
also detected. Estimation of mode and strength of selection acting on GLI
orthologs demonstrated that all members of the GLI gene family experienced more
relaxed selection in teleost fish than in the mammalian lineage. Furthermore, the
GLI1 gene appeared to have been exposed to different functional constraints in
fish and tetrapod lineages, whilst a similar level of functional constraints on
GLI2 and GLI3 was suggested by comparable average non-synonymous (Ka)
substitutions across the lineages. A relative rate test suggested that the
majority of the paralogous copies of the GLI family analyzed evolved with similar
evolutionary rates except GLI1 which evolved at a significantly faster rate than 
its paralogous counterparts in tetrapods.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that sequence evolutionary patterns of GLI family
members are largely correlated with the reported similarities and differences in 
the functionality of GLI proteins within and between the various vertebrate
species. We propose that duplication and divergence of GLI genes has increased in
the complexity of vertebrate body plan by recruiting the hedgehog signalling for 
the novel developmental tasks.

PMCID: PMC2747127
PMID: 19812723  [PubMed]


486. Cancer Cell. 2009 Oct 6;16(4):276-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.09.019.

Tail wags dog: primary cilia and tumorigenesis.

Barakat MT(1), Scott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, Program in Neurosciences, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305-5439, USA.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway contributes to many
forms of cancer. Primary cilia are Hh signal transduction centers. Two papers in 
a recent issue of Nature Medicine (Han et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2009) show that
mutating cilia can increase or reduce the rates of tumorigenesis depending on how
the Hh pathway is disrupted.

PMCID: PMC3437380
PMID: 19800572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 13;284(46):31523-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.059964. Epub
2009 Sep 21.

Cloning of the human GLI2 Promoter: transcriptional activation by transforming
growth factor-beta via SMAD3/beta-catenin cooperation.

Dennler S(1), André J, Verrecchia F, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U697, Université Paris-Diderot, 75010 Paris, France.

GLI2 (GLI-Kruppel family member 2), a zinc finger transcription factor that
mediates Hedgehog signaling, is implicated in the progression of an ever-growing 
number of human malignancies, including prostate and pancreatic cancer, as well
as basal cell carcinoma of the skin. Its expression is up-regulated by
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) in a variety of cell types, both
normal and transformed. We report herein that TGF-beta-driven GLI2 expression is 
transcriptional and does not result from stabilization of GLI2 transcripts. We
describe the characterization of the 5'-flanking sequence of human GLI2 mRNA, the
identification of a transcription start site, the cloning of approximately 1,600 
bp of the regulatory promoter region and the identification and functional
analysis of a TGF-beta-responsive region mapped to a 91-bp sequence between
nucleotides -119 and -29 of the promoter. This region harbors SMAD and lymphoid
enhancer factor/T cell factor binding sites that allow functional cooperation
between SMAD3 and beta-catenin, recruited to the promoter in response to TGF-beta
to drive GLI2 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2797221
PMID: 19797115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Oncogene. 2009 Dec 17;28(50):4480-90. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.294. Epub 2009 Sep
28.

The Sonic Hedgehog pathway stimulates prostate tumor growth by paracrine
signaling and recapitulates embryonic gene expression in tumor myofibroblasts.

Shaw A(1), Gipp J, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI 53792, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway contributes to prostate cancer growth and progression. 
The presence of robust Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) expression in both normal prostate
and localized cancer challenged us to explain the unique growth-promoting effect 
in cancer. We show here that paracrine Hh signaling exerts a non-cell autonomous 
effect on xenograft tumor growth and that Hh pathway activation in myofibroblasts
alone is sufficient to stimulate tumor growth. Nine genes regulated by Hh in the 
mesenchyme of the developing prostate were found to be regulated in the stroma of
Hh overexpressing xenograft tumors. Correlation analysis of gene expression in
matched specimens of benign and malignant human prostate tissue revealed a
partial five-gene fingerprint of Hh-regulated expression in stroma of all cancers
and the complete nine-gene fingerprint in the subset of tumors exhibiting a
reactive stroma. No expression fingerprint was observed in benign tissues. We
conclude that changes in the prostate stroma due to association with cancer
result in an altered transcriptional response to Hh that mimics the
growth-promoting actions of the fetal mesenchyme. Patients with an abundance of
myofibroblasts in biopsy tissue may comprise a subgroup that will exhibit a
particularly good response to anti-Hh therapy.

PMCID: PMC2795794
PMID: 19784071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Development. 2009 Oct;136(20):3495-504. doi: 10.1242/dev.036087.

Sonic hedgehog-dependent synthesis of laminin alpha1 controls basement membrane
assembly in the myotome.

Anderson C(1), Thorsteinsdóttir S, Borycki AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

Basement membranes have essential structural and signalling roles in tissue
morphogenesis during embryonic development, but the mechanisms that control their
formation are still poorly understood. Laminins are key components of basement
membranes and are thought to be essential for initiation of basement membrane
assembly. Here, we report that muscle progenitor cells populating the myotome
migrate aberrantly in the ventral somite in the absence of sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signalling, and we show that this defect is due to the failure to form a myotomal
basement membrane. We reveal that expression of Lama1, which encodes laminin
alpha1, a subunit of laminin-111, is not activated in Shh(-/-) embryos. Recovery 
of Lama1 expression or addition of exogenous laminin-111 to Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-)
embryos restores the myotomal basement membrane, demonstrating that laminin-111
is necessary and sufficient to initiate assembly of the myotomal basement
membrane. This study uncovers an essential role for Shh signalling in the control
of laminin-111 synthesis and in the initiation of basement membrane assembly in
the myotome. Furthermore, our data indicate that laminin-111 function cannot be
compensated by laminin-511.

PMCID: PMC2752398
PMID: 19783738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Differentiation. 2010 Jan;79(1):31-40. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2009.08.008. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Canonical Wnt signaling regulates Foxc1/2 expression in P19 cells.

Savage J(1), Voronova A, Mehta V, Sendi-Mukasa F, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.

FOXC1 and FOXC2 are forkhead/winged-helix transcription factors expressed in
paraxial mesoderm and somites. Emphasizing the importance of FOXC1/2 during
embryonic development, double-knockout mice lacking the alleles for both Foxc1
and Foxc2 failed to form segmented somites and undergo myogenesis. The present
study aims to determine upstream factors that regulate Foxc1/2 expression during 
the differentiation of P19 cells into skeletal muscle. Previous work had shown
that dominant-negative forms of beta-catenin, Gli2, and Meox1 could inhibit
distinct stages of skeletal myogenesis in P19 cells. In the presence of a
dominant-negative beta-catenin fusion protein, Foxc1/2 transcripts were not
upregulated and neither were markers of somitogenesis/myogenesis, including
Meox1, Pax3 and MyoD. Conversely, inhibition of GSK3 by LiCl or overexpression of
activated beta-catenin in aggregated P19 cells resulted in enhancement of Foxc1/2
expression, indicating that FOX transcription may be under the control of Wnt
signaling. Supporting this hypothesis, beta-catenin bound to conserved regions
upstream of Foxc1 during P19 cell differentiation and drove transcription from
this region in a promoter assay. In addition, ectopic expression of a
dominant-negative Meox1 or Gli2 resulted in decreased Foxc1/2 transcript levels, 
correlating with inhibition of skeletal myogenesis. Overexpression of Gli2 was
also sufficient to upregulate Foxc1/2 transcript levels and induce skeletal
myogenesis. In summary, Foxc1/2 expression is dependent on a complex interplay
from various signaling inputs from the Wnt and Shh pathways during early stages
of in vitro skeletal myogenesis.

PMID: 19782461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Nov;20(21):4541-51. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-03-0227. Epub 2009
Sep 16.

Sox9 family members negatively regulate maturation and calcification of
chondrocytes through up-regulation of parathyroid hormone-related protein.

Amano K(1), Hata K, Sugita A, Takigawa Y, Ono K, Wakabayashi M, Kogo M, Nishimura
R, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University Graduate School
of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Sox9 is a transcription factor that plays an essential role in chondrogenesis and
has been proposed to inhibit the late stages of endochondral ossification.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of chondrocyte
maturation and calcification by Sox9 remain unknown. In this study, we attempted 
to clarify roles of Sox9 in the late stages of chondrocyte differentiation. We
found that overexpression of Sox9 alone or Sox9 together with Sox5 and Sox6
(Sox5/6/9) inhibited the maturation and calcification of murine primary
chondrocytes and up-regulated parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)
expression in primary chondrocytes and the mesenchymal cell line C3H10T1/2.
Sox5/6/9 stimulated the early stages of chondrocyte proliferation and
development. In contrast, Sox5/6/9 inhibited maturation and calcification of
chondrocytes in organ culture. The inhibitory effects of Sox5/6/9 were rescued by
treating with anti-PTHrP antibody. Moreover, Sox5/6/9 bound to the promoter
region of the PTHrP gene and up-regulated PTHrP gene promoter activity.
Interestingly, we also found that the Sox9 family members functionally
collaborated with Ihh/Gli2 signaling to regulate PTHrP expression and chondrocyte
differentiation. Our results provide novel evidence that Sox9 family members
mediate endochondral ossification by up-regulating PTHrP expression in
association with Ihh/Gli2 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2770942
PMID: 19759178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Oncology. 2009;77(3-4):231-43. doi: 10.1159/000236047. Epub 2009 Sep 7.

Activation of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in olfactory neuroblastoma.

Mao L(1), Xia YP, Zhou YN, Dai RL, Yang X, Wang YJ, Duan SJ, Qiao X, Mei YW, Hu
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

OBJECTIVES: Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is associated with tumor
development; however, the role of Shh signaling in the development of olfactory
neuroblastoma (ONB) is unknown. This study aimed to investigate the relationship 
between the regulation of Shh signaling and the pathogenesis of ONB.
METHODS: The expression of Shh signaling components was characterized by
immunohistochemistry in human non-tumor olfactory epithelium and ONB specimens,
and by RT-PCR and immunoblotting in human ONB cell lines. The impact of the
treatment with cyclopamine (a selective inhibitor of the Shh pathway) and/or
exogenous Shh on ONB cell proliferation, cycle and apoptosis was examined by MTT,
soft agar colony formation and flow cytometry assays, respectively. The influence
of Shh signaling on the expression of Shh signaling components and cell
cycle-related regulators was determined by immunoblotting and quantitative
RT-PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of Pacthed1, Gli1 and Gli2 was detected in 70, 70, and
65% of human ONB specimens, respectively, and in proportion of ONB cell lines,
but not in non-tumor olfactory epithelium. Treatment with cyclopamine inhibited
the proliferation and colony formation of ONB cells, induced ONB cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis, and down-regulated the expression of Pacthed1, Gli1 and
cyclin D1, but up-regulated p21 expression in vitro. These regulatory effects of 
cyclopamine were partially or completely erased by exogenous Shh.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the Shh signaling pathway is crucial for the 
growth of ONB.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19738389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Nat Med. 2009 Sep;15(9):1055-61. doi: 10.1038/nm.2011. Epub 2009 Aug 23.

Primary cilia can both mediate and suppress Hedgehog pathway-dependent
tumorigenesis.

Wong SY(1), Seol AD, So PL, Ermilov AN, Bichakjian CK, Epstein EH Jr, Dlugosz AA,
Reiter JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2009 Sep;15(9):994-6.

Primary cilia are present on most mammalian cells and are implicated in
transducing Hedgehog (Hh) signals during development; however, the prevalence of 
cilia on human tumors remains unclear, and the role of cilia in cancer has not
been examined. Here we show that human basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) are
frequently ciliated, and we test the role of cilia in BCC by conditionally
deleting Kif3a (encoding kinesin family member 3A) or Ift88 (encoding
intraflagellar transport protein 88), genes required for ciliogenesis, in two Hh 
pathway-dependent mouse tumor models. Ciliary ablation strongly inhibited
BCC-like tumors induced by an activated form of Smoothened. In contrast, removal 
of cilia accelerated tumors induced by activated Gli2, a transcriptional effector
of Hh signaling. These seemingly paradoxical effects are consistent with a dual
role for cilia in mediating both the activation and the repression of the Hh
signaling pathway. Our findings demonstrate that cilia function as unique
signaling organelles that can either mediate or suppress tumorigenesis depending 
on the nature of the oncogenic initiating event.

PMCID: PMC2895420
PMID: 19701205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nat Med. 2009 Sep;15(9):1062-5. doi: 10.1038/nm.2020. Epub 2009 Aug 23.

Dual and opposing roles of primary cilia in medulloblastoma development.

Han YG(1), Kim HJ, Dlugosz AA, Ellison DW, Gilbertson RJ, Alvarez-Buylla A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery and The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research University of California-San
Francisco (UCSF), California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2009 Sep;15(9):994-6.

Recent work has shown that primary cilia are essential for Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling during mammalian development. It is also known that aberrant Hh
signaling can lead to cancer, but the role of primary cilia in oncogenesis is not
known. Cerebellar granule neuron precursors (GNPs) can give rise to
medulloblastomas, the most common malignant brain tumor in children. The primary 
cilium and Hh signaling are required for GNP proliferation. We asked whether
primary cilia in GNPs have a role in medulloblastoma growth in mice. Genetic
ablation of primary cilia blocked medulloblastoma formation when this tumor was
driven by a constitutively active Smoothened protein (Smo), an upstream activator
of Hh signaling. In contrast, removal of cilia was required for medulloblastoma
growth by a constitutively active glioma-associated oncogene family zinc finger-2
(GLI2), a downstream transcription factor. Thus, primary cilia are either
required for or inhibit medulloblastoma formation, depending on the initiating
oncogenic event. Remarkably, the presence or absence of cilia was associated with
specific variants of human medulloblastomas; primary cilia were found in
medulloblastomas with activation in HH or WNT signaling but not in most
medulloblastomas in other distinct molecular subgroups. Primary cilia could serve
as a diagnostic tool and provide new insights into the mechanism of
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2771737
PMID: 19701203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1910-28. doi: 10.1101/gad.1794109.

Cilium-independent regulation of Gli protein function by Sufu in Hedgehog
signaling is evolutionarily conserved.

Chen MH(1), Wilson CW, Li YJ, Law KK, Lu CS, Gacayan R, Zhang X, Hui CC, Chuang
PT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California at San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1843-8.

A central question in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is how evolutionarily conserved
components of the pathway might use the primary cilium in mammals but not fly. We
focus on Suppressor of fused (Sufu), a major Hh regulator in mammals, and reveal 
that Sufu controls protein levels of full-length Gli transcription factors, thus 
affecting the production of Gli activators and repressors essential for graded Hh
responses. Surprisingly, despite ciliary localization of most Hh pathway
components, regulation of Gli protein levels by Sufu is cilium-independent. We
propose that Sufu-dependent processes in Hh signaling are evolutionarily
conserved. Consistent with this, Sufu regulates Gli protein levels by
antagonizing the activity of Spop, a conserved Gli-degrading factor. Furthermore,
addition of zebrafish or fly Sufu restores Gli protein function in Sufu-deficient
mammalian cells. In contrast, fly Smo is unable to translocate to the primary
cilium and activate the mammalian Hh pathway. We also uncover a novel positive
role of Sufu in regulating Hh signaling, resulting from its control of both Gli
activator and repressor function. Taken together, these studies delineate
important aspects of cilium-dependent and cilium-independent Hh signal
transduction and provide significant mechanistic insight into Hh signaling in
diverse species.

PMCID: PMC2725943
PMID: 19684112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1843-8. doi: 10.1101/gad.1838109.

Variations in Hedgehog signaling: divergence and perpetuation in Sufu regulation 
of Gli.

Ruel L(1), Thérond PP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Biologie du Développement et Cancer-IBDC, Université de Nice-Sophia
Antipolis, CNRS UMR 6543, Centre de Biochimie, Nice Cedex 02, France.

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1910-28.

The Hedgehog (Hh) proteins play a universal role in metazoan development.
Nevertheless, fundamental differences exist between Drosophila and vertebrates in
the transduction of the Hh signal, notably regarding the role of primary cilia in
mammalian cells. In this issue of Genes & Development, Chen and colleagues (pp.
1910-1928) demonstrate that mouse Suppressor of fused (Sufu) regulates the
stability of the transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3 by antagonizing the
conserved Gli degradation device mediated by Hib/Spop in a cilia-independent
manner.

PMCID: PMC2725945
PMID: 19684109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 11;106(32):13377-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906944106. Epub 2009 Jul 29.

Mouse Kif7/Costal2 is a cilia-associated protein that regulates Sonic hedgehog
signaling.

Liem KF Jr(1), He M, Ocbina PJ, Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Mammalian Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for embryonic development
and stem cell maintenance and has critical roles in tumorigenesis. Although core 
components of the Shh pathway are conserved in evolution, important aspects of
mammalian Shh signaling are not shared with the Drosophila pathway. Perhaps the
most dramatic difference between the Drosophila and mammalian pathways is that
Shh signaling in the mouse requires a microtubule-based organelle, the primary
cilium. Proteins that are required for the response to Shh are enriched in the
cilium, but it is not clear why the cilium provides an appropriate venue for
signal transduction. Here, we demonstrate that Kif7, a mammalian homologue of
Drosophila Costal2 (Cos2), is a cilia-associated protein that regulates signaling
from the membrane protein Smoothened (Smo) to Gli transcription factors. By using
a Kif7 mutant allele identified in a reporter-based genetic screen, we show that,
similar to Drosophila and zebrafish Cos2, mouse Kif7 acts downstream of Smo and
upstream of Gli2 and has both negative and positive roles in Shh signal
transduction. Mouse Kif7 activity depends on the presence of cilia and Kif7-eGFP 
localizes to base of the primary cilium in the absence of Shh. Activation of the 
Shh pathway promotes trafficking of Kif7-eGFP from the base to the tip of the
cilium, and localization to the tip of the cilium is disrupted in a motor domain 
mutant. We conclude that Kif7 is a core regulator of Shh signaling that may also 
act as a ciliary motor.

PMCID: PMC2726420
PMID: 19666503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Cell Sci. 2009 Sep 1;122(Pt 17):3070-82. doi: 10.1242/jcs.049676. Epub 2009 Aug
4.

The primary cilium coordinates early cardiogenesis and hedgehog signaling in
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Clement CA(1), Kristensen SG, Møllgård K, Pazour GJ, Yoder BK, Larsen LA,
Christensen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Defects in the assembly or function of primary cilia, which are sensory
organelles, are tightly coupled to developmental defects and diseases in mammals.
Here, we investigated the function of the primary cilium in regulating hedgehog
signaling and early cardiogenesis. We report that the pluripotent P19.CL6 mouse
stem cell line, which can differentiate into beating cardiomyocytes, forms
primary cilia that contain essential components of the hedgehog pathway,
including Smoothened, Patched-1 and Gli2. Knockdown of the primary cilium by
Ift88 and Ift20 siRNA or treatment with cyclopamine, an inhibitor of Smoothened, 
blocks hedgehog signaling in P19.CL6 cells, as well as differentiation of the
cells into beating cardiomyocytes. E11.5 embryos of the Ift88(tm1Rpw)
(Ift88-null) mice, which form no cilia, have ventricular dilation, decreased
myocardial trabeculation and abnormal outflow tract development. These data
support the conclusion that cardiac primary cilia are crucial in early heart
development, where they partly coordinate hedgehog signaling.

PMCID: PMC2729259
PMID: 19654211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Cancer Cell. 2009 Aug 4;16(2):126-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.05.013.

Gli2 and p53 cooperate to regulate IGFBP-3- mediated chondrocyte apoptosis in the
progression from benign to malignant cartilage tumors.

Ho L(1), Stojanovski A, Whetstone H, Wei QX, Mau E, Wunder JS, Alman B.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, ON, Canada.

Clinical evidence suggests that benign cartilage lesions can progress to
malignant chondrosarcoma, but the molecular events in this progression are
unknown. Mice that develop benign cartilage lesions due to overexpression of Gli2
in chondrocytes developed lesions similar to chondrosarcomas when they were also 
deficient in p53. Gli2 overexpression and p53 deficiency had opposing effects on 
chondrocyte differentiation, but had additive effects negatively regulating
apoptosis. Regulation of Igfbp3 expression and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
signaling by Gli and p53 integrated their effect on apoptosis. Treatment of human
chondrosarcomas or fetal mouse limb explants with IGFBP3 or by blocking IGF
increased the apoptosis rate, and mice expressing Gli2 developed substantially
fewer tumors when they were also deficient for Igf2. IGF signaling-meditated
apoptosis regulates the progression to malignant chondrosarcoma.

PMID: 19647223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Head Neck. 2010 Mar;32(3):333-40. doi: 10.1002/hed.21191.

Expression of hedgehog signaling molecules in Merkel cell carcinoma.

Brunner M(1), Thurnher D, Pammer J, Heiduschka G, Petzelbauer P, Schmid C,
Schneider S, Erovic BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog signaling pathway is important for human development and
carcinogenesis in various malignancies.
METHODS: One tissue microarray with triplets of 28 samples from 25 patients with 
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) was constructed. Six samples of normal skin and 5
samples of normal oral mucosa served as controls. All samples were analyzed
immunohistochemically with antibodies directed against Sonic hedgehog, Indian
hedgehog, Patched, Smoothened, Gli-1, Gli-2, and Gli-3.
RESULTS: All investigated proteins were frequently and intensely overexpressed in
MCCs (Sonic hedgehog, 93%; Indian hedgehog, 84%; Patched, 86%; Smoothened, 79%;
Gli-1, 79%; Gli-2, 79%; Gli-3, 86%) compared with control samples. High levels of
Patched and Indian hedgehog were significantly associated with an increase in
patients overall (p = .015) and recurrence-free survival (p = .011),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the Hedgehog signaling pathway is strongly
activated in MCC and thus may play a role in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19644931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Dev Biol. 2009 Oct 1;334(1):264-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.026. Epub 2009
Jul 24.

Patterning of ventral telencephalon requires positive function of Gli
transcription factors.

Yu W(1), Wang Y, McDonnell K, Stephen D, Bai CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The ability of neuroepithelial cells to generate a diverse array of neurons is
influenced by locally secreted signals. In the spinal cord, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) 
is known to induce distinct cell fates in a concentration-dependent manner by
regulating the activities of the three Gli transcription factors in neural
precursors. However, whether Gli-mediated Shh signaling is also required to
induce different cell types in the ventral telencephalon has been controversial. 
In particular, loss of Shh has little effect on dorsoventral patterning of the
telencephalon when Gli3 is also removed. Furthermore, no ventral telencephalic
phenotypes have been found in individual Gli mutants. To address this issue, we
first characterized Shh-responding ventral telencephalic progenitors between E9.5
and E12.5 and found that they produce neurons migrating to different layers of
the cortex. We also discovered a loss of Nkx2.1 and Nkx6.2 expression in two
subgroups of progenitors in embryos lacking major Gli activators. Finally, we
analyzed the telencephalic phenotypes of embryos lacking all Gli genes and found 
that the ventral telencephalon was highly disorganized with intermingling of
distinct neuronal cell types. Together, these studies unravel a role for Gli
transcription factors in mediating Shh signaling to control specification,
differentiation and positioning of ventral telencephalic neurons.

PMID: 19632216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cancer Sci. 2009 Oct;100(10):1848-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01262.x. Epub
2009 Jun 26.

A critical role of Sonic Hedgehog signaling in maintaining the tumorigenicity of 
neuroblastoma cells.

Mao L(1), Xia YP, Zhou YN, Dai RL, Yang X, Duan SJ, Qiao X, Mei YW, Hu B, Cui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Accumulated evidence suggests a major role for the activation of the Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway in the development of neural crest stem cells
that give rise to the sympathetic nervous system. We therefore investigated the
involvement of SHH signaling in the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma, a common
childhood malignant tumor of the sympathetic nervous system. Human neuroblastoma 
cell lines and a majority of primary neuroblastoma specimens showed high-level
expression of the pathway targets and components, indicating persistent
activation of the SHH pathway. All of the neuroblastoma cell lines we examined
expressed significant levels of SHH ligand, suggesting an autocrine,
ligand-dependent activation of the SHH pathway in neuroblastoma cells. Inhibition
of SHH signaling by cyclopamine induced apoptosis and blocked proliferation in
all major types of neuroblastoma cells, and abrogated the tumorigenicity of
neuroblastoma cells. Moreover, the knockdown of GLI2 in neuroblastoma BE (2)-C
and SK-N-DZ cell lines resulted in the inhibition of colony formation. Our study 
has revealed a molecular mechanism for the persistent activation of the SHH
pathway which promotes the development of neuroblastoma, and suggests a new
approach for the treatment of this childhood malignant tumor. (Cancer Sci 2009;
100: 1848-1855).

PMID: 19622100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mod Pathol. 2009 Oct;22(10):1312-20. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.98. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

Sonic hedgehog signaling proteins and ATP-binding cassette G2 are aberrantly
expressed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Kim JE(1), Singh RR, Cho-Vega JH, Drakos E, Davuluri Y, Khokhar FA, Fayad L,
Medeiros LJ, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Dysregulation of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway has been shown in
several cancer types, but has not been explored in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
We assessed 67 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma for expression of SHH
(ligand), GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (transcriptional effectors of SHH signaling), and
the ATP-binding cassette (ABC)G2 (a downstream target of SHH signaling), using
immunohistochemistry. For comparison, we assessed the expression levels of these 
proteins in 28 cases of follicular lymphoma, 5 chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma, and 5 reactive lymph nodes. In diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, SHH was expressed in 61 of 67 (91%) cases, GLI1 in 62 of 67 (93%), GLI2
in 41 of 56 (73%), and GLI3 in 22 of 56 (39%). Expression of ABCG2 was detected
in 52 of 55 (95%) cases and was high in 15 (27%) cases. SHH expression positively
correlated with expression levels of ABCG2 (P=0.05). Patients with diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma with high ABCG2 expression showed significantly shorter overall
survival (P=0.031) and failure-free survival (P=0.029) compared with patients
with tumors with low or no expression of ABCG2. Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
expressed SHH, and GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 more frequently and more intensely than
cases of follicular lymphoma or chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic
lymphoma. In conclusion, our data show that SHH signaling proteins and ABCG2 are 
aberrantly expressed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and that ABCG2 expression
has prognostic implications. These findings also provide evidence that
dysregulation of the SHH pathway may be involved in the pathogenesis of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 19593328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2009 Oct;45(9):566-72. doi:
10.1007/s11626-009-9228-z. Epub 2009 Jul 8.

Cross talk between hedgehog and bone morphogenetic proteins occurs during
cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells.

Gianakopoulos PJ(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1H 8M5.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a role in heart morphogenesis and can initiate
cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells. To determine if Hh signaling is essential for P19 
cell cardiomyogenesis, we determined which Hh factors are expressed and the
effect of Hh signal transduction inhibitors. Here, we find that the Hh gene
family and their downstream mediators are expressed during cardiomyogenesis but
an active Hh signaling pathway is not essential. However, loss of Hh signaling
resulted in a delay of BMP-4, GATA-4, Gli2, and Meox1 expression during
cardiomyogenesis. By using Noggin-overexpressing P19 cells, we determined that Hh
signaling was not active during Noggin-mediated inhibition of cardiomyogenesis.
Thus, there is cross talk between the Hh and BMP signaling pathways and the Hh
pathway appears important for timely cardiomyogenesis.

PMID: 19585175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 May;42(5):615-25. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0390OC. 
Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Gli2 influences proliferation in the developing lung through regulation of cyclin
expression.

Rutter M(1), Wang J, Huang Z, Kuliszewski M, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology and Experimental Medicine Program, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8 Canada.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is crucial for normal lung
development. In the lung, epithelial-produced Shh signals via mesenchymal Gli1-3 
transcription factors. Gli-null lung phenotypes suggest that Gli2 is the primary 
Gli transcription factor transducing Shh-regulated lung growth, although the
mechanism has yet to be elucidated. To clarify the role of Gli2 during lung
development, we overexpressed gli2 in the lung mesenchyme of mice, to investigate
for changes in Shh signaling, and cellular proliferation. The ectopic
overexpression of gli2 resulted in increased Shh pathway activation as evident by
increased expression of shh, ptc1, ptc2, smo, hhip, and gli1. Interestingly, we
also observed increased expression of gli3 transcripts. Using two different mouse
models, gli3-null and gli3Delta699 (Gli3 constitutive repressor), it was found
that Gli3 activity does not affect the levels of gli2 in the developing lung.
Real-time PCR and immunoblotting revealed that there is increased expression of
cyclins D1, D2, and E1 associated with increased gli2 levels. Furthermore, the
increase and decrease of cyclins (associated with changes in gli2 levels)
positively correlated with cellular proliferation, as assessed by phospho-histone
H3 immunohistochemistry. To determine if Gli3 has an effect on cyclin expression 
in the developing lung, we measured the levels of cyclin D1, D2, and E1, in
gli3-null and gli3Delta699 mice and compared them to their wild-type
counterparts. However, no change in the levels of cyclins D1, D2, or E1 due to
altered Gli3 was observed. These findings suggest that Gli2 and not Gli3 is the
primary mediator of Shh signaling influencing fetal lung growth through cyclin
regulation.

PMID: 19574535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Med Chem. 2009 Jul 23;52(14):4277-87. doi: 10.1021/jm900106f.

Structure-activity relationships and cancer-cell selective toxicity of novel
inhibitors of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 1 (Gli1) mediated
transcription.

Mahindroo N(1), Connelly MC, Punchihewa C, Kimura H, Smeltzer MP, Wu S, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

We report novel inhibitors of Gli1-mediated transcription as potential anticancer
agents. Focused chemical libraries were designed and assessed for inhibition of
functional cell-based Gli1-mediated transcription and selective toxicity toward
cancer cells. The SAR was revealed, and the selectivity of the lead compounds'
inhibition of Gli1-mediated transcription over that of Gli2 was determined.
Compound 63 (NMDA298-1), which inhibited Gli1-mediated transcription in C3H10T1/2
cells with an IC(50) of 6.9 muM, showed 3-fold selectivity for inhibiting
transcription mediated by Gli1 over that by Gli2. Cell-viability assays were
performed to evaluate the chemical library in a normal cell line and a panel of
cancer cell lines with or without up-regulated expression of the Gli1 gene. These
compounds decreased the viability of several cancer cell lines but were less
active in the noncancerous BJ-hTERT cells.

PMCID: PMC2853048
PMID: 19545120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Genesis. 2009 Sep;47(9):628-37. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20532.

Targeted disruption of Sonic Hedgehog in the mouse adrenal leads to
adrenocortical hypoplasia.

Ching S(1), Vilain E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

Development of the mammalian adrenal gland is regulated by a diverse network of
growth and transcription factors. Disruptions in these pathways often result in
adrenal insufficiency because of adrenal hypoplasia. Several lines of evidence
have suggested that the Hedgehog signaling pathway, which controls many aspects
of tissue and organ patterning, may play a direct role in adrenal morphogenesis
as well. Therefore, we examined the role of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a member of the
Hedgehog family, in mouse adrenal development. We show that Shh and its
downstream effectors Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 are expressed in the adrenal cortex
throughout development, and that Shh is required for normal adrenal
organogenesis. Conditional inactivation of Shh in the adrenal cortex using a
Cre-loxP system resulted in severe hypoplasia and disorganization of the cortex. 
In mice carrying the targeted mutation (Shh(fl/fl;SF-1/Cre+)), adrenal mass was
significantly reduced and the cortex failed to encapsulate the adrenal medulla.
Taken together, these results establish a direct role for Shh signaling in normal
adrenal development.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19536807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dev Biol. 2009 Aug 15;332(2):429-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.579. Epub 2009 
Jun 6.

BMP7 and SHH regulate Pax2 in mouse retinal astrocytes by relieving TLX
repression.

Sehgal R(1), Sheibani N, Rhodes SJ, Belecky Adams TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis,
Indianapolis, IN-46202, USA.

Pax2 is essential for development of the neural tube, urogenital system, optic
vesicle, optic cup and optic tract. In the eye, Pax2 deficiency is associated
with coloboma, a loss of astrocytes in the optic nerve and retina, and abnormal
axonal pathfinding of the ganglion cell axons at the optic chiasm. Thus,
appropriate expression of Pax2 is essential for astrocyte determination and
differentiation. Although BMP7 and SHH have been shown to regulate Pax2
expression, the molecular mechanism by which this regulation occurs is not well
understood. In this study, we determined that BMP7 and SHH activate Pax2
expression in mouse retinal astrocyte precursors in vitro. SHH appeared to play a
dual role in Pax2 regulation; 1) SHH may regulate BMP7 expression, and 2) the SHH
pathway cooperates with the BMP pathway to regulate Pax2 expression. BMP and SHH 
pathway members can interact separately or together with TLX, a repressor protein
in the tailless transcription factor family. Here we show that the interaction of
both pathways with TLX relieves the repression of Pax2 expression in mouse
retinal astrocytes. Together these data reveal a new mechanism for the
cooperative actions of signaling pathways in astrocyte determination and
differentiation and suggest interactions of regulatory pathways that are
applicable to other developmental programs.

PMCID: PMC2917894
PMID: 19505455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jul;149A(7):1476-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32678.

Hartsfield holoprosencephaly-ectrodactyly syndrome in five male patients: further
delineation and review.

Vilain C(1), Mortier G, Van Vliet G, Dubourg C, Heinrichs C, de Silva D, Verloes 
A, Baumann C.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, ULB, Hôpital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium.
cavilain@ulb.ac.be

We report on five male subjects with a triad of signs compatible with Hartsfield 
syndrome: ectrodactyly, holoprosencephaly, and mental retardation. Only six
patients with this distinctive association have been reported over the past 20
years, all of them being males. Of the patients described here, some have
unreported findings such as vermian hypoplasia in one and prolonged survival into
adulthood in two. Two patients developed central diabetes insipidus. All were
mentally retarded. No abnormalities were found at the cytogenetic level,
including array CGH in two. No known genes for holoprosencephaly or ectrodactyly 
were found, including GLI2. The cause of Hartsfield syndrome is unknown. An
X-linked defect is possible, although no recurrences have been described to date.
Our observations almost double the number of cases. They underscore the
usefulness of fetal brain imaging in the differential diagnosis of syndromal
clefting diagnosed in utero, particularly when ectrodactyly-ectodermal
dysplasia-clefting syndrome is suspected.

PMID: 19504604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Pathol. 2009 Sep;219(1):61-8. doi: 10.1002/path.2568.

Neuronal differentiation in basal cell carcinoma: possible relationship to
Hedgehog pathway activation?

Gore SM(1), Kasper M, Williams T, Regl G, Aberger F, Cerio R, Neill GW, Philpott 
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, St. Bartholomew's and the London, Queen Mary's 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

Although deregulated Hedgehog signalling and elevated Gli transcription factor
expression are known to promote the development of basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
little is known about molecular mechanisms driving the development of specific
growth pattern subtypes. Using gene array analysis, we have previously observed
that over-expression of GLI1 in human keratinocytes promotes increased expression
of the neuronal differentiation markers ARC and ULK1. We asked whether neuronal
differentiation is a characteristic of BCC and whether there is any correlation
with BCC subtype. Using RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, we confirmed that the
neuronal markers ARC, beta-tubulin III, GAP-43 and Neurofilament are expressed in
human BCC but not in normal epidermis. Moreover, we found that expression of
these neuronal differentiation markers showed strong correlation to BCC subtype, 
with more aggressive infiltrative and morphoeic BCC showing low levels or lack of
expression compared to nodular, superficial and micronodular subtypes. Primary
human keratinocytes retrovirally expressing GLI1(-) and GLI2(-) showed elevated
levels of beta-tubulin III and ARC but not Neurofilament or GAP-43, suggesting
that beta-tubulin III and Arc may be early targets of aberrant Gli expression in 
BCC, whereas expression of Neurofilament and GAP-43 are either later, downstream 
targets or under control of alternative pathways. We propose that neuronal
differentiation is a feature of BCC and that expression of these markers is in
part due to aberrant Hedgehog signalling. Moreover, we suggest that correlation
between loss of expression of neuronal markers in infiltrative and morphoeic BCC 
subtypes reflects dedifferentiation of more aggressive BCC subtypes.

PMID: 19479712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jun;149A(6):1277-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32844.

Holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly, and bilateral cleft of lip and palate: exclusion
of SHH, TGIF, SIX3, GLI2, TP73L, and DHCR7 as candidate genes.

Zechi-Ceide RM(1), Ribeiro LA, Raskin S, Bertolacini CD, Guion-Almeida ML,
Richieri-Costa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital of Rehabilitation of Craniofacial
Anomalies (HRAC), University of São Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

We describe a Brazilian boy with semilobar holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly,
bilateral cleft of lip and palate, and severe mental retardation. The karyotype
was normal and the screening for mutations in the genes SHH, TGIF, SIX3, GLI2,
TP73L, and DHCR7 did not show any change. This rare condition was described
previously in seven male patients. Clinical and genetic aspects are discussed.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19449411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Pathol Int. 2009 May;59(5):279-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02366.x.

Expression of sonic hedgehog signaling molecules in normal, hyperplastic and
carcinomatous endometrium.

Kim KH(1), Kim JM, Choi YL, Shin YK, Lee HC, Seong IO, Kim BK, Chae SW, Chung YS,
Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Eulji University College of Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.

The aim of the present study was to determine the expression profile of the
hedgehog (Hh) signaling molecules in normal, hyperplastic, and carcinomatous
uterine endometrium. For this purpose, 271 endometrial tissue samples, (62 of
normal endometrium, 127 of endometrial hyperplasias, and 82 endometrial
adenocarcinomas) were studied using antibodies recognizing Hh-related signaling
proteins, such as, sonic hedgehog (Shh), Patched (PTCH), Smoothened (Smo),
Suppressor of fused [Su(Fu)], Gli-1, Gli-2, and Gli-3 by immunohistochemistry.
The mRNA expression of these molecules was also assessed on reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the normal endometrium, the
expression of Hh signaling molecules was generally downregulated except for
Su(Fu), Gli-2, and Shh. In particular, the expression of both PTCH and Smo was
very low or almost absent. Overall expression of Hh signaling molecules increased
in hyperplastic endometrium; in particular, PTCH and Smo were significantly
highly expressed in complex and atypical hyperplasia. In carcinoma samples
extensive alterations were observed in the expression pattern of the signaling
molecules. Nuclear Gli-2, cytoplasmic Gli-3, and Su(Fu) were overexpressed,
whereas Shh, PTCH, and Smo expression were significantly reduced compared with
the hyperplastic endometrium. The results suggest that the alteration of Hh
signaling may be implicated in tumorigenesis of the endometrium.

PMID: 19432668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Jul;48(7):558-68. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20665.

Novel oncogene amplifications in tumors from a family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome.

Rieber J(1), Remke M, Hartmann C, Korshunov A, Burkhardt B, Sturm D,
Mechtersheimer G, Wittmann A, Greil J, Blattmann C, Witt O, Behnisch W, Halatsch 
ME, Orakcioglu B, von Deimling A, Lichter P, Kulozik A, Pfister S.

Author information: 
(1)Division Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg, Germany.

Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) represents an inherited tumor syndrome that is
typically caused by germline mutations of the tumor suppressor gene TP53. TP53
dysfunction secondarily disturbs the genetic integrity of the cell. Here, we
report a family with LFS harboring a germline TP53 mutation (R248W) located in
the functional domain of the protein that binds to the minor groove of the DNA.
In this family, tumors of the central nervous system were diagnosed as primary
malignancies in all carriers of the mutation. The index patient developed an
anaplastic medulloblastoma with unusual genomic profile exhibiting six distinct
high-level genomic amplifications, two of them targeting the MYCN and GLI2 genes,
respectively. In an extrarenal rhabdoid tumor from the same patient, we found a
novel high-level amplification of the MYC oncogene. The father of this patient
was diagnosed with myxopapillary ependymoma (WHO degrees I), whereas a brother
died from an early relapse of a choroid plexus carcinoma. The analysis of this
LFS familiy thus revealed novel oncogene amplifications as different second hits 
that are likely to also play a role in the pathogenesis of their sporadic
counterparts.

PMID: 19378321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mech Dev. 2009 May-Jun;126(5-6):394-405. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.02.002. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

The role of Parafibromin/Hyrax as a nuclear Gli/Ci-interacting protein in
Hedgehog target gene control.

Mosimann C(1), Hausmann G, Basler K.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center Frontiers in Genetics, Institut für
Molekularbiologie, Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway, an evolutionarily conserved key regulator of embryonic
patterning and tissue homeostasis, controls its target genes by managing the
processing and activities of the Gli/Ci transcription factors. Little is known
about the nuclear co-factors the Gli/Ci proteins recruit, and how they
mechanistically control Hh target genes. Here, we provide evidence for the
involvement of Parafibromin/Hyx as a positive component in Hh signaling. We found
that hyx RNAi impaired Hh pathway activity in Drosophila cell culture. Consistent
with an evolutionarily conserved function in Hh signaling, RNAi-mediated
knockdown of Parafibromin in mammalian cell culture experiments diminished the
transcriptional activity of Gli1 and Gli2. In vivo, in Drosophila, genetic
impairment of hyx decreased the expression of the high-threshold Hh target gene
knot/collier. Conversely, hyx overexpression ameliorated the inhibitory activity 
of Ptc and Ci(75) misexpression during Drosophila wing development. We
subsequently found that Parafibromin can form a complex with all three Glis, and 
provide evidence that Parafibromin/Hyx directly binds Region 1, the Su(fu)
interaction domain, in the N-terminus of all Glis and Ci. Taken together, our
results suggest a target gene-selective involvement of the PAF1 complex in Hh
signaling via the Parafibromin/Hyx-mediated recruitment to Gli/Ci.

PMID: 19368795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Int J Oncol. 2009 May;34(5):1411-5.

Transcriptional regulation of WNT2B based on the balance of Hedgehog, Notch, BMP 
and WNT signals.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

We cloned and characterized human WNT2B in 1996, and then others cloned and
characterized mouse, chicken, and zebrafish WNT2B orthologs. WNT2B is expressed
in several types of human cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, gastric cancer,
breast cancer, head/neck squamous cell carcinoma, cervical cancer and leukemia.
WNT2B is one of canonical WNTs transducing signals through Frizzled (FZD) and
LRP5/LRP6 receptors to beta-catenin-TCF/LEF signaling cascade. Here, refined
integrative genomic analyses on WNT2B orthologs were carried out to elucidate its
transcriptional mechanisms. GLI-, double FOX-, HES/HEY-, bHLH-, and Sp1-binding
sites within mammalian WNT2B promoter were well conserved. Because GLI1, FOXA2,
FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1 and FOXL1 are direct target genes of Hedgehog-GLI2 signaling 
cascade, Hedgehog signals should induce WNT2B upregulation through GLI family
members as well as FOX family members. Notch, BMP and Hedgehog signals inhibit
WNT2B expression via HES/HEY-binding to N-box, whereas BMP and WNT signals
inhibit bHLH transcription factor-induced WNT2B expression via ID1, ID2, ID3,
MSX1 or MSX2. Together these facts indicate that Hedgehog signals and bHLH
transcription factors are involved in WNT2B upregulation, which is counteracted
by BMP, WNT and Notch signals. Mesenchymal BMP induces IHH expression in
gastrointestinal epithelial cells, and then epithelial Hedgehog induces WNT2B and
BMP4 expression in mesenchymal cells. NF-kappaB signals induce SHH upregulation, 
and WNT2B is upregulated in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). BMP-IHH and
inflammation-SHH signaling loops are involved in WNT2B up-regulation during
embryogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis, and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19360354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2009 Jan;6 Suppl 2:283-90.

LHX3 and LHX4 transcription factors in pituitary development and disease.

Colvin SC(1), Mullen RD, Pfaeffle RW, Rhodes SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5120, USA.

The LHX3 and LHX4 LIM-homeodomain proteins are regulatory transcription factors
that play overlapping but distinct functions during the establishment of the
specialized cells of the mammalian pituitary gland and the nervous system. Recent
studies have identified a variety of mutations in the LHX3 and LHX4 genes in
patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency diseases. These patients have
complex and variable syndromes involving short stature, metabolic disorders,
reproductive system deficits, and nervous system developmental abnormalities. The
short stature secondary to growth hormone deficiency is a key feature of the
disorders associated with these gene mutations and responds well to
supplementation with recombinant growth hormone. Overall, the frequency of
mutations in the LHX3 and LHX4 genes in patients with combined pituitary hormone 
deficiency is low. Mutations in other regulatory genes such as HESX1, PROP1, PIT1
/ POU1F1, and GLI2 have been shown to be additional causes of pituitary hormone
deficiency, but overall, the etiology of many cases of hypopituitarism is not
understood. Further investigation is therefore required to identify other genes, 
both primary regulatory genes and those with modifier functions, which contribute
to pituitary development and function.

PMID: 19337183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int J Lab Hematol. 2010 Apr;32(2):150-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2009.01149.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 12.

Expression profile of Notch-related genes in multidrug resistant K562/A02 cells
compared with parental K562 cells.

Yan S(1), Ma D, Ji M, Guo D, Dai J, Zhao P, Ji C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong,
China.

Drug resistance is the major setback of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) therapy.
Notch proteins have demonstrated functional regulation in cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis and thus may affect drug resistance. Our study
aimed to identify the Notch-related gene profile in drug-resistant AML cells and 
provide potential strategies for resistant AML therapy.
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay was conducted 
to detect the cytotoxicity of adriamycin toward K562 and drug-resistant K562/A02.
Intracellular mean fluorescence intensity was monitored to reflect the intake of 
adriamycin by confocal microscopy. cDNA microarray was used to test the
expression of 113 Notch signaling pathway-related genes in K562/A02 and K562.
Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western
blot were used to validate the results from microarray. K562/A02 cells showed a
65-fold higher IC(50) to adriamycin and less intracellular accumulation of
adriamycin than K562. cDNA microarray showed marked increases in binding of
collagen and cell proliferation-related genes (CD44, DLL3, IL17B, NUMB, and
NUMBL) and decreases in signal transduction and transcription factor activity
related genes (FZD9, GBP2, GLI1, GLI2, IFNG, KRT5, Notch2, and Notch3). The
change of gene expression was further validated by real-time RT-PCR and western
blot. Notch signaling pathway-related genes may contribute to the drug resistance
of AML.

PMID: 19302234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 May 15;18(10):1740-54. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp113. Epub 2009 Mar
12.

Tubby-like protein 3 (TULP3) regulates patterning in the mouse embryo through
inhibition of Hedgehog signaling.

Norman RX(1), Ko HW, Huang V, Eun CM, Abler LL, Zhang Z, Sun X, Eggenschwiler JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Tubby-like protein 3 (TULP3) is required for proper embryonic development in
mice. Disruption of mouse Tulp3 results in morphological defects in the embryonic
craniofacial regions, the spinal neural tube and the limbs. Here, we show that
TULP3 functions as a novel negative regulator of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
in the mouse. In Tulp3 mutants, ventral cell types in the lumbar neural tube,
which acquire their identities in response to Shh signaling, are ectopically
specified at the expense of dorsal cell types. Genetic epistasis experiments show
that this ventralized phenotype occurs independently of Shh and the transmembrane
protein Smoothened, but it is dependent on the transcription factor Gli2. The
ventralized phenotype is also dependent on the kinesin II subunit Kif3A, which is
required for intraflagellar transport and ciliogenesis. In addition, TULP3 is
required for proper Shh-dependent limb patterning and for maintaining the correct
balance between differentiation and proliferation in the neural tube. Finally,
the localization of TULP3 to the tips of primary cilia raises the possibility
that it regulates the Hedgehog pathway within this structure.

PMCID: PMC2671991
PMID: 19286674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Virchows Arch. 2009 Apr;454(4):369-79. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0753-7. Epub 2009 
Mar 12.

Hedgehog signaling is involved in differentiation of normal colonic tissue rather
than in tumor proliferation.

Alinger B(1), Kiesslich T, Datz C, Aberger F, Strasser F, Berr F, Dietze O,
Kaserer K, Hauser-Kronberger C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, General Hospital, Paracelsus Medical University
Salzburg, Muellner Hauptstrasse 48, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is a main regulation cascade in embryonic
differentiation. It is also present in adult tissues and unusual expression has
been associated with formation of benign and malignant lesions. We examined the
presence of the Hedgehog pathway in normal and pathological human colon tissue.
Components investigated include Sonic (Shh), Indian (Ihh), and Desert Hedgehog
(Dhh), Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and Patched (Ptch). Pathological tissue samples
comprised 23 benign and 20 malignant lesions of human colon. The influence of the
Hedgehog pathway on differentiation and proliferation has been investigated by
analyzing the effect of the pathway inhibitor Cyclopamine on human colon cancer
cell lines HT29 and CaCo2. In normal colon, we detected expression of Shh and Dhh
within the lining epithelium and Patched, Gli1, and Gli2 along the whole crypts. 
Within all benign lesions, positive staining of Shh, Dhh, Gli1, Gli2, and Ptch
was detected. Expression of Shh and Dhh was restricted to single cell aggregates.
Malignant lesions also displayed focal staining pattern for Shh and Dhh but to a 
much lesser extent. We conclude that Hedgehog signaling is involved rather in
constant differentiation and renewing of the colonic lining epithelium than in
cancer formation, growth, or proliferation.

PMID: 19280222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Blood. 2009 May 21;113(21):5144-56. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-10-185751. Epub 2009 
Mar 9.

Sonic hedgehog negatively regulates pre-TCR-induced differentiation by a
Gli2-dependent mechanism.

Rowbotham NJ(1), Hager-Theodorides AL, Furmanski AL, Ross SE, Outram SV, Dessens 
JT, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Univeristy College London Institute of Child Health, United Kingdom.

Hedgehog signaling regulates differentiation, survival, and proliferation of the 
earliest double-negative (DN) thymocytes, but its importance at later stages of
T-cell development is controversial. Here we use loss- and gain-of-function mouse
models to show that Shh, by signaling directly to the developing thymocyte, is a 
negative regulator of pre-TCR-induced differentiation from DN to double-positive 
(DP) cell. When hedgehog signaling was reduced, in the Shh(-/-) and Gli2(-/-)
thymus, or by T lineage-specific transgenic expression of a
transcriptional-repressor form of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaC(2)), differentiation to DP
cell after pre-TCR signal transduction was increased. In contrast, when Hh
signaling was constitutively activated in thymocytes, by transgenic expression of
a constitutive transcriptional-activator form of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaN(2)), the
production of DP cells was decreased. Gene expression profiling showed that
physiologic Hh signaling in thymocytes maintains expression of the transcription 
factor FoxA2 on pre-TCR signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC2686185
PMID: 19273836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):506-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.017. Epub 2009 
Feb 24.

A SHH-independent regulation of Gli3 is a significant determinant of
anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud.

Hill P(1), Götz K, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

The family of GLI proteins (GLI1-3) comprises the intracellular mediators of the 
hedgehog pathway, which regulates a myriad of developmental processes, one of
which is limb development. Whereas GLI1 and GLI2 seem to be dispensable during
limb development, GLI3 is especially crucial since all GLI3-associated human
congenital diseases comprise limb malformations. Furthermore, Gli3(-/-) mouse
embryos exhibit pronounced polydactyly in conjunction with a loss of digit
identities. Here we examined how the quantity of GLI3 contributes to its function
by using different Gli3 mutants in order to vary overall GLI3 levels. In
addition, we made use of the Gli3(Delta699) allele, which encodes a C-terminally 
truncated version of GLI3, thus mimicking the processed GLI3 isoform (GLI3R). The
Gli3(Delta699) mutant made it feasible to analyze isoform-specific contributions 
of GLI3 within the context of anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud. We
revealed a so far unappreciated variation in the quantitative demand for GLI3
within different phases and aspects of distal limb formation. In addition, our
analyses provide evidence that unprocessed full-length GLI3 is dispensable for
anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud. Instead, digit identities are most
likely defined by GLI3 repressor activity alone. Furthermore, we present evidence
that the anteroposterior grading of GLI3 activity by the action of SHH is
supported by a prototype patterning, which regulates Gli3 independently from SHH.

PMID: 19248778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cancer Sci. 2009 May;100(5):948-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01111.x. Epub
2009 Feb 24.

Drug resistance is dramatically restored by hedgehog inhibitors in CD34+ leukemic
cells.

Kobune M(1), Takimoto R, Murase K, Iyama S, Sato T, Kikuchi S, Kawano Y,
Miyanishi K, Sato Y, Niitsu Y, Kato J.

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, South-1, West-16, Chuo-Ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido, 060-8543, Japan.

Aberrant reactivation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been described in a wide
variety of human cancers and in cancer stem cells. However, the contribution of
Hh signaling to leukemic cell regulation has remained unclear. In this study, we 
assessed the possibility that Hh pathway activation contributes to the survival
and drug resistance of cluster of differentiation (CD)34+ leukemia cells. Hh
signaling in leukemic cell lines and primary leukemic cells was screened by
reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and a Hh signaling
reporter assay. We found that Hh signaling is active in several human acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) cells, especially primary CD34+ leukemic cells and
cytokine-responsive CD34+ cell lines such as Kasumi-1, Kasumi-3 and TF-1. These
CD34+ cells express the downstream effectors glioma-associated oncogene homolog
(GLI)1 or GLI2, indicative of active Hh signaling. Moreover, inhibition of Hh
signaling with the naturally derived Smoothened antagonist cyclopamine,
endogenous Hh inhibitor hedgehog-interacting protein or anti-hedgehog
neutralizing antibody induced apoptosis after 48 h of exposure, although these
CD34+ cell lines exhibited resistance to cytarabine (Ara-C). In contrast,
cyclopamine failed to affect growth or survival in U937 and HL-60 cell lines that
lack expression of Hh receptor components, confirming that the effect of Hh
inhibition is specific. Furthermore, combination with 10 microM cyclopamine
significantly reduced drug resistance of CD34+ cell lines and primary CD34+
leukemic cells to Ara-C. These results suggest that aberrant Hh pathway
activation is a feature of some CD34+ myeloid leukemic cells and Hh inhibitors
may have a therapeutic role in the treatment of AML.

PMID: 19245435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Aug;17(8):1024-33. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.2. Epub 2009 Feb 
18.

Characterization of two ectrodactyly-associated translocation breakpoints
separated by 2.5 Mb on chromosome 2q14.1-q14.2.

David D(1), Marques B, Ferreira C, Vieira P, Corona-Rivera A, Ferreira JC, van
Bokhoven H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa,
Portugal. dezso.david@insa.min-saude.pt

Split hand-split foot malformation or ectrodactyly is a heterogeneous congenital 
defect of digit formation. The aim of this study is the mapping of the
breakpoints and a detailed molecular characterization of the candidate genes for 
an isolated and syndromic form of ectrodactyly, both associated with de novo
apparently balanced chromosome translocations involving the same chromosome 2
band, [t(2;11)(q14.2;q14.2)] and [t(2;4)(q14.1;q35)], respectively. Breakpoints
were mapped by fluorescence in situ hybridization using bacterial artificial
chromosome clones. Where possible, these breakpoints were further delimited.
Candidate genes were screened for pathogenic mutations and the expression levels 
of two of them analysed. The isolated bilateral split foot
malformation-associated chromosome 2 breakpoint was localized at 120.9 Mb,
between the two main candidate genes, encoding GLI-Kruppel family member GLI2 and
inhibin-betaB. The second breakpoint associated with holoprosencephaly,
hypertelorism and ectrodactyly syndrome was mapped 2.5 Mb proximal at 118.4 Mb
and the candidate genes identified from this region were the insulin-induced
protein 2 and the homeobox protein engrailed-1. No clear pathogenic mutations
were identified in any of these genes. The breakpoint between INHBB and GLI2
coincides with a previously identified translocation breakpoint associated with
ectrodactyly. We propose a mechanism by which translocations in the 2q14.1-q14.2 
region disrupt the specific arrangement of long-range regulatory elements that
control the tight quantitative spatiotemporal expression of one or more genes
from the breakpoint region.

PMCID: PMC2986556
PMID: 19223936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Oncogene. 2009 Apr 2;28(13):1639-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.10. Epub 2009 Feb 16.

Cooperation between GLI and JUN enhances transcription of JUN and selected GLI
target genes.

Laner-Plamberger S(1), Kaser A, Paulischta M, Hauser-Kronberger C, Eichberger T, 
Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

Sustained Hedgehog (HH) signaling is implicated in basal cell carcinoma of the
skin and other types of cancer. Here we show that GLI1 and GLI2, the main
transcriptional activators of the HH pathway, directly regulate expression of the
activator protein 1 (AP-1) family member JUN, a transcription factor controlling 
keratinocyte proliferation and skin homeostasis. Activation of the JUN promoter
by GLI is dependent on a GLI-binding site and the AP-1 sites known to be involved
in self-activation of JUN. Transcription of JUN is greatly enhanced in the
presence of GLI and requires activated JUN protein. GLI2act is a more potent
activator than GLI1 in these experiments and physical interaction with
phosphorylated JUN was only detected for GLI2act. The synergistic effect of GLI
and JUN extends to the activation of further GLI target genes as shown by
shRNA-mediated knockdown of JUN in human keratinocytes. Some of these
cooperatively activated genes are involved in cell-cycle progression, which is
consistent with a significant reduction of the proliferative potential of GLI in 
the absence of JUN. These results suggest a novel connection between HH/GLI
pathway activity and JUN, which may contribute to the oncogenic activity of
HH/GLI signaling in skin.

PMID: 19219074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Oncol. 2009 Mar;34(3):829-36.

Role of Hedgehog signaling pathway in proliferation and invasiveness of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Cheng WT(1), Xu K, Tian DY, Zhang ZG, Liu LJ, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, Peoples Republic of China.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been confirmed a contributor to the carcinogenesis 
and progression of various tumor types. To investigate the Hh signaling activity 
in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), we detected the expression levels of Hh 
pathway components (Shh, Ptch1 and Gli2) in 57 samples of HCC and corresponding
adjacent-tumor liver tissues. The Hh pathway was overexpressed in cancer tissues 
compared with non-cancer tissues and correlated closely with histologic
differentiation and portal venous invasion of HCC. To elucidate the relationship 
between Hh signaling and HCC progression, we performed a further study in vitro. 
First, the expression levels of the signaling were detected in a subset of
hepatoma cell lines and SMMC-7721 cells selected with high level of Hh signaling 
expression. Next, we employed KAAD-cyclopamine (a specific inhibitor of Hedgehog 
pathway) to block the Hh pathway in SMMC-7721 cells and assessed the changes of
their biological behaviors. The results showed that the blockade of Hh signaling 
pathway by KAAD-cyclopamine induced reduction of DNA synthesis leading to marked 
cell growth inhibition and also caused significant attenuation in invasiveness
and motility of HCC cells. Collectively, our data demonstrated that the Hh
pathway plays an important role in HCC development and invasion. Blockade of the 
Hh signaling pathway may be a potential target of new therapeutic strategy for
HCC.

PMID: 19212688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Lung Cancer. 2009 Oct;66(1):64-74. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.01.007. Epub 2009 
Feb 6.

Overexpression of hedgehog pathway molecules and FOXM1 in non-small cell lung
carcinomas.

Gialmanidis IP(1), Bravou V, Amanetopoulou SG, Varakis J, Kourea H, Papadaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Patras, 26500 Rio
Patras, Greece. gialmanidis nikea@yahoo.com

The hedgehog (HH)-signaling pathway is implicated in developmental processes and 
its aberrant activation in adult tissues has been associated with malignancy. The
aim of this study was to determine the expression pattern of HH-signaling
molecules in non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC), as well as the involvement
of the transcription factor FOXM1, that controls cell proliferation, in this
process. Paraffin-embedded tissue sections of 80 NSCLC cases and adjacent
non-neoplastic lung parenchyma were immunohistochemically analyzed with anti-SHH,
anti-Patched1 (PTCH1), anti-Smoothened (SMO), anti-GLI1, anti-GLI2 and anti-FOXM1
antibodies. Correlations of HH molecules with clinicopathological parameters and 
FOXM1 expression were evaluated. All the HH-signaling molecules examined were
overexpressed in NSCLC compared with the adjacent non-neoplastic lung parenchyma.
HH pathway activity and expression of PTCH1 and SMO were significantly higher in 
squamous cell carcinomas compared to other NSCLC histological types. Activation
of HH pathway and PTCH1 expression were correlated with tumor grade being higher 
in low grade tumors. There was a significant correlation of lymph node metastases
with expression of SMO in all NSCLC histological types and with nuclear GLI1
immunolocalization only in adenocarcinomas. Overexpression of FOXM1 in NSCLC was 
also significantly correlated with PTCH1, SMO and GLI1 expression. In conclusion,
HH-signaling pathway is activated in NSCLC and correlates with histological type,
prognostic parameters of the tumors as well as with the increased expression of
FOXM1.

PMID: 19200615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 15;69(4):1284-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2331. Epub
2009 Feb 3.

Epidermal growth factor receptor signaling synergizes with Hedgehog/GLI in
oncogenic transformation via activation of the MEK/ERK/JUN pathway.

Schnidar H(1), Eberl M, Klingler S, Mangelberger D, Kasper M, Hauser-Kronberger
C, Regl G, Kroismayr R, Moriggl R, Sibilia M, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

Persistent activation of the Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signaling pathway has been
implicated in the development of a number of human cancers. The GLI zinc finger
transcription factors act at the end of the HH signaling cascade to control gene 
expression, and recent studies have shown that the activity of GLI proteins can
be additionally modified by integration of distinct signals, such as the
MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and phosphinositide-3 kinase
(PI3K)/AKT pathway. However, little is known about the identity of the upstream
activators of these HH/GLI interacting signaling pathways in cancer. Here, we
provide evidence that integration of the HH/GLI and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) pathway synergistically induces oncogenic transformation, which
depends on EGFR-mediated activation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK but not of the
PI3K/AKT pathway. EGFR/MEK/ERK signaling induces JUN/activator protein 1
activation, which is essential for oncogenic transformation, in combination with 
the GLI activator forms GLI1 and GLI2. Furthermore, pharmacologic inhibition of
EGFR and HH/GLI efficiently reduces growth of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) cell
lines derived from mice with activated HH/GLI signaling. The results identify the
synergistic integration of GLI activator function and EGFR signaling as a
critical step in oncogenic transformation and provide a molecular basis for
therapeutic opportunities relying on combined inhibition of the HH/GLI and
EGFR/MEK/ERK/JUN pathway in BCC.

PMCID: PMC3035872
PMID: 19190345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Development. 2009 Feb;136(4):665-76. doi: 10.1242/dev.016204.

Early mouse caudal development relies on crosstalk between retinoic acid, Shh and
Fgf signalling pathways.

Ribes V(1), Le Roux I, Rhinn M, Schuhbaur B, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire Inserm, U 964, 
Illkirch, F-67400 France.

The progressive generation of embryonic trunk structures relies on the proper
patterning of the caudal epiblast, which involves the integration of several
signalling pathways. We have investigated the function of retinoic acid (RA)
signalling during this process. We show that, in addition to posterior
mesendoderm, primitive streak and node cells transiently express the
RA-synthesizing enzyme Raldh2 prior to the headfold stage. RA-responsive cells
(detected by the RA-activated RARE-lacZ transgene) are additionally found in the 
epiblast layer. Analysis of RA-deficient Raldh2(-/-) mutants reveals early caudal
patterning defects, with an expansion of primitive streak and mesodermal markers 
at the expense of markers of the prospective neuroepithelium. As a result, many
genes involved in neurogenesis and/or patterning of the embryonic spinal cord are
affected in their expression. We demonstrate that RA signalling is required at
late gastrulation stages for mesodermal and neural progenitors to respond to the 
Shh signal. Whole-embryo culture experiments indicate that the proper response of
cells to Shh requires two RA-dependent mechanisms: (1) a balanced antagonism
between Fgf and RA signals, and (2) a RA-mediated repression of Gli2 expression. 
Thus, an interplay between RA, Fgf and Shh signalling is likely to be an
important mechanism underpinning the tight regulation of caudal embryonic
development.

PMID: 19168680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jan 1;8(1):149-57.

Androgenic regulation of hedgehog signaling pathway components in prostate cancer
cells.

Chen M(1), Tanner M, Levine AC, Levina E, Ohouo P, Buttyan R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, The Ordway Research Institute, 150 New Scotland Avenue, Albany,
NY 12208, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is thought to play a role in several human cancers including
prostate cancer. Although prostate cancer cells express many of the gene products
involved in hedgehog signaling, these cells are refractory to the canonical
signaling effects of exogenous hedgehog ligands or to activated Smoothened, the
hedgehog-regulated mediator of Gli transcriptional activation. Here, we show that
the expression of hedgehog ligands and some hedgehog target genes are regulated
by androgen in the human prostate cancer cell line, LNCaP and its more metastatic
variants (C4-2 and C4-2B). Androgen (R1881) strongly suppressed the expression of
hedgehog ligands in these cells and their prolonged maintenance in
androgen-deficient medium upregulated Sonic and Indian hedgehog mRNA and protein 
levels by up to 30,000-fold. Hedgehogs were released into the conditioned medium 
of androgen-deprived LNCaP cells and this medium was able to increase hedgehog
target gene expression in hedgehog-responsive mouse fibroblasts (MC3T3-E1).
Moreover, this activity was accompanied by increased expression of Gli target
genes, Patched 1 and Gli2, in LNCaP that could be suppressed by cyclopamine,
indicating that chronic androgen-deprivation also re-awakens the autocrine
responsiveness of the cancer cells to hedgehog. In contrast to the suppressive
effects of R1881 on hedgehog ligand and Gli2 expression, we found that Gli1
expression in LNCaP cells was induced by R1881. Given the ability of androgen to 
modulate the expression and release of hedgehog ligands and the activity of the
autocrine hedgehog signaling pathway in these prostate cancer cells, our results 
imply that chronic androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) for prostate cancer might
create a hedgehog signaling environment in the region of the tumor that could
ultimately impact on the long term effectiveness of this treatment. This
consideration supports the idea of clinically testing hedgehog-blocking drugs in 
conjunction with ADT in patients with advanced prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2633936
PMID: 19158486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Cell Biol. 2009 Jan 12;184(1):101-12. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200805155. Epub 2009 Jan
5.

Progenitor cell proliferation in the retina is dependent on Notch-independent
Sonic hedgehog/Hes1 activity.

Wall DS(1), Mears AJ, McNeill B, Mazerolle C, Thurig S, Wang Y, Kageyama R,
Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is an indispensable, extrinsic cue that regulates progenitor
and stem cell behavior in the developing and adult mammalian central nervous
system. Here, we investigate the link between the Shh signaling pathway and Hes1,
a classical Notch target. We show that Shh-driven stabilization of Hes1 is
independent of Notch signaling and requires the Shh effector Gli2. We identify
Gli2 as a primary mediator of this response by showing that Gli2 is required for 
Hh (Hedgehog)-dependent up-regulation of Hes1. We also show using chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Gli2 binds to the Hes1 promoter, which suggests that
Hes1 is a Hh-dependent direct target of Gli2 signaling. Finally, we show that Shh
stimulation of progenitor proliferation and cell diversification requires Gli2
and Hes1 activity. This paper is the first demonstration of the mechanistic and
functional link between Shh, Gli, and Hes1 in the regulation of progenitor cell
behavior.

PMCID: PMC2615087
PMID: 19124651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(1):45-57. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082669cp.

Hedgehog signalling is required for cloacal development in the zebrafish embryo.

Parkin CA(1), Allen CE, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield, U.K.

The Hedgehog (Hh) family of signalling molecules is essential for a wide range of
developmental processes. Mammalian studies have implicated the Hedgehog pathway
in the aetiology of anorectal malformations (ARMs), relatively common congenital 
anomalies caused by failures in the development of the cloaca. In this study we
demonstrate that Hh signalling is absolutely required for the formation of the
zebrafish cloaca and that the severity of the posterior gut abnormalities induced
by a reduction in Hh activity is dependent on the levels of Hh signal
transduction. The complete loss of all Hh activity results in the most severe
defects and the critical period for Hh activity is between 34 and 74 hours post
fertilisation. Using a range of mutant genotypes that cause notochord and
floorplate abnormalities, we show that the source of the Hh signals required for 
posterior gut formation is the endoderm and not the notochord, as previously
postulated in mammalian models of ARMs. We show that Adriamycin, a drug known to 
cause ARMs in rat, but not chick embryos, has no effect on the development of the
zebrafish gastrointestinal tract. These studies establish the zebrafish as a
model for ARMs, and for the elucidation of other pathways involved in hindgut
developmental processes.

PMID: 19123126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;29(5):1291-305. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01566-08. Epub 2008 Dec 
22.

Inhibition of microtubule assembly in osteoblasts stimulates bone morphogenetic
protein 2 expression and bone formation through transcription factor Gli2.

Zhao M(1), Ko SY, Liu JH, Chen D, Zhang J, Wang B, Harris SE, Oyajobi BO, Mundy
GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 372321, USA. zhaomin@umkc.edu

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) is essential for postnatal bone formation
and fracture repair. By screening chemical libraries for BMP-2 mimics using a
cell-based assay, we identified inhibitors of microtubule assembly as stimulators
of BMP-2 transcription. These microtubule inhibitors increased osteoblast
differentiation in vitro, stimulated periosteal bone formation when injected
locally over murine calvaria, and enhanced trabecular bone formation when
administered systemically in vivo. To explore molecular mechanisms mediating
these responses, we examined effects of microtubule inhibitors on the hedgehog
(Hh) pathway, since this pathway is known to regulate BMP-2 transcription in
osteoblasts and microtubules have been shown to be involved in Hh signaling in
Drosophila. Here we show that in osteoblasts, inhibition of microtubule assembly 
increased cytoplasmic levels and transcriptional activity of Gli2, a
transcriptional mediator of Hh signaling that we have previously shown to enhance
BMP-2 expression in osteoblasts (M. Zhao et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 26:6197-6208,
2006). Microtubule inhibition blocked beta-TrCP-mediated proteasomal processing
of Gli2 in osteoblasts. In summary, inhibition of microtubule assembly enhances
BMP-2 gene transcription and subsequent bone formation, in part, through
inhibiting proteasomal processing of Gli2 and increasing intracellular Gli2
concentrations.

PMCID: PMC2643819
PMID: 19103752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 27;284(9):5620-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809172200. Epub 2008
Dec 18.

Sonic hedgehog-responsive genes in the fetal prostate.

Yu M(1), Gipp J, Yoon JW, Iannaccone P, Walterhouse D, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Molecular and Environmental Toxicology
Center, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an important role in prostate
development and appears to play an equally important role in promoting growth of 
advanced prostate cancer. During prostate development, epithelial cells in the
urogenital sinus (UGS) express Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and secrete Shh peptide. The 
secreted Hh peptide acts on adjacent mesenchymal cells to activate the Hh signal 
transduction pathway and elicit paracrine effects on epithelial proliferation and
differentiation. To identify mesenchymal targets of Shh signaling, we performed
microarray analysis on a Shh-responsive, immortalized urogential sinus
mesenchymal cell line. We found 68 genes that were up-regulated by Shh and 21
genes that were down-regulated. Eighteen of those were selected for further study
with Ptc1 and Gli1 serving as reference controls. We found 10 of 18 were also
Hh-regulated in primary UGS mesenchymal cells and 13 of 18 in the cultured UGS.
Seven of 18 exhibited Shh-regulated expression in both assays (Igfbp-6, Igfbp-3, 
Fbn2, Ntrk3, Agpt4, Dmp1, and Mmp13). Three of the 18 genes contained putative
Gli binding motifs that bound Gli1 peptide in electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. With the exception of Tiam1, target gene expression generally showed no
differences in the concentration dependence of ligand-induced expression, but we 
observed strikingly different responses to direct pathway activation by
transfection with activated Smo, Gli1, and Gli2.

PMCID: PMC2645820
PMID: 19095649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. FEBS Lett. 2009 Jan 5;583(1):224-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.12.010. Epub 2008
Dec 10.

Identification of the gene transcription repressor domain of Gli3.

Tsanev R(1), Tiigimägi P, Michelson P, Metsis M, Østerlund T, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn,
Estonia.

Gli transcription factors are downstream targets of the Hedgehog signaling
pathway. Two of the three Gli proteins harbor gene transcription repressor
function in the N-terminal half. We have analyzed the sequences and identified a 
potential repressor domain in Gli2 and Gli3 and have tested this experimentally. 
Overexpression studies confirm that the N-terminal parts harbor gene repression
activity and we mapped the minimal repressor to residues 106 till 236 in Gli3.
Unlike other mechanisms that inhibit Gli induced gene transcription, the
repressor domain identified here does not utilize Histone deacetylases (HDACs) to
achieve repression, as confirmed by HDAC inhibition studies and pull-down assays.
This distinguishes the identified domain from other regulatory parts with
negative influence on transcription.

PMCID: PMC2697317
PMID: 19084012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1928-36. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0142.

Hedgehog-induced survival of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells in a
stromal cell microenvironment: a potential new therapeutic target.

Hegde GV(1), Peterson KJ, Emanuel K, Mittal AK, Joshi AD, Dickinson JD,
Kollessery GJ, Bociek RG, Bierman P, Vose JM, Weisenburger DD, Joshi SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6395, USA.

B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is characterized by an accumulation
of neoplastic B cells due to their resistance to apoptosis and increased
survival. Among various factors, the tumor microenvironment is known to play a
role in the regulation of cell proliferation and survival of many cancers.
However, it remains unclear how the tumor microenvironment contributes to the
increased survival of B-CLL cells. Therefore, we studied the influence of bone
marrow stromal cell-induced hedgehog (Hh) signaling on the survival of B-CLL
cells. Our results show that a Hh signaling inhibitor, cyclopamine, inhibits bone
marrow stromal cell-induced survival of B-CLL cells, suggesting a role for Hh
signaling in the survival of B-CLL cells. Furthermore, gene expression profiling 
of primary B-CLL cells (n = 48) indicates that the expression of Hh signaling
molecules, such as GLI1, GLI2, SUFU, and BCL2, is significantly increased and
correlates with disease progression of B-CLL patients with clinical outcome. In
addition, SUFU and GLI1 transcripts, as determined by real-time PCR, are
significantly overexpressed and correlate with adverse indicators of clinical
outcome in B-CLL patients, such as cytogenetics or CD38 expression. Furthermore, 
selective down-regulation of GLI1 by antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (GLI1-ASO)
results in decreased BCL2 expression and cell survival, suggesting that GLI1 may 
regulate BCL2 and, thereby, modulate cell survival in B-CLL. In addition, there
was significantly increased apoptosis of B-CLL cells when cultured in the
presence of GLI1-ASO and fludarabine. Together, these results reveal that Hh
signaling is important in the pathogenesis of B-CLL and, hence, may be a
potential therapeutic target.

PMID: 19074837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 1;326(1):143-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.006. Epub 2008
Nov 20.

A dynamic Gli code interprets Hh signals to regulate induction, patterning, and
endocrine cell specification in the zebrafish pituitary.

Devine CA(1), Sbrogna JL, Guner B, Osgood M, Shen MC, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is necessary for the induction and functional patterning 
of the pituitary placode, however the mechanisms by which Hh signals are
interpreted by placodal cells are unknown. Here we show distinct temporal
requirements for Hh signaling in endocrine cell differentiation and describe a
dynamic Gli transcriptional response code that interprets these Hh signals within
the developing adenohypophysis. Gli1 is required for the differentiation of
selected endocrine cell types and acts as the major activator of Hh-mediated
pituitary induction, while Gli2a and Gli2b contribute more minor activator
functions. Intriguingly, this Gli response code changes as development proceeds. 
Gli1 continues to be required for the activation of the Hh response anteriorly in
the pars distalis. In contrast, Gli2b is required to repress Hh target gene
expression posteriorly in the pars intermedia. Consistent with these changing
roles, gli1, gli2a, and gli2b, but not gli3, are expressed in pituitary precursor
cells at the anterior neural ridge. Later in development, gli1 expression is
maintained throughout the adenohypophysis while gli2a and gli2b expression are
restricted to the pars intermedia. Given the link between Hh signaling and
pituitary adenomas in humans, our data suggest misregulation of Gli function may 
contribute to these common pituitary tumors.

PMID: 19056374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 1;326(1):177-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.009. Epub 2008
Nov 20.

Phosphorylation of Gli2 by protein kinase A is required for Gli2 processing and
degradation and the Sonic Hedgehog-regulated mouse development.

Pan Y(1), Wang C, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, W404, New York, NY 10065, USA.

In mice, Gli2 and Gli3 are the transcription factors that mediate the initial
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. In the absence of Hh signaling, the majority of the
full-length Gli3 protein undergoes proteolytic processing into a repressor, while
only a small fraction of the full-length Gli2 protein is processed. Gli3
processing is dependent on phosphorylation of the first four of the six protein
kinase A (PKA) sites at its C-terminus. However, whether the same phosphorylation
of Gli2 by PKA is required for Gli2 processing and, if so, whether such
phosphorylation regulates additional Gli2 function are unknown. To address these 
questions, we mutated these PKA sites in the mouse Gli2 locus to create the
Gli2(P1-4) allele. Gli2(P1-4) homozygous embryos die in utero and exhibit
exencephaly, defects in neural tube closure, enlarged craniofacial structures,
and an extra anterior digit. Analysis of spinal cord patterning shows that
domains of motoneurons and V2, V1, and V0 interneurons are expanded to different 
degrees in both Gli2(P1-4) single and Gli2(P1-4);Shh double mutants. Furthermore,
Gli2(P1-4) expression prevents massive cell death and promotes cell proliferation
in Shh mutant. Analysis of Gli2(P1-4) protein in vivo reveals that the mutant
protein is not processed and is twice as stable as wild type Gli2 protein. We
also show that the Gli2 repressor can effectively antagonize Gli2P1-4 activity.
Together, these results indicate that phosphorylation of Gli2 by PKA induces Gli2
processing and destabilization in vivo and plays an important role in the
Hh-regulated mouse embryonic patterning.

PMCID: PMC2650378
PMID: 19056373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 27;284(9):5936-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808103200. Epub 2008
Dec 2.

FoxF1 and FoxL1 link hedgehog signaling and the control of epithelial
proliferation in the developing stomach and intestine.

Madison BB(1), McKenna LB, Dolson D, Epstein DJ, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is a key component of cross-talk during
vertebrate gut development, involving endodermally secreted Sonic (Shh) and
Indian hedgehog (Ihh) proteins that directly signal to adjacent mesoderm. Here we
show that the closely linked mesenchymal forkhead transcription factors Foxf1 and
Foxl1 are part of this signaling cascade. Analysis of conserved non-coding
sequences surrounding Foxf1 and Foxl1 identified seven Gli binding sites, with
two sites near Foxl1 being identical among mammalian, bird, fish, and amphibian
species. In vitro experiments indicate that Gli2 binds to these Gli sites,
several of which are critical for Gli2-mediated activation of a luciferase
reporter in 293 cells. In addition, we demonstrate occupancy of one of these
elements by Gli proteins in the intestine in vivo using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Furthermore, expression of both Foxf1 and Foxl1 is reduced
in the Gli2/Gli3 mutant gut. These results provide compelling evidence that Foxf1
and Foxl1 are mediators of the Hh (endoderm) to mesoderm signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2645837
PMID: 19049965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Oncogene. 2009 Feb 5;28(5):625-37. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.421. Epub 2008 Nov 17.

Stromal control of oncogenic traits expressed in response to the overexpression
of GLI2, a pleiotropic oncogene.

Snijders AM(1), Huey B, Connelly ST, Roy R, Jordan RC, Schmidt BL, Albertson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0808, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is often activated in tumors, yet it remains unclear how GLI2,
a transcription factor activated by this pathway, acts as an oncogene. We show
that GLI2 is a pleiotropic oncogene. The overexpression induces genomic
instability and blocks differentiation, likely mediated in part by enhanced
expression of the stem cell gene SOX2. GLI2 also induces transforming growth
factor (TGF)B1-dependent transdifferentiation of foreskin and tongue, but not
gingival fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, creating an environment permissive for 
invasion by keratinocytes, which are in various stages of differentiation having 
downregulated GLI2. Thus, upregulated GLI2 expression is sufficient to induce a
number of the acquired characteristics of tumor cells; however, the stroma, in a 
tissue-specific manner, determines whether certain GLI2 oncogenic traits are
expressed.

PMCID: PMC2643346
PMID: 19015636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):225-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.10.020. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Defective ciliogenesis, embryonic lethality and severe impairment of the Sonic
Hedgehog pathway caused by inactivation of the mouse complex A intraflagellar
transport gene Ift122/Wdr10, partially overlapping with the DNA repair gene
Med1/Mbd4.

Cortellino S(1), Wang C, Wang B, Bassi MR, Caretti E, Champeval D, Calmont A,
Jarnik M, Burch J, Zaret KS, Larue L, Bellacosa A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Primary cilia are assembled and maintained by evolutionarily conserved
intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins that are involved in the coordinated
movement of macromolecular cargo from the basal body to the cilium tip and back. 
The IFT machinery is organized in two structural complexes named complex A and
complex B. Recently, inactivation in the mouse germline of Ift genes belonging to
complex B revealed a requirement of ciliogenesis, or proteins involved in
ciliogenesis, for Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling in mammals. Here we report on a 
complex A mutant mouse, defective for the Ift122 gene. Ift122-null embryos show
multiple developmental defects (exencephaly, situs viscerum inversus, delay in
turning, hemorrhage and defects in limb development) that result in lethality. In
the node, primary cilia were absent or malformed in homozygous mutant and
heterozygous embryos, respectively. Impairment of the Shh pathway was apparent in
both neural tube patterning (expansion of motoneurons and rostro-caudal
level-dependent contraction or expansion of the dorso-lateral interneurons), and 
limb patterning (ectrosyndactyly). These phenotypes are distinct from both
complex B IFT mutant embryos and embryos defective for the ciliary protein
hennin/Arl13b, and suggest reduced levels of both Gli2/Gli3 activator and Gli3
repressor functions. We conclude that complex A and complex B factors play
similar but distinct roles in ciliogenesis and Shh/Gli3 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2645042
PMID: 19000668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Feb;129(2):438-48. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.279. Epub 2008
Nov 6.

An essential role for dermal primary cilia in hair follicle morphogenesis.

Lehman JM(1), Laag E, Michaud EJ, Yoder BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Feb;129(2):264-5.

The primary cilium is a microtubule-based organelle implicated as an essential
component of a number of signaling pathways. It is present on cells throughout
the mammalian body; however, its functions in most tissues remain largely
unknown. Herein we demonstrate that primary cilia are present on cells in murine 
skin and hair follicles throughout morphogenesis and during hair follicle cycling
in postnatal life. Using the Cre-lox system, we disrupted cilia assembly in the
ventral dermis and evaluated the effects on hair follicle development. Mice with 
disrupted dermal cilia have severe hypotrichosis (lack of hair) in affected
areas. Histological analyses reveal that most follicles in the mutants arrest at 
stage 2 of hair development and have small or absent dermal condensates. This
phenotype is reminiscent of that seen in the skin of mice lacking Shh or Gli2. In
situ hybridization and quantitative RT-PCR analysis indicates that the hedgehog
pathway is downregulated in the dermis of the cilia mutant hair follicles. Thus, 
these data establish cilia as a critical signaling component required for normal 
hair morphogenesis and suggest that this organelle is needed on cells in the
dermis for reception of signals such as sonic hedgehog.

PMCID: PMC2677658
PMID: 18987668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Stem Cells. 2009 Jan;27(1):165-74. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0580.

Gli2 is a novel regulator of sox2 expression in telencephalic neuroepithelial
cells.

Takanaga H(1), Tsuchida-Straeten N, Nishide K, Watanabe A, Aburatani H, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, Kobe, Japan.

Multipotential neural stem cells (NSCs) in the central nervous system (CNS)
proliferate indefinitely and give rise to neurons, astrocytes, and
oligodendrocytes. As NSCs hold promise for CNS regeneration, it is important to
understand how their proliferation and differentiation are controlled. We show
here that the expression of sox2 gene, which is essential for the maintenance of 
NSCs, is regulated by the Gli2 transcription factor, a downstream mediator of
sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling: Gli2 binds to an enhancer that is vital for sox2 
expression in telencephalic neuroepithelial (NE) cells, which consist of NSCs and
neural precursor cells. Overexpression of a truncated form of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaC)
or Gli2-specific short hairpin RNA (Gli2 shRNA) in NE cells in vivo and in vitro 
inhibits cell proliferation and the expression of Sox2 and other NSC markers,
including Hes1, Hes5, Notch1, CD133, and Bmi1. It also induces premature neuronal
differentiation in the developing NE cells. In addition, we show evidence that
Sox2 expression decreases significantly in the developing neuroepithelium of
Gli2-deficient mice. Finally, we demonstrate that coexpression of Gli2DeltaC and 
Sox2 can rescue the expression of Hes5 and prevent premature neuronal
differentiation in NE cells but cannot rescue its proliferation. Thus these data 
reveal a novel transcriptional cascade, involving Gli2 --> Sox2 --> Hes5, which
maintains the undifferentiated state of telencephalic NE cells.

PMID: 18927476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Development. 2008 Nov;135(22):3687-96. doi: 10.1242/dev.021899. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Wnt signaling determines ventral spinal cord cell fates in a time-dependent
manner.

Yu W(1), McDonnell K, Taketo MM, Bai CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The identity of distinct cell types in the ventral neural tube is generally
believed to be specified by sonic hedgehog (Shh) in a concentration-dependent
manner. However, recent studies have questioned whether Shh is the sole signaling
molecule determining ventral neuronal cell fates. Here we provide evidence that
canonical Wnt signaling is involved in the generation of different cell types in 
the ventral spinal cord. We show that Wnt signaling is active in the mouse
ventral spinal cord at the time when ventral cell types are specified.
Furthermore, using an approach that stabilizes beta-catenin protein in small
patches of ventral spinal cord cells at different stages, we show that Wnt
signaling activates different subsets of target genes depending on the time when 
Wnt signaling is amplified. Moreover, disruption of Wnt signaling results in the 
expansion of ventrally located progenitors. Finally, we show genetically that Wnt
signaling interacts with Hh signaling at least in part through regulating the
transcription of Gli3. Our results reveal a novel mechanism by which ventral
patterning is achieved through a coordination of Wnt and Shh signaling.

PMID: 18927156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2008 Nov;135(22):3643-53. doi: 10.1242/dev.023325. Epub 2008 Oct 8.

Pioneer longitudinal axons navigate using floor plate and Slit/Robo signals.

Farmer WT(1), Altick AL, Nural HF, Dugan JP, Kidd T, Charron F, Mastick GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557, USA.

Longitudinal axons transmit all signals between the brain and spinal cord. Their 
axon tracts through the brain stem are established by a simple set of pioneer
axons with precise trajectories parallel to the floor plate. To identify
longitudinal guidance mechanisms in vivo, the overall role of floor plate tissue 
and the specific roles of Slit/Robo signals were tested. Ectopic induction or
genetic deletion of the floor plate diverted longitudinal axons into abnormal
trajectories. The expression patterns of the diffusible cues of the Slit family
were altered in the floor plate experiments, suggesting their involvement in
longitudinal guidance. Genetic tests of Slit1 and Slit2, and the Slit receptors
Robo1 and Robo2 were carried out in mutant mice. Slit1;Slit2 double mutants had
severe longitudinal errors, particularly for ventral axons, including midline
crossing and wandering longitudinal trajectories. Robo1 and Robo2 were largely
genetically redundant, and neither appeared to specify specific tract positions. 
However, combined Robo1 and Robo2 mutations strongly disrupted each pioneer
tract. Thus, pioneer axons depend on long-range floor plate cues, with Slit/Robo 
signaling required for precise longitudinal trajectories.

PMCID: PMC2768610
PMID: 18842816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 1;68(19):7795-802. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1078.

Runx2 transcriptional activation of Indian Hedgehog and a downstream bone
metastatic pathway in breast cancer cells.

Pratap J(1), Wixted JJ, Gaur T, Zaidi SK, Dobson J, Gokul KD, Hussain S, van
Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Stein GS, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Runx2, required for bone formation, is ectopically expressed in breast cancer
cells. To address the mechanism by which Runx2 contributes to the osteolytic
disease induced by MDA-MB-231 cells, we investigated the effect of Runx2 on key
components of the "vicious cycle" of transforming growth factor beta
(TGFbeta)-mediated tumor growth and osteolysis. We find that Runx2 directly
up-regulates Indian Hedgehog (IHH) and colocalizes with Gli2, a Hedgehog
signaling molecule. These events further activate parathyroid hormone-related
protein (PTHrP). Furthermore, Runx2 directly regulates the TGFbeta-induced PTHrP 
levels. A subnuclear targeting deficient mutant Runx2, which disrupts
TGFbeta-induced Runx2-Smad interactions, failed to induce IHH and downstream
events. In addition, Runx2 knockdown in MDA-MB-231 inhibited IHH and PTHrP
expression in the presence of TGFbeta. In vivo blockade of the Runx2-IHH pathway 
in MDA-MB-231 cells by Runx2 short hairpin RNA inhibition prevented the
osteolytic disease. Thus, our studies define a novel role of Runx2 in
up-regulating the vicious cycle of metastatic bone disease, in addition to Runx2 
regulation of genes related to progression of tumor metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2596479
PMID: 18829534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Oncol. 2008 Oct;33(4):881-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on GLI2: mechanism of Hedgehog priming through basal
GLI2 expression, and interaction map of stem cell signaling network with P53.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Hedgehog-binding to Patched family receptors results in Smoothened-mediated
activation of MAP3K10 (MST) and inactivation of SUFU. MAP3K10-induced DYRK2
phosphorylation combined with SUFU inhibition results in the stabilization and
nuclear accumulation of GLI2 for transcriptional activation of GLI1, CCND1,
CCND2, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXP3, FOXQ1, RUNX2, and JAG2. Here, integrative genomic
analyses on GLI2 orthologs were carried out. Rat Gli2 complete coding sequence
was determined by assembling nucleotide sequences of exons 1, 2, and 5'-truncated
rat Gli2 RefSeq (NM_001107169.1). GLI2 orthologs were more related to GLI3
orthologs than to GLI1 orthologs lacking the N-terminal repressor domain.
betaTRCP1 (FBXW1)-binding DSYxxxS motif was conserved in GLI2 and GLI3 orthologs,
while betaTRCP2 (FBXW11)-binding DSGxxxxxxxxxS motif in GLI2 and GLI1 orthologs. 
Human GLI2 mRNA was expressed in ES cells, NT2 cells, fetal lung, fetal heart,
regenerating liver, gastric cancer, and other tumors. Mouse Gli2 mRNA was
expressed in unfertilized egg, ES cells, and EG cells. Tandem RRRCWWGYYY motifs
for P53, P63 or P73, and also four conserved bHLH-binding sites were identified
within GLI2 proximal promoter region. Interaction map of P53 and stem cell
signaling network were then constructed. P53-induced NOTCH1 upregulation leads to
HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 or HEYL upregulation for the repression of tissue specific
bHLH transcriptional activators. DYRK2 functions as a positive regulator of
P53-mediated apoptosis, and also as a negative regulator of the Hedgehog
signaling cascade. GLI2 expression is regulated based on the balance of P53,
Notch, and TGF-beta signaling, and Hedgehog signaling activation results in cell 
survival and proliferation due to transcriptional activation of Hedgehog-target
genes, and also partly due to perturbation of P53-mediated transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 18813803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;14(18):5769-77. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4282.

GLI2 knockdown using an antisense oligonucleotide induces apoptosis and
chemosensitizes cells to paclitaxel in androgen-independent prostate cancer.

Narita S(1), So A, Ettinger S, Hayashi N, Muramaki M, Fazli L, Kim Y, Gleave ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Prostate Center, Vancouver General Hospital, British Columbia, Canada.

PURPOSE: GLI transcription factors mediate hedgehog signaling and have been
implicated in several human malignancies, including prostate cancer. The
objectives of this study were to characterize GLI2 expression levels in human
prostate cancer cell lines and tissues to test the effect of antisense
oligonucleotide (ASO) targeting GLI2 on androgen-independent (AI) prostate cancer
cell lines.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A tissue microarray was used to characterize differences in 
GLI2 expression in benign prostate hyperplasia, prostate cancer treated by
neoadjuvant hormonal therapy and AI prostate cancer. The effects of GLI2 ASO on
PC-3 cell growth and paclitaxel chemosensitivity were assessed in vitro and in
vivo. Oligonucleotide spotted microarray analysis was used to determine
alteration in GLI2 coregulated genes after ASO treatment.
RESULTS: The expression of GLI2 was significantly higher in prostate cancer than 
in benign prostate hyperplasia, decreased after androgen ablation in a
time-dependent fashion, but became highly expressed again in AI prostate cancer. 
GLI2 ASO treatment of PC-3 cells reduced GLI2 mRNA and protein levels in a
dose-dependent manner. GLI2 knockdown increased PC-3 cell apoptotic rates and
significantly decreased cell growth and modulated levels of apoptosis-related
genes, such as Bcl2, Bcl-xL, and clusterin. GLI2 knockdown also changed levels of
several cell cycle regulators, such as cyclin D1, p27, and PKC-eta. Systematic
administration of GLI2 ASO in athymic mice significantly delayed PC-3 tumor
progression and enhanced paclitaxel chemosensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that increased levels of GLI2 correlates with
AI progression and that GLI2 may be a therapeutic target in castrate-resistant
prostate cancer.

PMID: 18794086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. BMC Cell Biol. 2008 Sep 13;9:49. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-9-49.

Establishment and characterization of immortalized Gli-null mouse embryonic
fibroblast cell lines.

Lipinski RJ(1), Bijlsma MF, Gipp JJ, Podhaizer DJ, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. lipinski@surgery.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is a conserved morphogenetic pathway which
plays critical roles in embryonic development, with emerging evidence also
supporting a role in healing and repair processes and tumorigenesis. The Gli
family of transcription factors (Gli1, 2 and 3) mediate the Hedgehog
morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of downstream target genes. We 
previously characterized the individual and cooperative roles of the Gli proteins
in Hh target gene regulation using a battery of primary embryonic fibroblasts
from Gli null mice.
RESULTS: Here, we describe the establishment of spontaneously immortalized mouse 
embryonic fibroblast (iMEF) cell lines lacking single and multiple Gli genes.
These non-clonal cell lines recapitulate the unique ligand mediated
transcriptional response of primary MEFs. While loss of Gli1 had no effect on
target gene induction, Gli2 null cells demonstrated reduced target gene induction
while Gli3 null cells exhibited elevated basal and ligand-induced expression.
Target gene response in Gli1-/-2-/-iMEFs was severely reduced while
Gli2-/-3-/-iMEFs were incapable of ligand-induced transcriptional response.
However, we found that both Gli1-/-2-/- and Gli2-/-3-/-iMEFs exhibited robust
leukotriene synthesis-dependent migration responses to Hh ligand, demonstrating
that this response is not transcriptionally-dependent.
CONCLUSION: This study provides fundamental characterizations of the
transcriptional and non-transcriptional Hh responsiveness of a battery of
Gli-null iMEFs. Moving forward, these cell lines should prove a valuable tool set
to study the unique functional regulation of the Gli proteins in a Hh-responsive 
cell-type.

PMCID: PMC2542994
PMID: 18789160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Carcinog. 2009 May;48(5):408-19. doi: 10.1002/mc.20479.

Tumor suppressor gene co-operativity in compound Patched1 and suppressor of fused
heterozygous mutant mice.

Svärd J(1), Rozell B, Toftgård R, Teglund S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
Sweden.

Dysregulation of the Hedgehog signaling pathway is central to the development of 
certain tumor types, including medulloblastoma and basal cell carcinoma (BCC).
Patched1 (Ptch1) and Suppressor of fused (Sufu) are two essential negative
regulators of the pathway with tumor suppressor activity. Ptch1(+/-) mice are
predisposed to developing medulloblastoma and rhabdomyosarcoma, while Sufu(+/-)
mice develop a skin phenotype characterized by basaloid epidermal proliferations.
Here, we have studied tumor development in Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice to determine 
the effect of compound heterozygosity on the onset, incidence, and spectrum of
tumors. We found significantly more (2.3-fold) basaloid proliferations in
Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) compared to Sufu(+/-) female, but not male, mice. For
medulloblastoma, the cumulative 1-yr incidence was 1.5-fold higher in
Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) compared to Ptch1(+/-) female mice but this strong trend was 
not statistically significant. Together this suggests a weak genetic interaction 
of the two tumor suppressor genes. We noted a few rhabdomyosarcomas and
pancreatic cysts in the Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice, but the numbers were not
significantly different from the single heterozygous mice. Hydrocephalus
developed in approximately 20% of the Ptch1(+/-) and Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) but not 
in Sufu(+/-) mice. Interestingly, most of the medulloblastomas from the
Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice had lost expression of the remaining Ptch1 wild-type
allele but not the Sufu wild-type allele. On the contrary, Sufu as well as Gli1
and Gli2 expression was upregulated in the medulloblastomas compared to adult
cerebellum in Ptch1(+/-) and Sufu(+/-)Ptch1(+/-) mice. This suggests that Sufu
expression may be regulated by Hedgehog pathway activity and could constitute
another negative feedback loop in the pathway.

PMCID: PMC2674531
PMID: 18781608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Urol. 2008 Oct;180(4):1543-50. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2008.06.003. Epub 2008 Aug
16.

Sonic Hedgehog mediator Gli2 regulates bladder mesenchymal patterning.

Cheng W(1), Yeung CK, Ng YK, Zhang JR, Hui CC, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Paediatric Surgery, Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia. wei.cheng3@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Congenital bladder anomalies are a major challenge to pediatric
urologists. Understanding the mechanism of bladder development is crucial for
advancing patient treatment. Current evidence suggests that Shh (R&D Systems) is 
an epithelial signal regulating bladder development, although the mechanism of
the regulation is still unclear. We examined the regulation of bladder
mesenchymal development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mutation analysis, immunohistochemistry, immunoblot, in
situ hybridization, and primary cell culture and transfection were performed. The
mesenchyma proximal to the epithelium was defined as the inner zone and that
distal to the epithelium was defined as the outer zone.
RESULTS: We found that the Shh transcriptional factor Gli2 and the Shh target
gene Bmp4 (R&D Systems) were expressed in the inner mesenchymal zone of the
bladder, where active cell proliferation was observed. In Gli2(-/-) bladder
primary mesenchymal cell cultures transfection with adenoviruses expressing
DeltaNGli2, a constitutionally active form of Gli2, up-regulated Bmp4 expression 
and promoted cell proliferation. In the outer mesenchymal zone, where Gli2 and
Bmp4 expression was not detectable, smooth muscle alpha-actin was expressed. In
Gli2(-/-) embryo bladders Bmp4 expression in the inner zone was lost and ectopic 
smooth muscle was detected in the inner mesenchymal zone. Exogenous Bmp4 (10
ng/ml) in primary smooth muscle cell culture repressed smooth muscle
differentiation and repression was partially rescued by the Bmp4 antagonist
Noggin (R&D Systems) (300 ng/ml).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that the Shh transcriptional factor Gli2 regulates
radial patterning of the bladder mesenchyma.

PMID: 18710724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):271-5.

Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and miRNA (review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-003, Japan.

SHH, IHH, and DHH are lipid-modified secreted proteins binding to Patched
receptors, and CDON, BOC or GAS1 co-receptors. In the absence of Hedgehog
signaling, GLI1 is transcriptionally repressed, GLI2 is phosphorylated by GSK3
and CK1 for the FBXW11 (betaTRCP2)-mediated degradation, and GLI3 is processed to
a cleaved repressor. In the presence of Hedgehog signaling, Smoothened is
relieved from Patched-mediated suppression due to the Hedgehog-dependent
internalization of Patched, which leads to MAP3K10 (MST) activation and SUFU
inactivation for the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of GLI family
members. GLI activators then upregulate CCND1, CCND2 for cell cycle acceleration,
FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXP3, POU3F1, RUNX2, SOX13, TBX2 for cell
fate determination, JAG2, INHBC, and INHBE for stem cell signaling regulation.
Hedgehog signals also upregulate SFRP1 in mesenchymal cells for WNT signaling
regulation. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during embryogenesis,
adult tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis is characterized by class switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin. SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), SNAI3, ZEB1, ZEB2 (SIP1), 
KLF8, TWIST1, and TWIST2 are EMT regulators repressing CDH1 gene encoding
E-cadherin. Hedgehog signals induce JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSL-mediated
SNAI1 upregulation, and also induce TGFbeta1 secretion for ZEB1 and ZEB2
upregulation via TGFbeta receptor and NF-kappaB. TGFbeta-mediated downregulation 
of miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR-429 results in
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly 
leads to EMT through FGF, Notch, TGFbeta signaling cascades, and miRNA regulatory
networks. miRNAs targeted to stem cell signaling components or EMT regulators are
potent drug targets; however, off-target effects should be strictly controlled
before clinical application of synthetic miRNA. Peptide mimetic and RNA aptamer
could also be utilized as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors or EMT suppressors.

PMID: 18698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2008 Jul;37(7):594-7.

Holoprosencephaly: an antenatally-diagnosed case series and subject review.

Lim AS(1), Lim TH, Kee SK, Chia P, Raman S, Eu EL, Lim JY, Tien SL.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, 
Singapore. alvin.lim.s.t@sgh.com.sg

INTRODUCTION: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is an uncommon congenital failure of
forebrain development. Although the aetiology is heterogeneous, chromosomal
abnormalities or a monogenic defect are the major causes, accounting for about
40% to 50% of HPE cases. At least 7 genes have been positively implicated,
including SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, PTCH1, GLI2, and TDGF1.
CLINICAL PICTURE: Twelve antenatally- and 1 postnatally-diagnosed cases are
presented in this study. These comprised 6 amniotic fluid, 3 chorionic villus, 2 
fetal blood, 1 peripheral blood, and 1 product of conception.
OUTCOME: The total chromosome abnormality rate was 92.3%, comprising
predominantly trisomy 13 (66.7%). There was 1 case of trisomy 18, and 3 cases of 
structural abnormalities, including del13q, del18p, and add4q.
CONCLUSION: Despite the poor outcome of an antenatally-diagnosed HPE and the
likely decision by parents to opt for a termination of pregnancy, karyotyping
and/or genetic studies should be performed to determine if a specific familial
genetic or chromosomal abnormality is the cause. At the very least, a detailed
chromosome analysis should be carried out on the affected individual. If the
result of high resolution karyotyping is normal, Fluorescence in situ
hybridisation (FISH) and/or syndrome-specific testing or isolated
holoprosencephaly genetic testing may be performed. This information can be
useful in making a prognosis and predicting the risk of recurrence.

PMID: 18695774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Am J Pathol. 2008 Sep;173(3):752-61. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.071089. Epub 2008
Aug 7.

Hedgehog signaling, keratin 6 induction, and sebaceous gland morphogenesis:
implications for pachyonychia congenita and related conditions.

Gu LH(1), Coulombe PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, 725 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Keratins 6a and b (K6a, K6b) belong to a subset of keratin genes with
constitutive expression in epithelial appendages, and inducible expression in
additional epithelia, when subjected to environmental challenges or disease.
Mutations in K6a or K6b cause a broad spectrum of epithelial lesions that
differentially affect nail, hair, and glands in humans. Some lesions reflect a
loss of the structural support function shared by K6, other keratins, and
intermediate filament proteins. The formation of sebaceous gland-derived
epithelial cysts does not fit this paradigm, raising the question of the unique
functions of different K6 isoforms in this setting. Here, we exploit a mouse
model of constitutively expressed Gli2, a Hedgehog (Hh) signal effector, to show 
that K6a expression correlates with duct fate in sebaceous glands (SGs). Whether 
in the setting of Gli2 transgenic mice skin, which develops a prominent SG duct
and additional pairs of highly branched SGs, or in wild-type mouse skin, K6a
expression consistently coincides with Hh signaling in ductal tissue. Gli2
expression modestly transactivates a K6a promoter-driven reporter in heterologous
systems. Our findings thus identify K6 as a marker of duct fate in SGs, partly in
response to Hh signaling, with implications for the pathological expansion of SGs
that arises in the context of certain keratin-based diseases and related
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2527074
PMID: 18688029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncogene. 2008 Nov 20;27(51):6601-6. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.260. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Heterozygous mutations in the tumor suppressor gene PATCHED provoke basal cell
carcinoma-like features in human organotypic skin cultures.

Brellier F(1), Bergoglio V, Valin A, Barnay S, Chevallier-Lagente O, Vielh P,
Spatz A, Gorry P, Avril MF, Magnaldo T.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.

Basal cell carcinoma of the skin is the most common type of cancer in humans. The
majority of these tumors displays aberrant activation of the SONIC HEDGEHOG
(SHH)/PATCHED pathway, triggered by mutations in the PATCHED tumor suppressor
gene, which encodes a transmembrane receptor of SHH. In this study, we took
advantage of the natural genotype (PATCHED(+/-)) of healthy keratinocytes
expanded from patients with the nevoid basal cell carcinoma or Gorlin syndrome to
mimic heterozygous somatic mutations thought to occur in the PATCHED gene early
upon basal cell carcinoma development in the general population. PATCHED(+/-)
epidermis developed on a dermal equivalent containing wild-type (WT) PATCHED(+/+)
fibroblasts exhibited striking invasiveness and hyperproliferation, as well as
marked differentiation impairment. Deciphering the phenotype of PATCHED(+/-)
keratinocytes revealed slight increases of the transcriptional activators GLI1
and GLI2-the latter known to provoke basal cell carcinoma-like tumors when
overexpressed in transgenic mice. PATCHED(+/-) keratinocytes also showed a
substantial increase of the cell cycle regulator cyclin D1. These data show for
the first time the physiological impact of constitutive heterozygous PATCHED
mutations in primary human keratinocytes and strongly argue for a yet elusive
mechanism of haploinsufficiency leading to cancer proneness.

PMID: 18679421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Dyn. 2008 Aug;237(8):2039-52. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21610.

Characterization of primary cilia and Hedgehog signaling during development of
the human pancreas and in human pancreatic duct cancer cell lines.

Nielsen SK(1), Møllgård K, Clement CA, Veland IR, Awan A, Yoder BK, Novak I,
Christensen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling controls pancreatic development and homeostasis; aberrant
Hh signaling is associated with several pancreatic diseases. Here we investigated
the link between Hh signaling and primary cilia in the human developing
pancreatic ducts and in cultures of human pancreatic duct adenocarcinoma cell
lines, PANC-1 and CFPAC-1. We show that the onset of Hh signaling from human
embryogenesis to fetal development is associated with accumulation of Hh
signaling components Smo and Gli2 in duct primary cilia and a reduction of Gli3
in the duct epithelium. Smo, Ptc, and Gli2 localized to primary cilia of PANC-1
and CFPAC-1 cells, which may maintain high levels of nonstimulated Hh pathway
activity. These findings indicate that primary cilia are involved in pancreatic
development and postnatal tissue homeostasis.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18629868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 1;321(1):27-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.05.558. Epub 2008
Jun 11.

FKBP8 cell-autonomously controls neural tube patterning through a Gli2- and
Kif3a-dependent mechanism.

Cho A(1), Ko HW, Eggenschwiler JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Signaling by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) represents an important process by which many
types of neural progenitor cells become properly organized along the
dorsal-ventral axis of the vertebrate neural tube in a concentration-dependent
manner. However, the mechanism by which Shh signals are transduced with high
fidelity and the relationship between the Shh signaling pathway and other
patterning systems remain unclear. Here we focus on the role of FK506-binding
protein 8 (FKBP8) in controlling neural cell identity through its antagonism of
the Shh pathway. Our data indicate that disruption of FKBP8 function activates
the Shh signaling pathway cell-autonomously at a step that is independent of the 
transmembrane protein Smoothened but dependent on the Gli2 transcription factor. 
This activation is also dependent on the kinesin-2 subunit Kif3a, a component of 
the intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery used to generate cilia. Our data
also indicate that non-cell-autonomous effects of the Fkbp8 mutation further
contribute to the neural patterning phenotype and suggest that FKBP8 plays an
indirect role in promoting Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling through
antagonism of the Shh pathway.

PMID: 18590716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4658-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6174.

Protein phosphatase 2A and rapamycin regulate the nuclear localization and
activity of the transcription factor GLI3.

Krauss S(1), Foerster J, Schneider R, Schweiger S.

Author information: 
(1)Charité University Hospital, Department of Dermatology and Max-Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Gain-of-function alterations to the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling cascade have
been found in a wide range of tumors. Three SHH effectors, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, 
regulate transcription of diverse genes involved in cell growth and cell
proliferation. Here, we show that protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), its regulatory
subunit, alpha4, and rapamycin, an inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin
kinase complex 1 (mTORC1), regulate the nuclear localization and transcriptional 
activity of GLI3. An increase in PP2A activity or treatment with rapamycin leads 
to cytosolic retention of GLI3 and, consequently, reduced transcription of the
GLI3 target gene and cell cycle regulator, cyclin D1. Conversely, inhibition of
PP2A results in increased expression of cyclin D1. In summary, our findings
reveal the existence of a hitherto unrecognized molecular cross-talk between the 
oncogenic SHH pathway and the tumor suppressor PP2A and suggest a novel mechanism
underlying the anticancerogenic effects of rapamycin.

PMID: 18559511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Jun;7(6):1450-60. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2118. Epub 
2008 Jun 4.

Targeting of sonic hedgehog-GLI signaling: a potential strategy to improve
therapy for mantle cell lymphoma.

Hegde GV(1), Munger CM, Emanuel K, Joshi AD, Greiner TC, Weisenburger DD, Vose
JM, Joshi SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Anatomy, Center for Research in
Leukemia and Lymphoma, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198-6395, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) has one of the worst clinical outcomes among the
B-cell lymphomas, with a median survival of only 3 to 4 years. Therefore, a
better understanding of the underlying mechanisms that regulate MCL
proliferation/survival is needed to develop an effective therapy. Because sonic
hedgehog (Shh)-GLI signaling has been shown to be important in the proliferation 
and survival of several cancers, and no such information is available for MCL,
this study was undertaken. Our results show that the molecules associated with
Shh-GLI signaling, such as PTCH and SMO receptors, and GLI1 and GLI2 target
transcription factors were expressed in the human MCL cell lines and primary MCL 
cells from patients. Perturbation of this signaling in the presence of exogenous 
Shh/cyclopamine significantly (P < 0.001) influenced the proliferation of JVM2
MCL cells. Furthermore, down-regulation of GLI transcription factors using
antisense oligonucleotides not only resulted in significantly (P < 0.001)
decreased proliferation of the MCL cells but also significantly (P < 0.05)
increased their susceptibility to chemotherapeutic drug, doxorubicin. Also,
down-regulation of GLI decreased cyclin D1 and BCL2 transcript levels, which
suggests that these key molecules might be regulated by GLI in MCL. Thus, our
results indicate a significant role for Shh-GLI signaling in the proliferation of
MCL, and molecular targeting of GLI is a potential therapeutic approach to
improve the treatment for MCL.

PMID: 18524848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Pancreatology. 2008;8(3):227-9. doi: 10.1159/000134271. Epub 2008 May 22.

Primers on molecular pathways GLI: more than just Hedgehog?

Fernández-Zapico ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. fernandezzapico.martin@mayo.edu

GLI proteins, highly conserved in vertebrates and invertebrates, are critical in 
modulating embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis. These proteins are
zinc-finger-containing transcription factors that were originally identified by
genetic screening of embryonic lethal mutants of Drosophila melanogaster.
Alterations in GLI activity can lead to tumor development in tissues of different
origin including the pancreas. GLI activity is mainly regulated by the Hedgehog
pathway, via a ligand-receptor complex that triggers a signaling cascade that
activates GLI transcription factors, which in turn regulate gene expression, an
essential step of Hedgehog-mediated cellular effects. Interestingly, recent
reports show the ability of other signaling cascades to modulate GLI function in 
cancer cells including RAS and TGF-beta, two pathways implicated in pancreatic
carcinogenesis. Thus, these findings suggest that GLI proteins are not an
exclusive downstream target of Hedgehog but rather a common effector of a network
of signaling pathways controlling pancreatic carcinogenesis. and IAP.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2718430
PMID: 18497536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell. 2008 May 2;133(3):537-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.02.047.

Application of active and kinase-deficient kinome collection for identification
of kinases regulating hedgehog signaling.

Varjosalo M(1), Björklund M, Cheng F, Syvänen H, Kivioja T, Kilpinen S, Sun Z,
Kallioniemi O, Stunnenberg HG, He WW, Ojala P, Taipale J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute (KTL),
FI00290 Helsinki, Finland.

To allow genome-scale identification of genes that regulate cellular signaling,
we cloned >90% of all human full-length protein kinase cDNAs and constructed the 
corresponding kinase activity-deficient mutants. To establish the utility of this
resource, we tested the effect of expression of the kinases on three different
cellular signaling models. In all screens, many kinases had a modest but
significant effect, apparently due to crosstalk between signaling pathways.
However, the strongest effects were found with known regulators and novel
components, such as MAP3K10 and DYRK2, which we identified in a mammalian
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling screen. DYRK2 directly phosphorylated and induced the
proteasome-dependent degradation of the key Hh pathway-regulated transcription
factor, GLI2. MAP3K10, in turn, affected GLI2 indirectly by modulating the
activity of DYRK2 and the known Hh pathway component, GSK3beta. Our results
establish kinome expression screening as a highly effective way to identify
physiological signaling pathway components and genes involved in pathological
signaling crosstalk.

PMID: 18455992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;68(9):3295-303. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0174.

alpha vbeta 6 Integrin promotes the invasion of morphoeic basal cell carcinoma
through stromal modulation.

Marsh D(1), Dickinson S, Neill GW, Marshall JF, Hart IR, Thomas GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour Biology, Institute of Cancer, The London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most prevalent cancer in the Western world and 
its incidence is increasing. The pathogenesis of BCC involves deregulated Sonic
hedgehog signaling, leading to activation of the Gli transcription factors. Most 
BCCs have a nodular growth pattern, and are indolent, slow-growing, and
considered "low-risk" lesions. In contrast, the "high-risk" morphoeic variant,
which causes significant morbidity, has an infiltrative growth pattern, and is
so-called because of its densely fibrous stroma. As alpha v beta 6 is capable of 
promoting both carcinoma invasion and fibrosis, we examined the expression of
this integrin in BCCs and found that the morphoeic type showed significantly
higher alpha v beta 6 expression than the nodular type (P = 0.0009). In order to 
examine the function of alpha v beta 6, we transfected the transcription factors 
Gli1 or Gli2 into NTERT, human keratinocytes to generate a BCC model. These cells
expressed alpha v beta 6 and were invasive, although inhibition of alpha v beta 6
had no direct effect on cell invasion. However, the cells showed alpha v beta
6-dependent activation of transforming growth factor-beta1, which induced
transdifferentiation of human fibroblasts into myofibroblasts. Paracrine
secretion of hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor by these myofibroblasts
promoted c-Met-dependent tumor invasion in both Transwell and three-dimensional
organotypic assays. These experimental in vitro findings were confirmed using
human clinical samples in which we showed that the stroma of morphoeic BCC is
myofibroblast-rich compared with nodular BCC (P = 0.0036), that myofibroblasts
express hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor, and that morphoeic BCCs are
strongly c-Met-positive. These data suggest that alpha v beta 6-dependent
transforming growth factor-beta1 activation induces both the infiltrative growth 
pattern and fibrotic stroma so characteristic of morphoeic BCC.

PMID: 18451156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Cycle. 2008 Apr 1;7(7):904-8. Epub 2008 Jan 18.

Repression of hedgehog signal transduction in T-lineage cells increases
TCR-induced activation and proliferation.

Rowbotham NJ(1), Furmanski AL, Hager-Theodorides AL, Ross SE, Drakopoulou E,
Koufaris C, Outram SV, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

Hedgehog proteins signal for differentiation, survival and proliferation of the
earliest thymocyte progenitors, but their functions at later stages of thymocyte 
development and in peripheral T-cell function are controversial. Here we show
that repression of Hedgehog (Hh) pathway activation in T-lineage cells, by
expression of a transgenic repressor form of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaC2), increased T-cell
differentiation and activation in response to TCR signalling. Expression of the
Gli2DeltaC2 transgene increased differentiation from CD4(+)CD8(+) to single
positive thymocyte, and increased peripheral T cell populations. Gli2DeltaC2
T-cells were hyper-responsive to activation by ligation of CD3 and CD28: they
expressed cell surface activation markers CD69 and CD25 more quickly, and
proliferated more than wild-type T-cells. These data show that Hedgehog pathway
activation in thymocytes and T-cells negatively regulates TCR-dependent
differentiation and proliferation. Thus, as negative regulators of TCR-dependent 
events, Hh proteins provide an environmental influence on T-cell fate.

PMID: 18414059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 25;105(12):4838-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712216105. Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Hedgehog signaling overrides p53-mediated tumor suppression by activating Mdm2.

Abe Y(1), Oda-Sato E, Tobiume K, Kawauchi K, Taya Y, Okamoto K, Oren M, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical
School, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8533, Japan.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates the development of many organs in
mammals, and activation of this pathway is widely observed in human cancers.
Although it is known that Hh signaling activates the expression of genes involved
in cell growth, the precise role of the Hh pathway in cancer development is still
unclear. Here, we show that constitutively activated mutants of Smoothened (Smo),
a transducer of the Hh signaling pathway, inhibit the accumulation of the tumor
suppressor protein p53. This inhibition was also observed in the presence of Hh
ligand or with the overexpression of the transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2,
downstream effectors of Smo, indicating that this inhibition is specific for the 
Hh pathway. We also report that Smo mutants augment p53 binding to the E3
ubiquitin-protein ligase Mdm2 and promote p53 ubiquitination. Furthermore, Hh
signaling induced the phosphorylation of human Mdm2 protein on serines 166 and
186, which are activating phosphorylation sites of Mdm2. Smo mutants enhanced the
proliferation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) while inducing a DNA-damage
response. Moreover, Smo partially inhibited p53-dependent apoptosis and cell
growth inhibition in oncogene-expressing MEFs. We also found that accumulation of
p53 is inhibited by Hh signaling in several human cancer cell lines. Therefore,
the Hh pathway may be a powerful accelerator of oncogenesis by activating cell
proliferation and inhibiting the p53-mediated anti-cancer barrier induced by
oncogenic stress.

PMCID: PMC2290789
PMID: 18359851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Chembiochem. 2008 May 5;9(7):1082-92. doi: 10.1002/cbic.200700511.

Naturally occurring small-molecule inhibitors of hedgehog/GLI-mediated
transcription.

Hosoya T(1), Arai MA, Koyano T, Kowithayakorn T, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, 
Japan.

The aberrant hedgehog (Hh)/GLI signaling pathway causes the formation and
progression of a variety of tumors. To search for Hh/GLI inhibitors, we screened 
for naturally occurring inhibitors of the transcriptional activator GLI1 by using
a cell-based assay. We identified zerumbone (1), zerumbone epoxide (2),
staurosporinone (9), 6-hydroxystaurosporinone (10), arcyriaflavin C (11) and
5,6-dihydroxyarcyriaflavin A (12) as inhibitors of GLI-mediated transcription. In
addition, we isolated physalins F (17) and B (18) from Physalis minima, which are
also potent inhibitors. These compounds also inhibited GLI2-mediated
transactivation. Semiquantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting analysis further
revealed that 1, 9, 17, and 18 decreased Hh-related component expressions. We
also show that inhibitors of GLI-mediated transactivation reduce the level of the
antiapoptosis Bcl2 expression. Finally, these identified compounds were cytotoxic
to PANC1 pancreatic cancer cells, which express Hh/GLI components. These results 
strongly suggest that the cytotoxicity of the compounds to PANC1 cells correlates
with their inhibition of GLI-mediated transcription.

PMID: 18357592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2008;624:283-95. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77574-6_22.

Apoptosis and pathogenesis of melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancer.

Erb P(1), Ji J, Kump E, Mielgo A, Wernli M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
peter.erb@unibas.ch

Skin cancers, i.e., basal cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and
melanoma, belong to the most frequent tumors. Their formation is based on
constitutional and/or inherited factors usually combined with environmental
factors, mainly UV-irradiation through long term sun exposure. UV-light can
randomly induce DNA damage in keratinocytes, but it can also mutate genes
essential for control and surveillance in the skin epidermis. Various repair and 
safety mechanisms exist to maintain the integrity of the skin epidermis. For
example, UV-light damaged DNA is repaired and if this is not possible, the DNA
damaged cells are eliminated by apoptosis (sunburn cells). This occurs under the 
control of the p53 suppressor gene. Fas-ligand (FasL), a member of the tumor
necrosis superfamily, which is preferentially expressed in the basal layer of the
skin epidermis, is a key surveillance molecule involved in the elimination of
sunburn cells, but also in the prevention of cell transformation. However, UV
light exposure downregulates FasL expression in keratinocytes and melanocytes
leading to the loss of its sensor function. This increases the risk that
transformed cells are not eliminated anymore. Moreover, important control and
surveillance genes can also be directly affected by UV-light. Mutation in the p53
gene is the starting point for the formation of SCC and some forms of BCC. Other 
BCCs originate through UV light mediated mutations of genes of the hedgehog
signaling pathway which are essential for the maintainance of cell growth and
differentiation. The transcription factor Gli2 plays a key role within this
pathway, indeed, Gli2 is responsible for the marked apoptosis resistance of the
BCCs. The formation of malignant melanoma is very complex. Melanocytes form nevi 
and from the nevi melanoma can develop through mutations in various genes. Once
the keratinocytes or melanocytes have been transformed they re-express FasL which
may allow the expanding tumor to evade the attack of immune effector cells. FasL 
which is involved in immune evasion or genes which govern the apoptosis
resistance, e.g., Gli2 could therefore be prime targets to prevent tumor
formation and growth. Attempts to silence these genes by RNA interference using
gene specific short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) have
been functionally successful not only in tissue cultures and tumor tissues, but
also in a mouse model. Thus, siRNAs and/or shRNAs may become a novel and
promising approach to treat skin cancers at an early stage.

PMID: 18348464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jun;83(6):1476-83. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1107792. Epub 2008 Mar
11.

Survival and function of human thymic dendritic cells are dependent on autocrine 
Hedgehog signaling.

Varas A(1), Hernández-López C, Valencia J, Mattavelli S, Martínez VG, Hidalgo L, 
Gutiérrez-Frías C, Zapata AG, Sacedón R, Vicente A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Ciudad Universitaria,
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain. avaras@bio.ucm.es

The Hedgehog (Hh) family of signaling molecules functions in the development of
numerous tissues during embryogenesis and has also been involved in adult
self-renewing tissues. Recent results have demonstrated that the different
components of the Hh signaling pathway are expressed in the human thymus. In this
study, we investigate whether thymic dendritic cells (DCs) are cell targets for
Hh signaling. Both components of the Hh receptor, Patched and Smoothened, as well
as other Hh-binding proteins with modulating functions, are expressed by human
thymic DCs. The expression of Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 transcription factors suggests
that the Hh signaling pathway is active in thymic DCs, and approximately one-half
of thymic DCs produces Sonic Hh (Shh). The culture of thymic DCs with Shh
protects them from apoptosis [similarly to CD40 ligand (CD40L)], and these
antiapoptotic effects are related to an up-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L)
protein expression. The addition of the Hh pathway inhibitor, cyclopamine,
decreases DC viability and impairs their allostimulatory function in vitro. In
addition, the blockade of the Hh signaling pathway by cyclopamine treatment
abrogates the up-regulation of HLA-DR, CD86, CD80, and CD83 expression induced by
CD40L on thymic DCs. Finally, we also show that after activation with CD40L
thymic DCs down-regulate the expression of Hh receptor components as well as Shh 
production. Taken together, these results suggest that the survival and function 
of thymic DCs are regulated by an autocrine Hh signaling.

PMID: 18334540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Cell Biol. 2008 Mar 10;180(5):897-904. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200706028.

Human embryonic stem cells in culture possess primary cilia with hedgehog
signaling machinery.

Kiprilov EN(1), Awan A, Desprat R, Velho M, Clement CA, Byskov AG, Andersen CY,
Satir P, Bouhassira EE, Christensen ST, Hirsch RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are potential therapeutic tools and models of 
human development. With a growing interest in primary cilia in signal
transduction pathways that are crucial for embryological development and tissue
differentiation and interest in mechanisms regulating human hESC differentiation,
demonstrating the existence of primary cilia and the localization of signaling
components in undifferentiated hESCs establishes a mechanistic basis for the
regulation of hESC differentiation. Using electron microscopy (EM),
immunofluorescence, and confocal microscopies, we show that primary cilia are
present in three undifferentiated hESC lines. EM reveals the characteristic 9 + 0
axoneme. The number and length of cilia increase after serum starvation.
Important components of the hedgehog (Hh) pathway, including smoothened, patched 
1 (Ptc1), and Gli1 and 2, are present in the cilia. Stimulation of the pathway
results in the concerted movement of Ptc1 out of, and smoothened into, the
primary cilium as well as up-regulation of GLI1 and PTC1. These findings show
that hESCs contain primary cilia associated with working Hh machinery.

PMCID: PMC2265400
PMID: 18332216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genesis. 2008 Mar;46(3):177-83. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20380.

Regulation and function of foxe3 during early zebrafish development.

Swindell EC(1), Zilinski CA, Hashimoto R, Shah R, Lane ME, Jamrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

In this article, we investigate the expression, regulation, and function of the
zebrafish forkhead gene foxe3. In wild type embryos, foxe3 is first expressed in 
a crescent-shaped area at the anterior end of the prechordal plate, corresponding
to the polster. At later stages, the hatching gland, the lens, and the anterior
pituitary express this gene. Using morpholinos against the zinc finger
Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) we show that foxe3 is regulated differently in the
polster and in the lens. In the absence of KLF4, expression of foxe3 in the
polster is not activated, whereas in the lens placode the expression of KLF4 is
not required for the transcription of foxe3. The expression of foxe3 is also
regulated by the hedgehog and nodal signaling pathways. foxe3 expression is
altered in the hedgehog pathway mutants iguana and you-too and the nodal pathway 
mutant cyclops. foxe3 function is necessary for the execution of lens-specific
gene expression and lens morphogenesis, as the knockdown of foxe3 results in a
loss of platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (pdgfralpha) expression and
in the vacuolization of the lens.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18327772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 2;283(18):12426-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707117200. Epub 2008 
Mar 3.

GLI2-specific transcriptional activation of the bone morphogenetic
protein/activin antagonist follistatin in human epidermal cells.

Eichberger T(1), Kaser A, Pixner C, Schmid C, Klingler S, Winklmayr M,
Hauser-Kronberger C, Aberger F, Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, Austria.

Hedgehog (HH) signaling in the epidermis is primarily mediated by the zinc finger
transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2. Exquisite regulation of HH/GLI signaling is 
crucial for proper specification of the epidermal lineage and development of its 
derivatives, whereas dysregulation of HH/GLI signaling disrupts tissue
homeostasis and causes basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Similarly, bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) and activins have been described as key signaling factors in the 
complex regulation of epidermal fate decisions, although their precise interplay 
with HH/GLI is largely elusive. Here we show that, in human epidermal cells,
expression of the activin/BMP antagonist follistatin (FST) is predominantly
up-regulated by the HH effector GLI2. Consistently, we found strong FST
expression in the outer root sheath of human hair follicles and BCC. Detailed
promoter analysis showed that two sequences with homology to the GLI consensus
binding site are required for GLI2-mediated activation. Interestingly, activation
of the FST promoter is highly GLI2-specific, because neither GLI1 nor GLI3 can
significantly increase FST transcription. GLI2 specificity requires the presence 
of a 518-bp fragment in the proximal FST promoter region. On the protein level,
sequences C-terminal to the zinc finger are responsible for GLI2-specific
activation of FST transcription, pointing to the existence of GLI-interacting
cofactors that modulate GLI target specificity. Our results reveal a key role of 
GLI2 in activation of the activin/BMP antagonist FST in response to HH signaling 
and provide new evidence for a regulatory interaction between HH and activin/BMP 
signaling in hair follicle development and BCC.

PMCID: PMC2430996
PMID: 18319260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 2;369(2):350-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.015. Epub 2008 Feb 13.

Expression of Fgf15 is regulated by both activator and repressor forms of Gli2 in
vitro.

Komada M(1), Saitsu H, Shiota K, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factor 15 (Fgf15) is expressed in the medial region of
diencephalon and midbrain by the seven-somite stage. In the previous studies, we 
showed that Sonic hedgehog signaling through Gli protein is required for Fgf15
expression in this region. The Fgf15 expression domain overlapped with that of
Gli2 and the Gli-binding site (GliBs) is located in the 3.6-kb 5'-flanking
enhancer/promoter region of the Fgf15 gene. In this study, we identified the two 
additional Gli-binding sites in row, called Gli-responsive elements (GliREs).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicated that Gli2 directly binds to GliREs.
The results from luciferase assays indicated that the Gli2 activator form binds
to the GliBS and that the Gli2 repressor form binds to the GliREs. These findings
suggest that the repressor form of Gli2 preferentially binds to the GliREs to
control Fgf15 expression.

PMID: 18279667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Stem Cells. 2008 Apr;26(4):1027-36. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0879. Epub 2008
Feb 14.

Gli1 induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis in hippocampal but not tumor-derived
neural stem cells.

Galvin KE(1), Ye H, Erstad DJ, Feddersen R, Wetmore C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Neuroscience, The College of Idaho, Caldwell, Idaho, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is necessary for sustaining the proliferation of neural stem
cells (NSCs), yet little is known about its mechanisms. Whereas Gli1, Gli2, and
Gli3, the primary mediators of Shh signaling, were all expressed in hippocampal
neural progenitors, Shh treatment of NSCs induced only Gli1 expression. Acute
depletion of Gli1 in postnatal NSCs by short-hairpin RNA decreased proliferation,
whereas germline deletion of Gli1 did not affect NSC proliferation, suggesting a 
difference in mechanisms of Gli1 compensation that may be developmentally
dependent. To determine whether Gli1 was sufficient to enhance NSC proliferation,
we overexpressed this mitogen and were surprised to find that Gli1 resulted in
decreased proliferation, accumulation of NSCs in the G2/M phase of cell cycle,
and apoptosis. In contrast, Gli1-expressing lineage-restricted neural precursors 
demonstrated a 4.5-fold proliferation enhancement. Expression analyses of
Gli1-expressing NSCs identified significant induction of Gadd45a and decreased
cyclin A2 and Stag1 mRNA, genes involved in the G2-M transition and apoptosis.
Furthermore, Gadd45a overexpression was sufficient to partially recapitulate the 
Gli1-induced G2/M accumulation and cell death of NSCs. In contrast to normal stem
cells, tumor-derived stem cells had markedly higher basal Gli1 expression and did
not undergo apoptosis with further elevation of Gli1. Our data suggest that
Gli1-induced apoptosis may serve as a protective mechanism against premature
mitosis and may give insight into mechanisms by which nonmalignant stem cells
restrain hyperproliferation in the context of potentially transforming mitogenic 
signals. Tumor-derived stem cells apparently lack these mechanisms, which may
contribute to their unrestrained proliferation and malignant potential.

PMID: 18276799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 2008 Jun 19;27(27):3856-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.5. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

Gli2 upregulates cFlip and renders basal cell carcinoma cells resistant to death 
ligand-mediated apoptosis.

Kump E(1), Ji J, Wernli M, Häusermann P, Erb P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of
Basel, Petersplatz, Basel, Switzerland.

Mutations in the Hedgehog signaling pathway is responsible for the formation of
various cancers, including some forms of basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Uncontrolled
Hedgehog signaling leads to overexpression of the zinc-finger Gli transcription
factors, among which Gli2 plays a central role. We found that high Gli2
expression induced the concomitant high expression of the caspase 8 inhibitor,
cFlip, and thereby counteracts death-ligand-mediated apoptosis. By investigating 
the cFlip promoter, Gli2 binding sites were identified and confirmed. Gli2 gene
silencing by RNA interference broke the apoptosis resistance via cFlip
downregulation. The direct functional connection between Gli2 and cFlip was not
only demonstrated in a keratinocytic cell line but also in BCC tissue. As cFlip
and Bcl-2 are highly expressed in BCCs, as a consequence of high Gli2 expression,
this may explain the marked resistance of the tumor to the extrinsic and
intrinsic apoptotic pathway. We could now demonstrate that Gli2 gene silencing in
BCC tissues made the tumor sensitive to TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand)-mediated cell death by downregulating cFlip. As Gli2
silencing does not only downregulate cFlip, but also Bcl-2, Gli2 could be a key
target for a novel therapeutic approach in tumors with dysregulated Hedgehog
signaling.

PMID: 18264131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Nov;1116:100-12.

Synovial joint formation during mouse limb skeletogenesis: roles of Indian
hedgehog signaling.

Koyama E(1), Ochiai T, Rountree RB, Kingsley DM, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Iwamoto M,
Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) has been previously found to regulate synovial joint
formation. To analyze mechanisms, we carried out morphological, molecular, and
cell fate map analyses of interzone and joint development in wild-type and
Ihh(-/-) mouse embryo long bones. We found that Ihh(-/-) cartilaginous digit
anlagen remained fused and lacked interzones or mature joints, whereas wrist
skeletal elements were not fused but their joints were morphologically abnormal. 
E14.5 and E17.5 wild-type digit and ankle prospective joints expressed hedgehog
target genes including Gli1 and Gli2 and interzone-associated genes including
Gdf5, Erg, and tenascin-C, but expression of all these genes was barely
detectable in mutant joints. For cell fate map analysis of joint progenitor
cells, we mated Gdf5-Cre(+/-)/Rosa R26R(+/-) double transgenic mice with
heterozygous Ihh(+/-) mice and monitored reporter beta-galactosidase activity and
gene expression in triple-transgenic progeny. In control
Gdf5-Cre(+/-)/R26R(+/-)/Ihh(+/-) limbs, reporter-positive cells were present in
developing interzones, articulating layers, and synovial lining tissue and absent
from underlying growth plates. In mutant Gdf5-Cre(+/-)/R26R(+/-)/Ihh(-/-)
specimens, reporter-positive cells were present also. However, the cells were
mostly located around the prospective and uninterrupted digit joint sites and,
interestingly, still expressed Erg, tenascin-C, and Gdf5. Topographical analysis 
revealed that interzone and associated cells were not uniformly distributed, but 
were much more numerous ventrally. A similar topographical bias was seen for
cavitation process and capsule primordia formation. In sum, Ihh is a critical and
possibly direct regulator of joint development. In its absence, distribution and 
function of Gdf5-expressing interzone-associated cells are abnormal, but their
patterning at prospective joint sites still occurs. The joint-forming functions
of the cells appear to normally involve a previously unsuspected asymmetric
distribution along the ventral-to-dorsal plane of the developing joint.

PMCID: PMC2673545
PMID: 18083924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Feb;37(2):388-401. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Combined activity of the two Gli2 genes of zebrafish play a major role in
Hedgehog signaling during zebrafish neurodevelopment.

Ke Z(1), Kondrichin I, Gong Z, Korzh V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

It has been proposed that the downstream mediator of the evolutionarily conserved
Hedgehog pathway Gli2 plays a relatively minor role in neural development of
zebrafish. The second gli2 of zebrafish, gli2b, is expressed in the neural plate 
and the central nervous system. Our comparative analysis of the developmental
role of gli2/gli2b demonstrate a major role of the two Gli2s in mediating Hh
signaling. The Gli2s play an early Hh-independent repressor role in the
maintenance of neural progenitors and an Hh-dependent activating role during cell
differentiation in the floor plate, branchial motor neurons, and sensory neurons.
Our analysis of Gli2b loss-of-function using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides indicates that the functions of the two Gli2s diverged in
evolution. Gli2b acts in cell proliferation and plays an early role in the
hindbrain within a regulatory cascade involving Notch and Ngn1, as well as a role
as specific activator in rhombomere 4.

PMID: 18060804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Methods Mol Biol. 2007;397:67-78.

Efficient manipulation of Hedgehog/GLI signaling using retroviral expression
systems.

Kasper M, Regl G, Eichberger T, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Efficient manipulation of Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signaling activity is crucial to the 
analysis of molecular events underlying HH/GLI-regulated cell fate determination 
and tumor growth. In this article, we describe the use of retroviral expression
systems as a valuable tool to activate or repress Hh-pathway activity in a broad 
spectrum of mammalian cells-including human cells-either by forced expression of 
the major Hedgehog-effectors GLI1 and GLI2 or by expression of the short-hairpin 
RNAs-targeting GLI mRNAs. We focus on two distinct retroviral systems that allow 
efficient and sustainable expression of GLI proteins in primary cells and cell
lines of human origin: (i) a Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus-based and (ii) an
HIV-derived lentivirus expression system, which allows transduction of both
dividing and quiescent cells.

PMID: 18025714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 15;67(22):10642-6.

Role of GLI2 transcription factor in growth and tumorigenicity of prostate cells.

Thiyagarajan S(1), Bhatia N, Reagan-Shaw S, Cozma D, Thomas-Tikhonenko A, Ahmad
N, Spiegelman VS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706, USA.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been reported in
various cancer types including prostate cancer. The GLI2 transcription factor is 
a primary mediator of Hh signaling. However, its relative contribution to
development of prostate tumors is poorly understood. To establish the role of
GLI2 in maintaining the tumorigenic properties of prostate cancer cells, we
developed GLI2-specific small hairpin RNA. Knockdown of GLI2 in these cells
resulted in significant down-regulation of the Hh signaling pathway, followed by 
inhibition of colony formation, anchorage-independent growth, and growth of
xenografts in vivo. Conversely, ectopic expression of Gli2 in nontumorigenic
prostate epithelial cells resulted in accelerated cell cycle progression,
especially transition through G(2)-M, and augmented proliferation. Altogether,
our findings suggest that GLI2 plays a critical role in the malignant phenotype
of prostate cancer cells, and GLI2 may potentially become an attractive
therapeutic target for the treatment of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2653855
PMID: 18006803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2007 Oct 31;2(10):e1087.

Basonuclin-null mutation impairs homeostasis and wound repair in mouse corneal
epithelium.

Zhang X(1), Tseng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

At least two cellular processes are required for corneal epithelium homeostasis
and wound repair: cell proliferation and cell-cell adhesion. These processes are 
delicately balanced to ensure the maintenance of normal epithelial function.
During wound healing, these processes must be reprogrammed in coordination to
achieve a rapid re-epithelialization. Basonuclin (Bnc1) is a cell-type-specific
transcription factor expressed mainly in the proliferative keratinocytes of
stratified epithelium (e.g., corneal epithelium, epidermis and esophageal
epithelium) and the gametogenic cells in testis and ovary. Our previous work
suggested that basonuclin could regulate transcription of ribosomal RNA genes
(rDNA) and genes involved in chromatin structure, transcription regulation,
cell-cell junction/communication, ion-channels and intracelllular transportation.
However, basonuclin's role in keratinocytes has not been demonstrated in vivo.
Here we show that basonuclin-null mutation disrupts corneal epithelium
homeostasis and delays wound healing by impairing cell proliferation. In
basonuclin-null cornea epithelium, RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcription is
perturbed. This perturbation is unique because it affects transcripts from a
subset of rDNA. Basonuclin-null mutation also perturbs RNA polymerase II (Pol II)
transcripts from genes encoding chromatin structure proteins histone 3 and HMG2, 
transcription factor Gli2, gap-junction protein connexin 43 and adheren
E-cadherin. In most cases, a concerted change in mRNA and protein level is
observed. However, for E-cadherin, despite a notable increase in its mRNA level, 
its protein level was reduced. In conclusion, our study establishes basonuclin as
a regulator of corneal epithelium homeostasis and maintenance. Basonuclin likely 
coordinates functions of a subset of ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA) and a group of
protein coding genes in cellular processes critical for the regulation of cell
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2034529
PMID: 17971852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Lab Invest. 2007 Dec;87(12):1227-39. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Hepatic accumulation of Hedgehog-reactive progenitors increases with severity of 
fatty liver damage in mice.

Fleig SV(1), Choi SS, Yang L, Jung Y, Omenetti A, VanDongen HM, Huang J, Sicklick
JK, Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA.

Progenitors regenerate fatty livers but the mechanisms involved are uncertain.
The Hedgehog pathway regulates mesendodermal progenitors and modulates
mesenchymal-epithelial interactions during tissue remodeling. To determine if
Hedgehog signaling increases in liver progenitors during fatty liver injury, we
compared expression of Hedgehog ligands and target genes across a spectrum of
injury. Leptin-deficient ob/ob mice with fatty livers and their healthy lean
littermates were studied before and after exposure to the hepatotoxin, ethionine.
At baseline, ob/ob mice had greater liver damage than controls. Ethionine induced
liver injury in both ob/ob and lean mice, with greater injury occurring in ob/ob 
mice. After ethionine, the ob/ob mice developed liver atrophy and fibrosis. Liver
injury increased hepatic accumulation of progenitors, including ductular cells
that produced and responded to Hedgehog ligands. A dose-response relationship was
demonstrated between liver injury and expansion of Hedgehog-responsive
progenitors. In severely damaged, atrophic livers, nuclei in mature-appearing
hepatocytes accumulated the Hedgehog-regulated mesenchymal transcription factor, 
Gli2 and lost expression of the liver epithelial transcription factor, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 6 (HNF-6). Hepatic levels of collagen mRNA and pericellular
collagen fibrils increased concomitantly. Hence, fatty liver injury increases
Hedgehog activity in liver progenitors, and this might promote
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions that result in liver fibrosis.

PMID: 17952094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2007 Sep;14(3):865-74.

Snail and Sonic Hedgehog activation in neuroendocrine tumors of the ileum.

Fendrich V(1), Waldmann J, Esni F, Ramaswamy A, Mullendore M, Buchholz M, Maitra 
A, Feldmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, John Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. fendrich@med.uni-marbug.de

The transcription factor Snail represses E-cadherin and induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, a process also exploited by invasive cancer
cells. Aberrant Hedgehog (Hh) signaling was recently observed in a variety of
epithelial cancers and it has been shown that the Hh target gene Gli1 induces
expression of Snail. In this study, we examined whether Snail and Sonic Hedgehog 
(SHH) are expressed in neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) of the ileum. Using
immunohistochemistry, we found expression of Snail in 22 out of 37 (59%) of
evaluated NET samples, but not in adjacent normal tissues. Snail expression was
mostly restricted to the invasive front of the tumors. Six of seven liver
metastases analyzed were positive for Snail. Intratumoral expression of SHH was
detected in 27 out of 37 (73%) tumors. As opposed to Snail, cells expressing SHH 
were found to be distributed more randomly throughout the tumors. Out of 30
primary NETs, 16 (53%) showed both Snail and SHH expression. Furthermore, we
found downregulation of E-cadherin in Snail-expressing cells by
immunofluorescence. Real-time RT-PCR revealed conservation of the Hh target genes
Gli1, Gli2, and Ptch in the pancreatic carcinoid cell line BON-1, which were
downregulated upon Hh inhibition with cyclopamine. Moreover, Hh inhibition
attenuated in vitro cell growth in a dose-dependent manner. In conclusion, we
describe for the first time that Snail and SHH are overexpressed in a large
subset of NETs of the ileum. Aberrant activation of these pathways might be
involved in invasion and metastatic spread in NETs.

PMID: 17914115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 12;2(9):e864.

An amphioxus Gli gene reveals conservation of midline patterning and the
evolution of hedgehog signalling diversity in chordates.

Shimeld SM(1), van den Heuvel M, Dawber R, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
sebastian.shimeld@zoo.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog signalling, interpreted in receiving cells by Gli
transcription factors, plays a central role in the development of vertebrate and 
Drosophila embryos. Many aspects of the signalling pathway are conserved between 
these lineages, however vertebrates have diverged in at least one key aspect:
they have evolved multiple Gli genes encoding functionally-distinct proteins,
increasing the complexity of the hedgehog-dependent transcriptional response.
Amphioxus is one of the closest living relatives of the vertebrates, having split
from the vertebrate lineage prior to the widespread gene duplication prominent in
early vertebrate evolution.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We show that amphioxus has a single Gli gene, which is
deployed in tissues adjacent to sources of hedgehog signalling derived from the
midline and anterior endoderm. This shows the duplication and divergence of the
Gli gene family, and hence the origin of vertebrate Gli functional diversity, was
specific to the vertebrate lineage. However we also show that the single
amphioxus Gli gene produces two distinct transcripts encoding different proteins.
We utilise three tests of Gli function to examine the transcription regulatory
capacities of these different proteins, demonstrating one has activating activity
similar to Gli2, while the other acts as a weak repressor, similar to Gli3.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that vertebrates and amphioxus have evolved
functionally-similar repertoires of Gli proteins using parallel molecular routes;
vertebrates via gene duplication and divergence, and amphioxus via alternate
splicing of a single gene. Our results demonstrate that similar functional
complexity of intercellular signalling can be achieved via different evolutionary
pathways.

PMCID: PMC1955834
PMID: 17848995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Brain Dev. 2008 Mar;30(3):203-5. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Variable phenotypic manifestations of a K44N mutation in the TGIF gene.

Richieri-Costa A(1), Ribeiro LA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias Craniofaciais,
Universidade de São Paulo, Rua Silvio Marchioni 320, CEP 17012-900, Bauru, SP,
Brazil. richieri@usp.br

The etiologies and clinical spectra of HPE are extremely heterogeneous. Here, we 
report a Brazilian boy with lobar holoprosencephaly who was ascertained in a
sample of 60 patients with HPE and HPE-like phenotypes and screened for molecular
analysis of the major HPE causative genes: SHH, PTCH, SIX3, GLI2, and TGIF. This 
boy presented a p.K44N (c.132G>T) mutation in exon 2 of the TGIF gene which was
inherited from his phenotypically normal mother. This mutation leads to lysine to
arginine amino acid change and is predicted to be a damaging mutation. Clinical
aspects involving variable phenotypical manifestations in different mutations of 
TGIF are discussed.

PMID: 17825514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Cycle. 2007 Sep 1;6(17):2138-42. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

A novel role for Hedgehog in T-cell receptor signaling: implications for
development and immunity.

Rowbotham NJ(1), Hager-Theodorides AL, Furmanski AL, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is a key regulator of both embryonic
development and homeostasis of adult tissues, including thymus and blood. In the 
thymus, Hh signals for differentiation, survival and proliferation in the early
stages of T cell development, before TCR gene rearrangement. Our recent data has 
shown that Hh signaling also modulates T cell receptor (TCR) signal strength in
more mature T lineage cells. We showed that constitutive activation of the Hh
pathway in thymocytes (by transgenic expression of the transcriptional activator 
form of Gli2) decreased TCR signal strength with profound consequences for the
thymus--allowing self-reactive T cells to escape deletion and altering T cell
CD4/CD8 lineage decisions. In contrast, in the Sonic Hh deficient thymus, TCR
signaling was increased, again influencing both TCR repertoire selection and
CD4/8 lineage commitment. In peripheral T cells, the transcriptional changes
induced by activation of the Hh signaling pathway lead to reduced T cell
activation. Hh signaling also attenuated ERK phosphorylation and proliferation in
mature T cells on TCR ligation. Modulation of TCR signal strength by Hh pathway
activation has importance for immunity as the presence or absence of Hh in the
environment in which a T cell is activated would shape the immune response.

PMID: 17786048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Cycle. 2007 Oct 15;6(20):2458-63. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

Non-canonical activation of GLI transcription factors: implications for targeted 
anti-cancer therapy.

Lauth M(1), Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Center for Biosciences, Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Novum Research Park, Huddinge, Sweden.

GLI transcription factors constitute the final effectors of the Hedgehog (HH)
signaling pathway. In many tumors, such as those of the pancreas, prostate, skin 
or lung, ectopic activation of GLI proteins has been linked to tumorigenesis. In 
several of these cases, HH ligand- or receptor-induced signaling (canonical HH
signaling) was found to be the cause underlying GLI activation. Recent evidence
points towards additional, noncanonical, mechanisms of GLI activation. Here we
review findings on the crosstalk of two HH-unrelated signaling pathways (RAS and 
Transforming growth factor beta) to the HH pathway downstream of the signaling
component Smoothened. Both pathways stimulate and/or induce GLI1 and GLI2
activity independent of the presence of HH ligands. We also discuss the putative 
roles of these crosstalk mechanisms for tumor cell metastasis. The emerging
picture of GLI transcription factors as an integrative platform of numerous
signaling inputs has important implications for the understanding of tumor
development and argues for inclusion of targets acting downstream of the receptor
level in the design of current drug development programs.

PMID: 17726373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Aug;26(4):231-40.

Generation and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibody 5E1 against human
transcription factor GLI3.

Hunt R(1), Bragina O, Drews M, Kasak L, Timmusk S, Valkna A, Kogerman P,
Järvekülg L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 
15, Tallinn, Estonia.

GLI3 is a transcriptional effector of the developmentally important hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway. Here we report the production of mouse monoclonal antibody
(MAb) against putative repressive motif in GLI3 (GLI3pRM). BALB/c mice were
immunized with purified recombinant human GLI3pRM protein, and the splenocytes
from these mice were fused with myeloma cell line (SP2/0) by using standard
hybridoma production techniques. Resulting hybridomas producing anti-GLI3pRM
antibodies were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
isotyped. The specificity of MAb 5E1 was determined based on its activity in
Western blot and immunofluorescence analyses of the human NT2/D1 cell line. The
results showed that MAb 5E1 was immunoglobulin IgM/kappa, recognizing recombinant
human GLI3pRM specifically. In addition, MAb 5E1 bound to the full-length
(FL-GLI3) as well as a short protein (GLI3R) and did not cross-react with a
similar region in GLI2. MAb 5E1 could also be used to detect the expression of
Gli3 in mouse cell lines and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 17725385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 4;104(36):14460-5. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Reprogramming of keratin biosynthesis by sulforaphane restores skin integrity in 
epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

Kerns ML(1), DePianto D, Dinkova-Kostova AT, Talalay P, Coulombe PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, 725 North Wolfe Street, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a rare inherited condition in which the
epidermis loses its integrity after mechanical trauma. EBS is typified by the
dysfunction of intermediate filaments in basal keratinocytes of epidermis. Most
cases of EBS are due to mutations in the keratin 5 or 14 gene (K5 and K14), whose
products copolymerize to form intermediate filaments in basal keratinocytes.
Available treatments for this disorder are only palliative. Here we exploit
functional redundancy within the keratin gene family as the basis for therapy. We
show that genetic activation of Gli2 or treatment with a pharmacological
activator of Nrf2, two transcription factors eliciting distinct transcriptional
programs, alleviates the blistering caused by a K14 deficiency in an EBS mouse
model, correlating with K17 induction in basal epidermal keratinocytes. Nrf2
induction is brought about by treatment with sulforaphane, a natural product.
Sulforaphane thus represents an attractive option for the prevention of skin
blistering associated with K14 mutations in EBS.

PMCID: PMC1964870
PMID: 17724334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Cancer. 2008 Jan 1;122(1):50-6.

Gene silencing of transcription factor Gli2 inhibits basal cell carcinomalike
tumor growth in vivo.

Ji J(1), Kump E, Wernli M, Erb P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) belongs worldwide to the most frequent malignancy
among Caucasians. The understanding of the molecular mechanisms of BCC formation,
which is a prerequisite for the development of efficient new therapies, is still 
incomplete. The formation of sporadic BCCs in the skin is associated with
uncontrolled hedgehog signaling, and the transcription factor Gli2 has been
identified as a key mediator or effector of this signaling. There is indication
in the literature that preventing Gli2 function may inhibit BCC formation and
growth in vivo; however, the mechanism is unclear and difficult to study in
humans. Therefore, we used a mouse tumor allograft model to investigate the role 
of Gli2 in tumor formation. A constitutively Gli2 expressing mouse tumor cell
line was stably transfected with Gli2-specific shRNA to induce Gli2 gene
silencing or with control shRNA. Injecting the Gli2 gene silenced cells into nude
mice for tumor formation we detected a strongly retarded tumor growth compared
with control tumor cells. Investigating the mechanisms, we found that Gli2 gene
silencing has led to the disruption of the tumor structure as demonstrated by
staining tumor sections with hematoxylin. Two main reasons for the tumor
destruction were identified. We found that apoptosis was markedly increased while
vascularization was strongly decreased in these tumors. Thus, important functions
of the transcription factor Gli2 in this tumor model are the prevention of
apoptosis and the promotion of microvascularization.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17721996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 4;104(36):14466-71. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Sonic hedgehog-induced type 3 deiodinase blocks thyroid hormone action enhancing 
proliferation of normal and malignant keratinocytes.

Dentice M(1), Luongo C, Huang S, Ambrosio R, Elefante A, Mirebeau-Prunier D,
Zavacki AM, Fenzi G, Grachtchouk M, Hutchin M, Dlugosz AA, Bianco AC, Missero C, 
Larsen PR, Salvatore D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Endocrinology and Oncology, University of
Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy, and Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes,
and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway plays a critical role in hair follicle
physiology and is constitutively active in basal cell carcinomas (BCCs), the most
common human malignancy. Type 3 iodothyronine deiodinase (D3), the thyroid
hormone-inactivating enzyme, is frequently expressed in proliferating and
neoplastic cells, but its role in this context is unknown. Here we show that Shh,
through Gli2, directly induces D3 in proliferating keratinocytes and in mouse and
human BCCs. We demonstrate that Gli-induced D3 reduces intracellular active
thyroid hormone, thus resulting in increased cyclin D1 and keratinocyte
proliferation. D3 knockdown caused a 5-fold reduction in the growth of BCC
xenografts in nude mice. Shh-induced thyroid hormone degradation via D3
synergizes with the Shh-mediated reduction of the type 2 deiodinase, the
thyroxine-activating enzyme, and both effects are reversed by cAMP. This
previously unrecognized functional cross-talk between Shh/Gli2 and thyroid
hormone in keratinocytes is a pathway by which Shh produces its proliferative
effects and offers a potential therapeutic approach to BCC.

PMCID: PMC1964817
PMID: 17720805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Cancer. 2007 Dec 15;121(12):2622-7.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is inactive in colorectal cancer cell lines.

Chatel G(1), Ganeff C, Boussif N, Delacroix L, Briquet A, Nolens G, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Experimental Cancer Research Center, Center of 
Biomedical Integrative Genoproteomics, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an important role in human development.
Abnormal activation of this pathway has been observed in several types of human
cancers, such as the upper gastro-intestinal tract cancers. However, activation
of the Hh pathway in colorectal cancers is controversial. We analyzed the
expression of the main key members of the Hh pathway in 7 colon cancer cell lines
in order to discover whether the pathway is constitutively active in these cells.
We estimated the expression of SHH, IHH, PTCH, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, SUFU and
HHIP genes by RT-PCR. Moreover, Hh ligand, Gli3 and Sufu protein levels were
quantified by western blotting. None of the cell lines expressed the complete set
of Hh pathway members. The ligands were absent from Colo320 and HCT116 cells, Smo
from Colo205, HT29 and WiDr. GLI1 gene was not expressed in SW480 cells nor were 
GLI2/GLI3 in Colo205 or Caco-2 cells. Furthermore the repressive form of Gli3,
characteristic of an inactive pathway, was detected in SW480 and Colo320 cells.
Finally treatment of colon cancer cells with cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of
the Hh pathway, did not downregulate PTCH and GLI1 genes expression in the
colorectal cells, whereas it did so in PANC1 control cells. Taken together, these
results indicate that the aberrant activation of the Hh signaling pathway is not 
common in colorectal cancer cell lines.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17683069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 15;67(14):6981-6.

Induction of sonic hedgehog mediators by transforming growth factor-beta:
Smad3-dependent activation of Gli2 and Gli1 expression in vitro and in vivo.

Dennler S(1), André J, Alexaki I, Li A, Magnaldo T, ten Dijke P, Wang XJ,
Verrecchia F, Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U697, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Pavillon Bazin, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux,
75010 Paris, France.

Hedgehog (Hh) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family members are
involved in numerous overlapping processes during embryonic development, hair
cycle, and cancer. Herein, we show that TGF-beta induces the expression of the Hh
signaling molecules Gli1 and Gli2 in various human cell types, including normal
fibroblasts and keratinocytes, as well as various cancer cell lines. Gli2
induction by TGF-beta is rapid, independent from Hh receptor signaling, and
requires a functional Smad pathway. Gli1 expression is subsequently activated in 
a Gli2-dependent manner. In transgenic mice overexpressing TGF-beta1 in the skin,
Gli1 and Gli2 expression is also elevated and depends on Smad3. In pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cell lines resistant to Hh inhibition, pharmacologic blockade of
TGF-beta signaling leads to repression of cell proliferation accompanied with a
reduction in Gli2 expression. We thus identify TGF-beta as a potent
transcriptional inducer of Gli transcription factors. Targeting the cooperation
of Hh and TGF-beta signaling may provide new therapeutic opportunities for cancer
treatment.

PMID: 17638910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Invest Dermatol. 2008 Feb;128(2):361-9. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

Microarray analysis demonstrates a role for Slug in epidermal homeostasis.

Newkirk KM(1), MacKenzie DA, Bakaletz AP, Hudson LG, Kusewitt DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. knewkirk@utk.edu

Slug (Snail2) is a member of the Snail family of zinc-finger transcription
factors with regulatory functions in development, tissue morphogenesis, and tumor
progression. Little is known about Slug in normal adult tissue; however, a role
for Slug in the skin was suggested by our previous observations of Slug
expression in normal murine keratinocytes and Slug induction at wound margins. To
study the impact of Slug in the skin, we compared patterns of gene expression in 
epidermis from Slug-null and wild-type mice. A total of 139 genes had
significantly increased, and 109 genes had significantly decreased expression in 
Slug knockout epidermis. Altered expression of selected genes in Slug knockout
epidermis was validated by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Previously
reported Slug targets were identified, in addition to novel genes, including
cytokeratins, adhesion molecules, and extracellular matrix components. Functional
classification of altered gene expression was consistent with a role for Slug in 
keratinocyte development and differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, adhesion,
motility, as well as angiogenesis and response to environmental stimuli. These
results highlight the utility of genetic models to study the in vivo impact of
regulatory factors in unperturbed skin and suggest that Slug has significant
activities in the adult epidermis.

PMID: 17637818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Jun;26(3):131-9.

Generation and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibody 5E1 against human
transcription factor GLI3.

Hunt R(1), Bragina O, Drews M, Kasak L, Timmusk S, Valkna A, Kogerman P,
Järvekülg L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee,
Tallinn, Estonia.

GLI3 is a transcriptional effector of the developmentally important hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway. Here we report the production of mouse monoclonal antibody
(MAb) against putative repressive motif in GLI3 (GLI3pRM). BALB/c mice were
immunized with purified recombinant human GLI3pRM protein; the splenocytes from
these mice were fused with myeloma cell line (SP2/0) by using standard hybridoma 
production techniques. Resulting hybridomas producing anti-GLI3pRM antibodies
were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and isotyped. The
specificity of MAb 5E1 was determined based on its activity in Western blot and
immunofluorescence analysis of human NT2/D1 cell line. The results showed that
MAb 5E1 was immunoglobulin IgM/ê and it recognized recombinant human GLI3pRM
specifically. In addition, MAb 5E1 bound to the full-length (FL-GLI3) as well as 
a short protein (GLI3R) and did not cross-react with a similar region in GLI2.
MAb 5E1 could also be used to detect the expression of GLI3 in mouse cell lines
and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 17600494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 15;308(2):331-42. Epub 2007 May 31.

Differential gene induction by genetic and ligand-mediated activation of the
Sonic hedgehog pathway in neural stem cells.

Galvin KE(1), Ye H, Wetmore C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
MN 55905, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a secreted morphogen and mitogen, is essential for nervous 
system development and neural stem cell (NSC) self-renewal. As the intracellular 
signal transduction of Shh in NSCs is largely unknown, we sought to characterize 
pathway targets using ligand stimulation and genetic models of activation. NSCs
haploinsufficient for Patched (Ptc), a receptor repressive to Shh signaling,
showed enhanced proliferation of a magnitude similar to Shh-treated wild-type
(Wt) NSCs. Analysis of the Gli zinc-finger transcription factors, primary
mediators of Shh activity, demonstrated differential induction between models of 
pathway activation. Gli1 was significantly induced in Wt NSCs exposed to Shh,
whereas Gli2 was elevated and Gli1 expression did not change in Ptc(+/-) NSCs.
Other Shh targets (Nmyc, Id factors) were induced under both conditions of
pathway activation. Interestingly, Shh-treated Ptc(+/-) NSCs induced expression
of Gli1 but failed to increase proliferation, suggesting that the NSCs may have
reached a physiologic plateau in proliferative capacity. Thus, our data
demonstrate that Ptc(+/-) mice have an expanded progenitor cell niche in vivo and
that NSCs maintain a cell-intrinsic increase in basal proliferation in vitro that
is sustained by a Gli transduction signature distinct from that of exogenous Shh 
stimulation. Additionally, Ptc(+/-) NSCs maintain tight control over mitosis and 
do not further augment proliferation in the presence of mitogenic stimulation.

PMID: 17599824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Aug;79(8):573-80.

Single median maxillary central incisor: new data and mutation review.

El-Jaick KB(1), Fonseca RF, Moreira MA, Ribeiro MG, Bolognese AM, Dias SO,
Pereira ET, Castilla EE, Orioli IM.

Author information: 
(1)Estudo Latino Americano de Malformações Congênitas, Departamento de Genética, 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Single median maxillary central incisor (SMMCI) is a rare anomaly
that may occur alone or associated with other conditions, frequently as part of
the holoprosencephaly (HPE) spectrum. However, it has been suggested that SMMCI
alone, or associated with some midline defects, may be considered a different
entity from HPE (OMIM: 147250). Families with SMMCI, without HPE cases, are
difficult to counsel for the risk of HPE in future generations because the same
midline defects described as part of the "SMMCI syndrome" can also be part of the
HPE spectrum.
METHODS: We screened five cases of SMMCI for mutations in three HPE genes, SHH,
TGIF, and SIX3.
RESULTS: A missense mutation c.686C>T was found in the gene SIX3 of one patient, 
which did not differ from the accepted 20% of known HPE gene mutations among all 
HPE cases. Our results and an extensive literature review of gene mutations in
patients with SMMCI showed that 27/28 of them were in HPE genes: SHH (n = 21),
SIX3 (n = 3), TGIF (n = 1), GLI2 (n = 1), and PTCH (n = 1), and only one in the
SALL4 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical findings in patients with SMMCI without HPE in families
with mutations in HPE genes cannot be distinguished from the findings reported in
the SMMCI syndrome. Therefore, persons with SMMCI and their relatives should be
carefully investigated for related midline disorders, especially of the HPE
spectrum, and all known HPE genes screened.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17584896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;122(2):191-9. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

A new locus for split hand/foot malformation with long bone deficiency (SHFLD) at
2q14.2 identified from a chromosome translocation.

Babbs C(1), Heller R, Everman DB, Crocker M, Twigg SR, Schwartz CE, Giele H,
Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) with long bone deficiency (SHFLD) is a
distinct entity in the spectrum of ectrodactylous limb malformations
characterised by associated tibial a/hypoplasia. Pedigrees with multiple
individuals affected by SHFLD often include non-penetrant intermediate relatives,
making genetic mapping difficult. Here we report a sporadic patient with SHFLD
who carries a de novo chromosomal translocation t(2;18)(q14.2;p11.2).
Characterisation of the breakpoints revealed that neither disrupts any known
gene; however, the chromosome 2 breakpoint lies between GLI2 and INHBB, two genes
known to be involved in limb development. To investigate whether mutation of a
gene in proximity to the chromosome 2 breakpoint underlies the SHFLD, we sought
independent evidence of mutations in GLI2, INHBB and two other genes (RALB and
FLJ14816) in 44 unrelated patients with SHFM, SHFLD or isolated long bone
deficiency. No convincing pathogenic mutations were found, raising the
possibility that a long-range cis acting regulatory element may be disrupted by
this translocation. The previous description of a translocation with a 2q14.2
breakpoint associated with ectrodactyly, and the mapping of the ectrodactylous
Dominant hemimelia mouse mutation to a region of homologous synteny, suggests
that 2q14.2 represents a novel locus for SHFLD.

PMID: 17569090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 15;357(4):1084-9. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Hedgehog is involved in prostate basal cell hyperplasia formation and its
progressing towards tumorigenesis.

Chen BY(1), Liu JY, Chang HH, Chang CP, Lo WY, Kuo WH, Yang CR, Lin DP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung 402, Taiwan.

The role of Hedgehog signaling in human basal cell hyperplasia formation and its 
progressing towards tumorigenesis was investigated. Hedgehog signaling members
including PTCH1, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 were found co-localized with p63 expression
in most hyperplastic basal cells, but rarely in normal basal cells, suggesting
Hedgehog involvement in basal cell hyperplasia formation. Both CK-14 and CK-8
markers were found co-localized in the majority of hyperplastic basal cells, but 
relatively few in the normal basal cells, indicating a Hedgehog-promoted
transitory differentiation. Furthermore, CK-14 and PTCH1 were found co-localized 
with CD44 in the hyerplastic basal cells, in a way similar to the CD44
co-localization with PTCH1 and GLI1 in the cancer cells. Together, the present
study indicated Hedgehog involvement in forming basal cell hyperplasia and its
progressing towards cancer, presumably by transforming the normal basal stem
cells into the cancer stem cells where persistent Hedgehog activation might be
mandatory for tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17466949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Hepatology. 2007 May;45(5):1091-6.

Bile ductules and stromal cells express hedgehog ligands and/or hedgehog target
genes in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Jung Y(1), McCall SJ, Li YX, Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) regulates tissue morphogenesis. Hedgehog (Hh) activity has 
been demonstrated in human cholangiocarcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma lines,
and in myofibroblasts and progenitors from adult rodent livers. We evaluated Hh
pathway involvement in the response to biliary injury in primary biliary
cirrhosis (PBC). Liver sections from 3 PBC patients and 3 controls without liver 
disease were studied. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine if cells that
accumulate in PBC livers express Ihh or Hh-target genes including the
Hh-receptor, Patched (Ptc), and the Hh-transcriptional activator glioblastoma
(Gli) 2. Positive cells were further identified by costaining for cytokeratin
(CK) 19, a biliary marker, or OV6, a hepatic progenitor marker. In all subjects, 
Gli2 and Ptc expression localized in portal areas. The numbers of Gli2- or
Ptc-expressing cells/portal triad were each 10-fold greater in patients with PBC 
than in controls (P<0.05). In PBC livers, some CK19+ cells coexpressed Gli2 or
Ptc. Many stromal fibroblastic cells were also Gli2+. Strong Ihh expression was
detected in most bile ductular cells. Scattered stromal cells also expressed Ihh.
The number of Ihh+ cells/portal triad was 6-fold greater in PBC livers than
controls (P<0.05). OV6+ progenitors increased significantly in PBC livers, and
some of these cells coexpressed Ihh, Ptc, and/or Gli2.CONCLUSION: This is the
first direct evidence that noncancerous, adult human livers harbor several types 
of cells that produce and/or respond to Hh ligands. Such Hh-responsive cells
accumulate during the fibroproliferative response to chronic cholestatic liver
injury, suggesting a role for Hh signaling in this process.

PMID: 17464985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Jul;18(7):2411-8. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Ihh/Gli2 signaling promotes osteoblast differentiation by regulating Runx2
expression and function.

Shimoyama A(1), Wada M, Ikeda F, Hata K, Matsubara T, Nifuji A, Noda M, Amano K, 
Yamaguchi A, Nishimura R, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Graduate School of
Dentistry, Osaka University, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Genetic and cell biological studies have indicated that Indian hedgehog (Ihh)
plays an important role in bone development and osteoblast differentiation.
However, the molecular mechanism by which Ihh regulates osteoblast
differentiation is complex and remains to be fully elucidated. In this study, we 
investigated the role of Ihh signaling in osteoblast differentiation using
mesenchymal cells and primary osteoblasts. We observed that Ihh stimulated
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, osteocalcin expression, and calcification.
Overexpression of Gli2- but not Gli3-induced ALP, osteocalcin expression, and
calcification of these cells. In contrast, dominant-negative Gli2 markedly
inhibited Ihh-dependent osteoblast differentiation. Ihh treatment or Gli2
overexpression also up-regulated the expression of Runx2, an essential
transcription factor for osteoblastogenesis, and enhanced the transcriptional
activity and osteogenic action of Runx2. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis
demonstrated a physical interaction between Gli2 and Runx2. Moreover, Ihh or Gli2
overexpression failed to increase ALP activity in Runx2-deficient mesenchymal
cells. Collectively, these results suggest that Ihh regulates osteoblast
differentiation of mesenchymal cells through up-regulation of the expression and 
function of Runx2 by Gli2.

PMCID: PMC1924839
PMID: 17442891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 15;67(8):3583-93.

Selective down-regulation of glioma-associated oncogene 2 inhibits the
proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Kim Y(1), Yoon JW, Xiao X, Dean NM, Monia BP, Marcusson EG.

Author information: 
(1)Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc., 1896 Rutherford Road, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA.
ykim@isisph.com

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway contributes to the initiation and progression of
tumors with various origins when aberrantly activated. In this study, we
investigated if the Shh pathway is important for the proliferation of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells and also began to identify which components 
of the pathway play a pivotal role in the biology of HCC. Expression levels of
components in the pathway were measured, and glioma-associated oncogene (Gli) 2
levels were found to be considerably higher in human HCC lines compared with
normal liver. Gli2 levels were also higher in tumor tissue from HCC patients
compared with normal liver. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) were used to
specifically down-regulate Gli2, and this led to decreased proliferation of
various HCC cell lines. However, inhibition of Gli1 and Gli3 with ASOs did not
decrease proliferation in most HCC cell lines and inhibitors targeting the
upstream components of the pathway, including smoothened (Smo), displayed
antiproliferative effects in only a subset of HCC cell lines. Moreover, in cancer
cells harboring Smo mutations or unresponsive to the Smo inhibitor
3-keto-N-aminoethylaminoethylcaproyldihydrocinnamoyl cyclopamine, the Gli2 ASO
was still able to inhibit proliferation. The importance of Gli2 in HCC
proliferation was further confirmed by the changes in expression levels of genes,
such as Bcl-2, c-Myc, and p27, following suppression of Gli2 expression. Taken
together, these results suggest that, among the Gli transcription factors, Gli2
plays a predominant role in the proliferation of HCC cells and the suppression of
Gli2 expression may provide a useful therapeutic option for the treatment of HCC.

PMID: 17440069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Ann Med. 2006;38(8):560-77.

The role of transcription factors implicated in anterior pituitary development in
the aetiology of congenital hypopituitarism.

Kelberman D(1), Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Institute for Child Health,
London, UK.

The anterior pituitary gland is a central regulator of growth, reproduction and
homeostasis, and is the end-product of a carefully orchestrated pattern of
expression of signalling molecules and transcription factors leading to the
development of this complex organ secreting six hormones from five different cell
types. Naturally occurring and transgenic murine models have demonstrated a role 
for many of these molecules in the aetiology of combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1, POU1FI, 
LHX3, LHX4, TBX19 (TPIT), SOX3 and SOX2. The expression pattern of these
transcription factors, their interaction with co-factors and their impact on
target genes dictate the phenotype that results when the gene encoding the
relevant transcription factor is mutated. The highly variable phenotype may
consist of isolated hypopituitarism, or more complex disorders such as
septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) and holoprosencephaly. Since mutations in any one
transcription factor are uncommon, and since the overall incidence of mutations
in known transcription factors is low in patients with CPHD, it is clear that
many genes remain to be identified, and characterization of these will further
elucidate the pathogenesis of these complex conditions, and also shed light on
normal pituitary development.

PMID: 17438671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochem J. 2007 May 1;403(3):369-79.

Pathways of signal transduction employed by vertebrate Hedgehogs.

Riobo NA(1), Manning DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Signalling by Hh (Hedgehog) proteins is among the most actively studied
receptor-mediated phenomena relevant to development and post-embryonic
homoeostatic events. The impact of signalling by the Hh proteins is profound, and
work pertaining to the presentation of these proteins and the pathways engaged by
them continues to yield unique insights into basic aspects of morphogenic
signalling. We review here the mechanisms of signalling relevant to the actions
of Hh proteins in vertebrates. We emphasize findings within the past several
years on the recognition of, in particular, Sonic hedgehog by target cells,
pathways of transduction employed by the seven-pass transmembrane protein
Smoothened and end points of action, as manifest in the regulation of the Gli
transcription factors. Topics of extended interest are those regarding the
employment of heterotrimeric G-proteins and G-protein-coupled receptor kinases by
Smoothened. We also address the pathways, insofar as known, linking Smoothened to
the expression and stability of Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. The mechanisms by which Hh
proteins signal have few, if any, parallels. It is becoming clear in vertebrates,
however, that several facets of signalling are shared in common with other venues
of signalling. The challenge in understanding both the actions of Hh proteins and
the overlapping forms of regulation will be in understanding, in molecular terms,
both common and divergent signalling events.

PMID: 17419683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 15;67(8):3871-7. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Medulloblastomas derived from Cxcr6 mutant mice respond to treatment with a
smoothened inhibitor.

Sasai K(1), Romer JT, Kimura H, Eberhart DE, Rice DS, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is activated in approximately 30% of human
medulloblastoma resulting in increased expression of downstream target genes. In 
about half of these cases, this has been shown to be a consequence of mutations
in regulatory genes within the pathway, including Ptc1, Smo, and Sufu. However,
for some tumors, no mutations have been detected in known pathway genes. This
suggests that either mutations in other genes promote tumorigenesis or that
epigenetic alterations increase pathway activity in these tumors. Here, we report
that 3% to 4% of mice lacking either one or both functional copies of Cxcr6
develop medulloblastoma. Although CXCR6 is not known to be involved in Shh
signaling, tumors derived from Cxcr6 mutant mice expressed Shh pathway target
genes including Gli1, Gli2, Ptc2, and Sfrp1, indicating elevated pathway
activity. Interestingly, the level of Ptc1 expression was decreased in tumor
cells although two normal copies of Ptc1 were retained. This implies that reduced
CXCR6 function leads to suppression of Ptc1 thereby increasing Smoothened
function and promoting tumorigenesis. We used a direct transplant model to test
the sensitivity of medulloblastoma arising in Cxcr6 mutant mice to a
small-molecule inhibitor of Smoothened (HhAntag). We found that transplanted
tumors were dramatically inhibited in mice treated for only 4 days with HhAntag. 
These findings suggest that HhAntag may be effective against tumors lacking
mutations in known Shh pathway genes.

PMID: 17413002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1713-22. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Opposing gradients of Gli repressor and activators mediate Shh signaling along
the dorsoventral axis of the inner ear.

Bok J(1), Dolson DK, Hill P, Rüther U, Epstein DJ, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Rockville,
MD 20850, USA.

Organization of the vertebrate inner ear is mainly dependent on localized signals
from surrounding tissues. Previous studies demonstrated that sonic hedgehog (Shh)
secreted from the floor plate and notochord is required for specification of
ventral (auditory) and dorsal (vestibular) inner ear structures, yet it was not
clear how this signaling activity is propagated. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms by which Shh regulates inner ear development, we examined embryos with
various combinations of mutant alleles for Shh, Gli2 and Gli3. Our study shows
that Gli3 repressor (R) is required for patterning dorsal inner ear structures,
whereas Gli activator (A) proteins are essential for ventral inner ear
structures. A proper balance of Gli3R and Gli2/3A is required along the length of
the dorsoventral axis of the inner ear to mediate graded levels of Shh signaling,
emanating from ventral midline tissues. Formation of the ventral-most otic
region, the distal cochlear duct, requires robust Gli2/3A function. By contrast, 
the formation of the proximal cochlear duct and saccule, which requires less Shh 
signaling, is achieved by antagonizing Gli3R. The dorsal vestibular region
requires the least amount of Shh signaling in order to generate the correct dose 
of Gli3R required for the development of this otic region. Taken together, our
data suggest that reciprocal gradients of GliA and GliR mediate the responses to 
Shh signaling along the dorsoventral axis of the inner ear.

PMID: 17395647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Lab Invest. 2007 May;87(5):499-514. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Hedgehog-mediated mesenchymal-epithelial interactions modulate hepatic response
to bile duct ligation.

Omenetti A(1), Yang L, Li YX, McCall SJ, Jung Y, Sicklick JK, Huang J, Choi S,
Suzuki A, Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

In bile duct-ligated (BDL) rodents, as in humans with chronic cholangiopathies,
biliary obstruction triggers proliferation of bile ductular cells that are
surrounded by fibrosis produced by adjacent myofibroblastic cells in the hepatic 
mesenchyme. The proximity of the myofibroblasts and cholangiocytes suggests that 
mesenchymal-epithelial crosstalk promotes the fibroproliferative response to
cholestatic liver injury. Studying BDL mice, we found that bile duct obstruction 
induces activity of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway, a system that regulates the
viability and differentiation of various progenitors during embryogenesis. After 
BDL, many bile ductular cells and fibroblastic-appearing cells in the portal
stroma express Hh ligands, receptor and/or target genes. Transwell cocultures of 
an immature cholangiocyte line that expresses the Hh receptor, Patched (Ptc),
with liver myofibroblastic cells demonstrated that both cell types produced Hh
ligands that enhanced each other's viability and proliferation. Further support
for the concept that Hh signaling modulates the response to BDL was generated by 
studying PtcLacZ mice, which have an impaired ability to constrain Hh signaling
due to a heterozygous deficiency of Ptc. After BDL, PtcLacZ mice upregulated
fibrosis gene expression earlier than wild-type controls and manifested an
unusually intense ductular reaction, more expanded fibrotic portal areas, and a
greater number of lobular necrotic foci. Our findings reveal that adult livers
resurrect developmental signaling systems, such as the Hh pathway, to guide
remodeling of the biliary epithelia and stroma after cholestatic injury.

PMID: 17334411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Biol. 2007 May 1;305(1):28-39. Epub 2007 Jan 27.

PTHrP regulates growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation in a
Gli3 dependent manner utilizing hedgehog ligand dependent and independent
mechanisms.

Mau E(1), Whetstone H, Yu C, Hopyan S, Wunder JS, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)The Program in Developmental Biology of the Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Growth plate chondrocytes undergo a tightly regulated process of differentiation,
allowing for the longitudinal growth of bones. Although it is known that
parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP) and Indian hedgehog regulate the
differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes, how these pathways interact to
regulate chondrocyte development is not fully elucidated. We examined how the
interaction between PTHrP and the hedgehog activated transcription factors, Gli2 
and Gli3, regulates growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation.
Analysis of fetal limbs showed that Gli2 is a negative regulator and Gli3 a
positive regulator of type X collagen expression. Limb explant cultures showed
that PTHrP treatment inhibited type X collagen expression and increased
chondrocyte proliferation. This effect was substantially enhanced in Gli2-/-
limbs, was blocked in Gli3-/- limbs, and was only partially inhibited by hedgehog
ligand blockade. PTHrP negatively regulated Gli mediated transcription in cell
cultures, and regulated the level of the repressor form of Gli3 in a PKA
dependent manner. These results show that PTHrP regulates growth plate
chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation in part through the activity of
Gli3, suggesting a crucial role for Gli3 in growth plate chondrocyte development.

PMID: 17328886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 2007 May 1;305(1):52-62. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Activation of Class I transcription factors by low level Sonic hedgehog signaling
is mediated by Gli2-dependent and independent mechanisms.

Pachikara A(1), Dolson DK, Martinu L, Riccomagno MM, Jeong Y, Epstein DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, School of Medicine,
Clinical Research Bldg., Room 470, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The partitioning of the ventral neural tube into five distinct neuronal
progenitor domains is dependent on the morphogenic action of the secreted protein
Sonic hedgehog (Shh). The prevailing model stipulates that Class I genes are
repressed and Class II genes are activated by high levels of Shh signaling and
that sharp progenitor domain boundaries are established by the mutual repression 
of complementary pairs of Class I and Class II transcription factors. While core 
elements of this model are supported by experimental evidence, a number of issues
remain unresolved. Foremost of these is a more thorough understanding of the
mechanism by which Class I genes are regulated. In this study, we describe the
consequences of Shh misexpression on Class I and Class II gene expression in the 
hindbrain of ShhP1 embryos. We observed that an ectopic source of Shh in the otic
vesicle of ShhP1 embryos ventralized the adjacent hindbrain by inducing, rather
than repressing, the expression of several Class I genes (Pax6, Dbx1, Dbx2). The 
Shh dependent activation of Class I genes was mediated, in part, by Gli2. These
results bear significance on the model of ventral neural tube patterning as they 
suggest a dual role for Shh in the regulation of Class I genes, whereby low
levels of Shh signaling initiate Class I gene transcription, while higher levels 
restrict the domains of Class I gene expression to intermediate positions of the 
neural tube through the activation of Class II transcriptional regulators.

PMCID: PMC1914214
PMID: 17321515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 26;26(34):4889-96. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Distinct roles of first exon variants of the tumor-suppressor Patched1 in
Hedgehog signaling.

Shimokawa T(1), Svärd J, Heby-Henricson K, Teglund S, Toftgård R, Zaphiropoulos
PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge,
Sweden. Tash@biosci.ki.se

Patched1 (PTCH1) is one of the key molecules involved in the Hedgehog (HH)
signaling pathway and acts as the receptor of HH ligands. Additionally, PTCH1
inhibits the positive signal transductor Smoothened (SMO). Several PTCH1 splice
variants are known but the functional differences among them are not clear. Here,
we demonstrate the unique biological properties of the PTCH1 isoforms generated
by alternative first exon usage. All isoforms examined worked as functional
receptors of both Sonic HH and Desert HH. However, the signaling upregulated
isoforms PTCH1-1B and -1C inhibited SMO and the pathway transcription factors
glioma 1 (GLI1) and GLI2 to a higher extent than PTCH1-1 and -1Ckid. Moreover, in
situ hybridizations allowed the detection of the Ptch1 isoforms in specific
structures of the developing mouse embryo. Additionally, the differences in the
N-terminal tail had a dramatic influence on the steady states of the proteins,
with PTCH1-1B and -1C levels being significantly higher than PTCH1-1 and -1Ckid. 
This implies that the pronounced signaling inhibitory properties of PTCH1-1B and 
-1C may be mostly due to this high-protein expression rather than to intrinsic
functional differences. Thus, our study supports a role of splicing variation and
promoter choice for HH signaling regulation.

PMID: 17310997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Differentiation. 2007 Sep;75(7):638-51. Epub 2007 Feb 16.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor signaling through MEK-ERK is required for
prostate bud induction.

Kuslak SL(1), Marker PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware St. SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The urogenital sinus (UGS) is specified as prostate in mice around embryonic day 
15.5 as indicated by expression of the transcription factor Nkx3.1. Shortly
thereafter, growth of epithelial buds into the UGS mesenchyme initiates prostatic
morphogenesis. A comparison of male and female UGSs in vivo demonstrated sexually
dimorphic expression of branching morphogenesis regulatory genes coincident with 
epithelial budding including Bmp7, Gli1, Gli2, Fgf10, Ptch1, and Shh. A
comparison of UGSs grown with or without testosterone in serum-free organ
cultures showed that some, but not all sexually dimorphic differences observed
during prostate bud induction, were effectively modeled in vitro. Organ cultures 
were then used to investigate the role of fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGFR) signaling during prostatic induction. Blocking FGFR activation with
PD173074 showed that activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2) in the UGS is dependent on FGFR signaling. Furthermore, inhibiting
either FGFR activation with PD173074 or ERK1/2 activation with UO126 blocked all 
morphogenesis, proliferation, and gene expression changes induced by androgens in
the UGS. These data reveal a previously unknown role for ERK1/2 during prostate
bud induction. They also show that signaling by FGFRs through ERK1/2 is required 
for androgen-induced budding morphogenesis, proliferation, and gene expression
during prostate bud induction.

PMID: 17309601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Urol. 2007 Mar;177(3):1179-85.

Lack of demonstrable autocrine hedgehog signaling in human prostate cancer cell
lines.

Zhang J(1), Lipinski R, Shaw A, Gipp J, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University
of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

PURPOSE: Several recent reports highlighted the role of hedgehog signaling in
prostate cancer. However, the relative contributions of autocrine and paracrine
hedgehog signaling to tumor growth and progression are unclear. Efforts to model 
autocrine signaling for drug development have been hampered by conflicting
reports of the presence or absence of autocrine signaling in established human
prostate cancer cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We comprehensively characterized the expression of
hedgehog pathway genes in the 3 prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP, PC3 and 22RV1
(American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, Virginia). We also examined their
response to Shh ligand and to the hedgehog pathway inhibitor cyclopamine (Toronto
Research Chemicals, Toronto, Ontario, Canada).
RESULTS: Expression of hedgehog ligand, patched and Gli1 in all 3 cell lines was 
lower than the expression level in normal human prostate tissue. All 3 cell lines
showed hedgehog target gene activation when transfected with an activated form of
Gli2 but none showed a detectable transcriptional response to hedgehog ligand or 
to transfection with an activated form of smoothened. Furthermore, treatment with
the hedgehog pathway inhibitor cyclopamine did not inhibit hedgehog target gene
expression in any of the 3 prostate cancer cell lines, although cyclopamine
inhibited proliferation in culture.
CONCLUSIONS: LNCaP, PC3 and 22RV1 show no evidence of autocrine signaling by
ligand dependent mechanisms and cyclopamine mediated inhibition of growth in
culture occurs without of any discernible effect on canonical hedgehog pathway
activity.

PMID: 17296441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 13;282(15):10846-52. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

A novel protein-processing domain in Gli2 and Gli3 differentially blocks complete
protein degradation by the proteasome.

Pan Y(1), Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, New York 10021, USA.

The proteasome usually completely degrades its target proteins, but it can also
degrade a handful of proteins in a limited and site-specific manner. The
molecular mechanism for such limited degradation is unknown. The repressor forms 
of Gli2 and Gli3 transcription factors are generated from their full-length
proteins through limited proteasome-mediated protein degradation. In this study, 
we have taken advantage of the fact that Gli3 is efficiently processed, whereas
Gli2 is not, and identified a region of approximately 200 residues in their C
termini that determine differential processing of the two proteins. This region, 
named processing determinant domain, functions as a signal for protein processing
in the context of not only Gli2 and Gli3 protein sequences but also a
heterologous hybrid protein, which would otherwise be completely degraded by the 
proteasome. Thus, the processing determinant domain constitutes a novel domain
that functions independently. Our findings explain, at the molecular level, why
Gli2 and Gli3 are differentially processed and, more importantly, may help
understand a probably general mechanism by which the proteasome degrades some of 
its target proteins partially rather than completely.

PMID: 17283082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007 Feb 2;2:8.

Holoprosencephaly.

Dubourg C(1), Bendavid C, Pasquier L, Henry C, Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 6061 CNRS, Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Université de
Rennes1, IFR 140 GFAS, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, 35000, France.
christele.dubourg@chu-rennes.fr

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a complex brain malformation resulting from incomplete
cleavage of the prosencephalon, occurring between the 18th and the 28th day of
gestation and affecting both the forebrain and the face. It is estimated to occur
in 1/16,000 live births and 1/250 conceptuses. Three ranges of increasing
severity are described: lobar, semi-lobar and alobar HPE. Another milder subtype 
of HPE called middle interhemispheric variant (MIHF) or syntelencephaly is also
reported. In most of the cases, facial anomalies are observed in HPE, like
cyclopia, proboscis, median or bilateral cleft lip/palate in severe forms, ocular
hypotelorism or solitary median maxillary central incisor in minor forms. These
latter midline defects can occur without the cerebral malformations and then are 
called microforms. Children with HPE have many medical problems: developmental
delay and feeding difficulties, epilepsy, instability of temperature, heart rate 
and respiration. Endocrine disorders like diabetes insipidus, adrenal hypoplasia,
hypogonadism, thyroid hypoplasia and growth hormone deficiency are frequent. To
date, seven genes have been positively implicated in HPE: Sonic hedgehog (SHH),
ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, PTCH, GLI2 and TDGF1. A molecular diagnosis can be performed by
gene sequencing and allele quantification for the four main genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3
and TGIF. Major rearrangements of the subtelomeres can also be identified by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Nevertheless, in about
70% of cases, the molecular basis of the disease remains unknown, suggesting the 
existence of several other candidate genes or environmental factors.
Consequently, a "multiple-hit hypothesis" of genetic and/or environmental factors
(like maternal diabetes) has been proposed to account for the extreme clinical
variability. In a practical approach, prenatal diagnosis is based on ultrasound
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) rather than on molecular diagnosis.
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive, and requires a multidisciplinary
management. Child outcome depends on the HPE severity and the medical and
neurological complications associated. Severely affected children have a very
poor prognosis. Mildly affected children may exhibit few symptoms and may live a 
normal life.

PMCID: PMC1802747
PMID: 17274816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 15;303(2):448-60. Epub 2006 Dec 15.

The role of Shh transcription activator Gli2 in chick cloacal development.

Liu G(1), Moro A, Zhang JJ, Cheng W, Qiu W, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Programs of Infection, Immunity, Injury and Repair, The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave, Suite 1526, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5G 1X8.

Patterning and differentiation along the dorsal-ventral (D-V) axis lead to
cloacal partitioning into ventral urinary and dorsal alimentary tracts in most
mammals, but not birds and fish. We previously reported that the major activator 
of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling transcription factor Gli2 plays an essential
role in cloacal partitioning along the D-V axis in a mouse model. Here, we report
that chick cloacal patterning and differentiation is along the anterior-posterior
axis. During chick cloacal formation, Shh is expressed strongly in hindgut
endoderm; Gli2 is very weakly detected in the surrounding hindgut mesoderm. In
the mesoderm of the cloacal region, the over-expression of the constitutively
active form of mouse Gli2 has been shown to: not induce cloacal partitioning
along the D-V axis; induce expression of Ptch1, Gli2, bmp4, wnt5a, and hoxd-13,
which have been previously shown to play a role in hindgut patterning; increase
cell proliferation; and reduce apoptosis. Interestingly, p63 expression in the
cloacal endoderm is also up-regulated, suggesting an interaction between the Shh 
and p63 pathways. In conclusion, Gli2 alone is insufficient to induce
partitioning along the D-V axis in the chick embryo. However, Gli2 regulates both
epithelial and mesenchymal cell proliferation and apoptosis during cloacal
development.

PMID: 17239843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nature. 2007 Feb 15;445(7129):761-5. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Promotion of Hras-induced squamous carcinomas by a polymorphic variant of the
Patched gene in FVB mice.

Wakabayashi Y(1), Mao JH, Brown K, Girardi M, Balmain A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, University of California at San Francisco, 2340
Sutter Street, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Mice of the C57BL/6 strain are resistant to the development of skin squamous
carcinomas (SCCs) induced by an activated Ras oncogene, whereas FVB/N mice are
highly susceptible. The genetic basis of this difference in phenotype is unknown.
Here we show that susceptibility to SCC is under the control of a
carboxy-terminal polymorphism in the mouse Ptch gene. F1 hybrids between C57BL/6 
and FVB/N strains ((B6FVB)F1) are resistant to Ras-induced SCCs, but resistance
can be overcome either by elimination of the C57BL/6 Ptch allele (Ptch(B6)) or by
overexpression of the FVB/N Ptch allele (Ptch(FVB)) in the epidermis of
K5Hras-transgenic (B6FVB)F1 hybrid mice. The human Patched (PTCH) gene is a
classical tumour suppressor gene for basal cell carcinomas and medulloblastomas, 
the loss of which causes increased signalling through the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH)
pathway. SCCs that develop in PtchB6+/- mice do not lose the wild-type Ptch gene 
or show evidence of increased SHH signalling. Although Ptch(FVB) overexpression
can promote SCC formation, continued expression is not required for tumour
maintenance, suggesting a role at an early stage of tumour cell lineage
commitment. The Ptch polymorphism affects Hras-induced apoptosis, and binding to 
Tid1, the mouse homologue of the Drosophila l(2)tid tumour suppressor gene. We
propose that Ptch occupies a critical niche in determining basal or squamous cell
lineage, and that both tumour types can arise from the same target cell depending
on carcinogen exposure and host genetic background.

PMID: 17230190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3757-66. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Activation of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in T-lineage cells inhibits TCR
repertoire selection in the thymus and peripheral T-cell activation.

Rowbotham NJ(1), Hager-Theodorides AL, Cebecauer M, Shah DK, Drakopoulou E, Dyson
J, Outram SV, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Imperial College London, South
Kensington Campus, London, UK.

TCR signal strength is involved in many cell fate decisions in the T-cell
lineage. Here, we show that transcriptional events induced by Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling reduced TCR signal strength in mice. Activation of Hh signaling in
thymocytes in vivo by expression of a transgenic transcriptional-activator form
of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaN(2)) changed the outcome of TCR ligation at many stages of
thymocyte development, allowing self-reactive cells to escape clonal deletion;
reducing transgenic TCR-mediated positive selection; reducing the ratio of
CD4/CD8 single-positive (SP) cells; and reducing cell surface CD5 expression. In 
contrast, in the Shh(-/-) thymus the ratio of CD4/CD8 cells and both positive and
negative selection of a transgenic TCR were increased, demonstrating that Shh
does indeed influence TCR repertoire selection and the transition from
double-positive (DP) to SP cell in a physiological situation. In peripheral T
cells, Gli2DeltaN(2) expression attenuated T-cell activation and proliferation,
by a mechanism upstream of ERK phosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC1874579
PMID: 17227833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):419-24.

Expression of homeotic genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 is decreased in the
lungs but not in the hearts of adriamycin-exposed mice.

Calonge WM(1), Martinez L, Lacadena J, Fernandez-Dumont V, Matesanz R, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P. de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Exposure of rat and mouse embryos to adriamycin (doxorubicin chlorhydrate)
induces esophageal atresia (EA) and VACTERL association. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Gli2/Gli3 pathways are involved in these conditions and knockout mice for
homeotic Hox genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 show phenotypes with some
of the associated VACTERL features. This study aims at evaluating the possible
influence of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 as upstream regulators of this complex
signalling. Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin (EA group)
or vehicle (controls) on embryonic days 7.5 and 8.5. Embryos were recovered at
four endpoints (E12.5-E15.5) and randomly assigned for immunohistochemical or
molecular biology studies. Lungs and hearts were separately harvested and
processed for Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 quantitative RT-PCR measurements.
Antibodies for Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins were used for immunohistochemical 
studies. RT-PCR studies showed a drastic and statistically significant decrease
of the four genes in the lungs of EA mice when compared to controls, with a
slight recovery from E15.5. Hearts of both groups showed a similar expression of 
all the genes throughout gestation. Control embryos expressed the hox3 paralogous
genes in heart, skin, foregut derivatives and their surrounding mesoderm through 
E12.5-E15.5 whereas adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a severe decrease in
expression of these three proteins in the same tissues but not in the heart.
Adriamycin drastically reduced the expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 in
mice embryonic lungs. Their expression in the heart did not seem to be influenced
by adriamycin in this experimental setting.

PMID: 17211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2007 Feb;134(3):557-65. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

The mouse seminal vesicle shape mutation is allelic with Fgfr2.

Kuslak SL(1), Thielen JL, Marker PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The mouse seminal vesicle shape (svs) mutation is a spontaneous recessive
mutation that causes branching morphogenesis defects in the prostate gland and
seminal vesicles. Unlike many other mutations that reduce prostatic and/or
seminal vesicle branching, the svs mutation dramatically reduces branching
without reducing organ growth. Using a positional cloning approach, we identified
the svs mutant lesion as a 491 bp insertion in the tenth intron of Fgfr2 that
results in changes in the pattern of Fgfr2 alternative splicing. An engineered
null allele of Fgfr2 failed to complement the svs mutation proving that a partial
loss of FGFR2(IIIb) isoforms causes svs phenotypes. Thus, the svs mutation
represents a new type of adult viable Fgfr2 allele that can be used to elucidate 
receptor function during normal development and in the adult. In the developing
seminal vesicles, sustained activation of ERK1/2 was associated with branching
morphogenesis and this was absent in svs mutant seminal vesicles. This defect
appears to be the immediate downstream effect of partial loss of FGFR2(IIIb)
because activation of FGFR2(IIIb) by FGF10 rapidly induced ERK1/2 activation, and
inhibition of ERK1/2 activation blocked seminal vesicle branching morphogenesis. 
Partial loss of FGFR2(IIIb) was also associated with down-regulation of several
branching morphogenesis regulators including Shh, Ptch1, Gli1, Gli2, Bmp4, and
Bmp7. Together with previous studies, these data suggest that peak levels of
FGFR2(IIIb) signaling are required to induce branching and sustain ERK1/2
activation, whereas reduced levels support ductal outgrowth in the prostate gland
and seminal vesicles.

PMID: 17202188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Am J Pathol. 2007 Jan;170(1):347-55.

Hedgehog signaling promotes medulloblastoma survival via Bc/II.

Bar EE(1), Chaudhry A, Farah MH, Eberhart CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave., Ross Building 558, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. ebar1@jhmi.edu

Activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been identified in several cancers,
including medulloblastoma, but the mechanisms by which this pathway affects tumor
survival and growth are incompletely understood. We investigated whether Hedgehog
might promote survival of medulloblastoma cells via up-regulation of BclII. We
found that mRNA levels of the Hedgehog pathway effector Gli1 were significantly
associated with BclII expression in medulloblastoma and that Gli1 and BclII are
both present in regions of decreased apoptosis in nodular medulloblastoma.
Transient overexpression of Gli1 and Gli2 in medulloblastoma cultures induced a
BclII transcriptional reporter and increased BclII protein levels, whereas stable
overexpression of Gli1 was associated with increased BclII mRNA. The Hedgehog
antagonist cyclopamine blocked expression of the Hh pathway targets PTCH1 and
Gli1, lowered BclII levels, and increased apoptosis in DAOY and UW228
medulloblastoma cells. Apoptotic induction caused by cyclopamine could be rescued
in part by enforced expression of Gli1 or BclII. Hh pathway blockade also
sensitized medulloblastoma to the effects of the proapoptotic agent lovastatin.
These data demonstrate that BclII is an important mediator of Hh activity in
medulloblastoma and suggest new strategies for combined chemotherapeutic
regimens.

PMCID: PMC1762704
PMID: 17200206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Dyn. 2007 Feb;236(2):426-34.

Temporomandibular joint formation and condyle growth require Indian hedgehog
signaling.

Shibukawa Y(1), Young B, Wu C, Yamada S, Long F, Pacifici M, Koyama E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is essential for jaw function, but the
mechanisms regulating its development remain poorly understood. Because Indian
hedgehog (Ihh) regulates trunk and limb skeletogenesis, we studied its possible
roles in TMJ development. In wild-type mouse embryos, Ihh expression was already 
strong in condylar cartilage by embryonic day (E) 15.5, and expression of Ihh
receptors and effector genes (Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and PTHrP) indicated that Ihh
range of action normally reached apical condylar tissue layers, including
polymorphic chondroprogenitor layer and articular disc primordia. In Ihh(-/-)
embryos, TMJ development was severely compromised. Condylar cartilage growth,
polymorphic cell proliferation, and PTHrP expression were all inhibited, and
growth plate organization and chondrocyte gene expression patterns were abnormal.
These severe defects were partially corrected in double Ihh(-/-)/Gli3(-/-)
mutants, signifying that Ihh action is normally modulated and delimited by Gli3
and Gli3(R) in particular. Both single and double mutants, however, failed to
form an articular disc primordium, normally appreciable as an independent
condensation between condylar apex and neighboring developing temporal bone in
wild-type. This failure persisted at later stages, leading to complete absence of
a normal functional disc and lubricin-expressing joint cavities. In summary, Ihh 
is very important for TMJ development, where it appears to regulate growth and
elongation events, condylar cartilage phenotype, and chondroprogenitor cell
function. Absence of articular disc and joint cavities in single and double
mutants points to irreplaceable Ihh roles in formation of those critical TMJ
components.

PMID: 17191253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 15;303(2):514-26. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Angiogenic factors stimulate tubular branching morphogenesis of sonic
hedgehog-deficient lungs.

van Tuyl M(1), Groenman F, Wang J, Kuliszewski M, Liu J, Tibboel D, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Group in Lung Development, Hospital for
Sick Children Research Institute, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)-deficient mice have a severe lung branching defect. Recent
studies have shown that hedgehog signaling is involved in vascular development
and it is possible that the diminished airway branching in Shh-deficient mice is 
due to abnormal pulmonary vasculature formation. Therefore, we investigated the
role of Shh in pulmonary vascular development using Shh/Tie2lacZ compound mice,
which exhibit endothelial cell-specific LacZ expression, and Pecam-1
immunohistochemistry. In E11.5-13.5 Shh-deficient mice, the pulmonary vascular
bed is decreased, but appropriate to the decrease in airway branching. However,
when E12.5 Shh-deficient lungs were cultured for 4-6 days, the vascular network
deteriorated compared to wild-type lungs. The expression of vascular endothelial 
growth factor (Vegf) or its receptor Vegfr2 (KDR/Flk-1) was not different between
E12.5-13.5 Shh-deficient and wild-type lungs. In contrast, angiopoietin-1 (Ang1),
but not Ang2 or the angiopoietin receptor Tie2, mRNA expression was downregulated
in E12.5-E13.5 lungs of Shh null mutants. Recombinant Ang1 alone was unable to
restore in vitro branching morphogenesis in Shh-deficient lungs. Conversely, the 
angiogenic factor fibroblast growth factor (Fgf)-2 alone or in combination with
Ang1, increased vascularization and tubular growth and branching of Shh-deficient
lungs in vitro. The angiogenic factors did not overcome the reduced smooth muscle
cell differentiation in the Shh null lungs. These data indicate that early
vascular development, mediated by Vegf/Vegfr2 signaling proceeds normally in
Shh-deficient mice, while later vascular development and stabilization of the
primitive network mediated by the Ang/Tie2 signaling pathway are defective,
resulting in an abnormal vascular network. Stimulation of vascularization with
angiogenic factors such as Fgf2 and Ang1 partially restored tubular growth and
branching in Shh-deficient lungs, suggesting that vascularization is required for
branching morphogenesis.

PMID: 17187775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Dec 15;140(24):2742-8.

A syndrome of holoprosencephaly, recurrent infections, and monocytosis.

Jubinsky PT(1), Shanske AL, Pixley FJ, Montagna C, Short MK.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and
Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, New York, USA. pjubinsk@aecom.yu.edu

We describe three siblings with holoprosencephaly, recurrent infections, and
increased peripheral blood monocytes. These children were born to apparently
healthy parents in a family with one unaffected child. Affected individuals had
microcephaly, severe developmental delay, failure to thrive, and brachydactyly.
The clinical courses were complicated by endocrine dysfunction, multiple
respiratory, and skin infections. Laboratory studies showed normal karyotypes,
normal lymphocyte function, and a peripheral blood monocytosis with markedly
abnormal morphology. Mutation analysis of the seven genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGI, 
FTDGF1, GLI2, and PTCH) known to be involved in holoprosencephaly was normal.
This is the first report demonstrating an association between abnormal
mononuclear phagocytes and holoprosencephaly.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17103456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Dec 1;140(23):2571-6.

GLI2 mutations in four Brazilian patients: how wide is the phenotypic spectrum?

Rahimov F(1), Ribeiro LA, de Miranda E, Richieri-Costa A, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa, USA.

We report four patients with GLI2 mutations together with their associated
phenotypes: (1) holoprosencephaly-like phenotype, (2) anophthalmia, branchial
arch anomalies, and CNS abnormalities, (3) heminasal aplasia and orbital
anomalies, and (4) lobar holoprosencephaly. This diversity of phenotypes expands 
our understanding. Findings include not only (1) holoprosencephaly or a
holoprosencephaly-like phenotype, but also (2) heminasal aplasia with orbital
anomalies, and (3) branchial arch anomalies of the type seen in hemifacial
microsomia with anophthalmia and in oculoauriculofrontonasal syndrome. Finally,
this is the first report of a double mutation involving GLI2 and PTCH in the same
patient.

PMID: 17096318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 8;351(1):78-84. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Fused kinase is stabilized by Cdc37/Hsp90 and enhances Gli protein levels.

Kise Y(1), Takenaka K, Tezuka T, Yamamoto T, Miki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genomics, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Serine/threonine kinase Fused (Fu) is an essential component of Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling in Drosophila, but the biochemical functions of Fu remain unclear.
Here, we have investigated proteins co-precipitated with mammalian Fu and
identified a kinase-specific chaperone complex, Cdc37/Hsp90, as a novel-binding
partner of Fu. Inhibition of Hsp90 function by geldanamycin (GA) induces rapid
degradation of Fu through a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. We next show that
co-expression of Fu with transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2 significantly
increases their protein levels and luciferase reporter activities, which are
blocked by GA. These increases can be ascribed to Fu-mediated stabilization of
Gli because co-expression of Fu prolongs half-life of Gli1 and reduces
polyubiquitination of Gli1. Finally, we show that GA inhibits proliferation of
PC3, a Hh signaling-activated prostate cancer cell line. This growth inhibition
is partially rescued by expression of ectopic Gli1, suggesting that Fu may
contribute to enhance Hh signaling activity in cancer cells.

PMID: 17054904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 24;281(47):35598-602. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Suppressing Wnt signaling by the hedgehog pathway through sFRP-1.

He J(1), Sheng T, Stelter AA, Li C, Zhang X, Sinha M, Luxon BA, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology, Department of Pharmacology and
Biochemistry, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-1048,
USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is essential for embryonic development and
carcinogenesis. Activation of Hh signaling has been identified in several types
of gastrointestinal cancers, including esophageal, gastric, pancreatic, and liver
cancers. Several recent studies suggest that Hh signaling activation can inhibit 
Wnt signaling. However, the molecular basis underlying this inhibition remains
unclear. As transcription factors in the Hh signaling pathway, Gli molecules
transform cells in culture, and their expression are associated with cancer
development. Here we report that expression of a secreted frizzled-related
protein-sFRP-1 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts is dependent on Gli1 and Gli2. In
human gastric cancer cells, inhibition of Hh signaling reduces the level of
sFRP-1 transcript, whereas ectopic expression of Gli1 increases the level of
sFRP-1 transcript. Results from chromatin immunoprecipitation indicate that Gli1 
is involved in transcriptional regulation of sFRP-1. In 293 cells with Gli1
expression, Wnt-1-mediated beta-catenin accumulation in the cytosol and DKK1
expression are all abrogated, which can be reversed by inhibiting sFRP-1
expression. Furthermore, while SIIA cells do not respond to Wnt-1-conditioned
medium, inhibition of Hh signaling by smoothened (SMO) antagonist
KAAD-cyclopamine (keto-N-aminoethylaminocaproyldihydrocinnamoylcyclopamine) leads
to Wnt1-mediated beta-catenin accumulation in the cytosol. These data indicate
that sFRP-1, a target gene of the hedgehog pathway, is involved in cross-talk
between the hedgehog pathway and the Wnt pathway.

PMID: 17035233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):345-55. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Gli2 and Gli3 play distinct roles in the dorsoventral patterning of the mouse
hindbrain.

Lebel M(1), Mo R, Shimamura K, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Room 13-314,
Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, Ontario, Canada.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a critical role during dorsoventral (DV)
patterning of the developing neural tube by modulating the expression of neural
patterning genes. Overlapping activator functions of Gli2 and Gli3 have been
shown to be required for motoneuron development and correct neural patterning in 
the ventral spinal cord. However, the role of Gli2 and Gli3 in ventral hindbrain 
development is unclear. In this paper, we have examined DV patterning of the
hindbrain of Shh(-/-), Gli2(-/-) and Gli3(-/-) embryos, and found that the
respective role of Gli2 and Gli3 is not only different between the hindbrain and 
spinal cord, but also at distinct rostrocaudal levels of the hindbrain.
Remarkably, the anterior hindbrain of Gli2(-/-) embryos displays ventral
patterning defects as severe as those observed in Shh(-/-) embryos suggesting
that, unlike in the spinal cord and posterior hindbrain, Gli3 cannot compensate
for the loss of Gli2 activator function in Shh-dependent ventral patterning of
the anterior hindbrain. Loss of Gli3 also results in a distinct patterning defect
in the anterior hindbrain, including dorsal expansion of Nkx6.1 expression.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that ventral patterning of rhombomere 4 is less
affected by loss of Gli2 function revealing a different requirement for Gli
proteins in this rhombomere. Taken together, these observations indicate that
Gli2 and Gli3 perform rhombomere-specific function during DV patterning of the
hindbrain.

PMID: 17026983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Oct;1763(10):1031-9. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

Transcriptome analysis of fetal metatarsal long bones by microarray, as a model
for endochondral bone formation.

Sugars RV(1), Kärner E, Petersson U, Ganss B, Wendel M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oral Biology, Institute of Odontology, Karolinska Institutet,
Sweden. Rachael.Sugars@ki.se

Endochondral bone formation is orchestrated by mesenchymal cell condensation to
form cartilage anlagen, which act as a template for bone formation and eventual
mineralization. The current study performed gene expression analysis to examine
pre- and post-mineralization stages (E15 and E19) of endochondral bone formation,
using fetal metatarsal long bones as a model. An extensive number of genes were
differentially expressed, with 543 transcripts found to have at least 2-fold
up-regulation and 742 with a greater than 2-fold down-regulation. A
bioinformatics approach was adopted based on gene ontology groups, and this
identified genes associated with the regulation of signaling and skeletal
development, cartilage replacement by bone, and matrix degradation and turnover. 
Transcripts linked to skeletal patterning, including Hoxd genes 10-12, Gli2 and
Noggin were considerably down-regulated at E19. Whereas genes associated with
bone matrix formation and turnover, ACP5, MMP-13, bone sialoprotein, osteopontin,
dentin matrix protein-1 and MMP-9 all were distinctly up-regulated at this later 
time point. This approach to studying the formation of the primary ossification
center provides a unique picture of the developmental dynamics involved in the
molecular and biochemical processes during this intricately regulated process.

PMID: 17005269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2006 Sep;76(9):658-73.

Holoprosencephaly: clinical, anatomic, and molecular dimensions.

Cohen MM Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
michael.cohen@dal.ca

Holoprosencephaly is addressed under the following headings: alobar, semilobar,
and lobar holoprosencephaly; arrhinencephaly; agenesis of the corpus callosum;
pituitary abnormalities; hindbrain abnormalities; syntelencephaly;
aprosencephaly/atelencephaly; neural tube defects; facial anomalies; median cleft
lip; minor facial anomalies; single maxillary central incisor;
holoprosencephaly-like phenotype; epidemiology; genetic causes of
holoprosencephaly; teratogenic causes of holoprosencephaly; SHH mutations; ZIC2
mutations; SIX3 mutations; TGIF mutations; PTCH mutations; GLI2 mutations; FAST1 
mutations; TDGF1 mutations; and DHCR7 mutations.

PMID: 17001700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Dec 1;140(23):2587-93.

Holoprosencephaly-like phenotype: clinical and genetic perspectives.

Richieri-Costa A(1), Ribeiro LA.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Genética Clínica, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias
Craniofaciais, Universidade de São Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil. richieri@usp.br

We report 22 patients with normal neuropsychological development and a
holoprosencephaly-like (HPE-like) phenotype screened for SHH, SIX3, TGIF, and
GLI2. These patients were divided into two groups: (1) 6 patients with SHH and
GLI2 mutations and (2) 16 patients with no detectable mutations. We discuss the
phenotypic manifestations, evolution of the phenotype, and neuroimaging in the
two groups. Conclusions about the HPE-like phenotype include (1) initial
appearance as an unusually wide, and very severe unilateral cleft lip-palate in
some cases; (2) variability with the expression of minor anomalies in some cases,
such as single maxillary central incisor; (3) identifiable mutations in some
cases and absence of mutations in others; (4) essentially normal MRI in the most 
cases (pituitary tumor in two cases and choroid fissure cyst in one case in Group
1; empty sella turcica in one case in Group 2); (5) intelligence within the
normal range; and (6) familial aggregation in some instances. Implications
include (1) thorough examination of family members for minor anomalies; (2) MRI
and developmental assessment for the proband; and (3) molecular analysis.

PMID: 17001669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 22;26(8):1122-36. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

The hedgehog regulated oncogenes Gli1 and Gli2 block myoblast differentiation by 
inhibiting MyoD-mediated transcriptional activation.

Gerber AN(1), Wilson CW, Li YJ, Chuang PT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94158, USA.

The mechanism by which activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) pathway modulates
differentiation and promotes oncogenesis in specific tissues is poorly
understood. We therefore, analysed rhabdomyosarcomas from mice that were
haploinsufficient for the Hh-binding protein, Hip1, or for the Hh receptor,
Patched 1 (Ptch1). Transfection of the Hh-regulated transcription factor Gli1,
which is expressed in a subset of mouse and human rhabdomyosarcomas, suppressed
differentiation of myogenic rhabdomyosarcoma lines generated from Hip1+/- and
Ptch1+/- mice. The closely related factor, Gli2, had similar effects. Gli1 and
Gli2 inhibited myogenesis by repressing the capacity of MyoD to activate
transcription. Deletion analysis of Gli1 indicated that multiple domains of Gli1 
are required for efficient inhibition of MyoD. Gli1 reduced the ability of MyoD
to heterodimerize with E12 and bind DNA, providing one mechanism whereby the Gli 
proteins modulate the activity of MyoD. This novel activity of Gli proteins
provides new insights into how Hh signaling modulates terminal differentiation
through inhibition of tissue-specific factors such as MyoD. This mechanism may
contribute to the broad role of Hh signaling and the Gli proteins in
differentiation decisions and cancer formation.

PMCID: PMC3325095
PMID: 16964293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Dyn. 2006 Nov;235(11):3063-70.

Expression of hedgehog signalling components in adult mouse testis.

Szczepny A(1), Hime GR, Loveland KL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.

Hedgehog (Hh) signalling is known to regulate many aspects of normal development 
as well as being upregulated in various cancers. Signalling is mediated by the
Gli family of zinc finger transcription factors. Based on observations that
deletion of one of the three Hh genes, Dhh, leads to male infertility, we
hypothesized that regulated expression of Hh signalling components would be a
feature of adult spermatogenesis. We used in situ hybridization to characterise
Gli gene expression in juvenile and adult mouse testes. In the first wave of
spermatogenesis, mRNAs encoding all three Glis are detected in spermatogonia and 
Sertoli cells. In adult mouse testes, these transcripts are observed in
spermatogonia and spermatocytes, with reduced signal intensity in round
spermatids. The mRNAs encoding key effectors of Hh signalling, Ptc2, Smo, and Fu,
are also most apparent in spermatogonia, spermatocytes, and to a lower extent in 
round spermatids. In contrast, mRNA encoding SuFu, a negative regulator of Hh
signalling, was most predominant in round spermatids and the protein is evident
in round and elongating spermatids, suggesting that SuFu protein may switch off
Hh signalling in haploid germ cells. Overall, the coordinated expression pattern 
of these genes in adult mouse testis indicates a role for Hh signalling in
spermatogenesis.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16958114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Hum Genet. 2006 Nov;120(4):501-18. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Analysis of candidate genes on chromosome 2 in oral cleft case-parent trios from 
three populations.

Beaty TH(1), Hetmanski JB, Fallin MD, Park JW, Sull JW, McIntosh I, Liang KY,
Vanderkolk CA, Redett RJ, Boyadjiev SA, Jabs EW, Chong SS, Cheah FS, Wu-Chou YH, 
Chen PK, Chiu YF, Yeow V, Ng IS, Cheng J, Huang S, Ye X, Wang H, Ingersoll R,
Scott AF.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. tbeaty@jhsph.edu

Isolated oral clefts, including cleft lip with/without cleft palate (CL/P) and
cleft palate (CP), have a complex and heterogeneous etiology. Case-parent trios
from three populations were used to study genes spanning chromosome 2, where
single nucleotide polymorphic (SNP) markers were analyzed individually and as
haplotypes. Case-parent trios from three populations (74 from Maryland, 64 from
Singapore and 95 from Taiwan) were genotyped for 962 SNPs in 104 genes on
chromosome 2, including two well-recognized candidate genes: TGFA and SATB2.
Individual SNPs and haplotypes (in sliding windows of 2-5 SNPs) were used to test
for linkage and disequilibrium separately in CL/P and CP trios. A novel candidate
gene (ZNF533) showed consistent evidence of linkage and disequilibrium in all
three populations for both CL/P and CP. SNPs in key regions of ZNF533 showed
considerable variability in estimated genotypic odds ratios and their
significance, suggesting allelic heterogeneity. Haplotype frequencies for regions
of ZNF533 were estimated and used to partition genetic variance into among-and
within-population components. Wright's fixation index, a measure of genetic
diversity, showed little difference between Singapore and Taiwan compared with
Maryland. The tensin-1 gene (TNS1) also showed evidence of linkage and
disequilibrium among both CL/P and CP trios in all three populations, albeit at a
lower level of significance. Additional genes (VAX2, GLI2, ZHFX1B on 2p;
WNT6-WNT10A and COL4A3-COL4A4 on 2q) showed consistent evidence of linkage and
disequilibrium only among CL/P trios in all three populations, and TGFA showed
significant evidence in two of three populations.

PMID: 16953426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):C488-96. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Biomechanical regulation of hedgehog signaling in vascular smooth muscle cells in
vitro and in vivo.

Morrow D(1), Sweeney C, Birney YA, Guha S, Collins N, Cummins PM, Murphy R, Walls
D, Redmond EM, Cahill PA.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science and Health, Vascular Health Research Centre, Dublin City
University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has recently been shown to be both responsive to
mechanical loading in vitro and to control vascular development in vivo. We
investigated the role of cyclic strain and pulsatile flow in modulating Hh
signaling and growth of adult rat vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) in culture. 
Exposure of SMC to defined equibiaxial cyclic strain (0% and 10% stretch, 60
cycles/min, for 24 h) significantly decreased sonic hedgehog (Shh) and patched 1 
(Ptc1) expression while concurrently inhibiting Gli(2)-dependent promoter
activity and mRNA expression, respectively. Cyclic strain significantly decreased
SMC proliferation (cell counts and proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression)
concomitant with a marked increase in SMC apoptosis (fluorescence-activated cell 
sorter analysis, acridine orange staining of apoptotic nuclei and Bax/Bcl-x(L)
ratio). These strain-induced changes in proliferation and apoptosis were
significantly attenuated following addition of either recombinant Shh (3.5
microg/ml) or overexpression of the Notch 3 intracellular domain (Notch IC).
Further studies using a perfused transcapillary culture system demonstrated a
significant decrease in Hh signaling in SMC following exposure of cells to
increased pulsatile flow concomitant with a decrease in proliferation and an
increase in apoptosis. Finally, the pulsatile flow-induced decreases in Hh
signaling were validated in vivo following flow-induced rat carotid arterial
remodeling after 28 days. These data suggest that Hh expression is diminished by 
biomechanical stimulation in vitro and in vivo and thus may play a fundamental
role in arterial remodeling and atherogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 16943241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Pathol. 2006 Sep;169(3):806-14.

Odontogenic keratocysts arise from quiescent epithelial rests and are associated 
with deregulated hedgehog signaling in mice and humans.

Grachtchouk M(1), Liu J, Wang A, Wei L, Bichakjian CK, Garlick J, Paulino AF,
Giordano T, Dlugosz AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan, 3316 CCGC, Box 0932, 1500 E. Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0932, USA.

Odontogenic keratocysts in humans are aggressive, noninflammatory jaw cysts that 
may harbor PTCH1 mutations, leading to constitutive activity of the embryonic
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. We show here that epithelial expression of the
Hh transcriptional effector Gli2 is sufficient for highly penetrant keratocyst
development in transgenic mice. Mouse and human keratocysts expressed similar
markers, leading to tooth misalignment, bone remodeling, and craniofacial
abnormalities. We detected Hh target gene expression in epithelial cells lining
keratocysts from both species, implicating deregulated Hh signaling in their
development. Most mouse keratocysts arose from rests of Malassez--quiescent,
residual embryonic epithelial cells that remain embedded in the periodontal
ligament surrounding mature teeth. In Gli2-expressing mice, these rests were
stimulated to proliferate, stratify, and form a differentiated squamous
epithelium. The frequent development of keratocysts in Gli2-expressing mice
supports the idea that GLI transcription factor activity mediates pathological
responses to deregulated Hh signaling in humans. Moreover, Gli2-mediated
reactivation of quiescent epithelial rests to form keratocysts indicates that
these cells retain the capacity to function as progenitor cells on activation by 
an appropriate developmental signal.

PMCID: PMC1698812
PMID: 16936257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Development. 2006 Sep;133(18):3661-70. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

Gli3-mediated repression of Hedgehog targets is required for normal mammary
development.

Hatsell SJ(1), Cowin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

The Hedgehog pathway is vital for the development of many epidermal appendages,
but its role in mammary development has been unclear. Here, we show that although
Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed during embryonic mammary development, transcriptional
reporters of positive Hedgehog signaling are absent. Nevertheless, Gli3(xt/xt)
embryos show aberrant early mammary marker expression and lack two pairs of
mammary buds, demonstrating that Gli3 is essential for mammary bud formation and 
preceding patterning events. Misactivation of the Hedgehog pathway by targeted
expression of the constitutive activator Gli1, from the Gli2 promoter in
Gli3(xt/+) mice, also induces mammary bud loss. Moreover, loss of Gli3 expression
induces Gli1 misexpression in mammary mesenchyme. These results establish that
the essential function of Gli3 during embryonic mammary development is to repress
Hedgehog/Gli1-inducible targets. During postnatal mammary development, Gli2 and
Gli3 are expressed in stromal and myoepithelial cells, and Gli3 is also found
within the lumenal epithelium. Again, transcriptional reporters of positive
Hedgehog signaling are absent from these cell types, yet are expressed robustly
within mammary lymphatics. Thus, positive Hedgehog signaling is absent throughout
mammary development, distinguishing the mammary gland from other epidermal
appendages, such as hair follicles, which require Hedgehog pathway activity.

PMID: 16914490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 1;66(15):7548-53.

The hedgehog signaling molecule Gli2 induces parathyroid hormone-related peptide 
expression and osteolysis in metastatic human breast cancer cells.

Sterling JA(1), Oyajobi BO, Grubbs B, Padalecki SS, Munoz SA, Gupta A, Story B,
Zhao M, Mundy GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) is a major factor involved in
tumor-induced osteolysis caused by breast cancers that have metastasized to bone.
However, the molecular mechanisms that mediate PTHrP production by breast cancer 
cells are not entirely clear. We hypothesized that Gli2, a downstream
transcriptional effector of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, regulates PTHrP 
expression in metastatic breast cancer because the Hh pathway regulates
physiologic PTHrP expression in the developing growth plate. Here, we show that
Gli2 is expressed in several human cancer cell lines that cause osteolytic
lesions in vivo and produce PTHrP (MDA-MB-231, RWGT2, and PC-3) but is not
expressed in nonosteolytic cancer cell lines that do not secrete PTHrP (MCF-7,
ZR-75, and T47D). Transient expression of Gli2 in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast
cancer cells increased PTHrP promoter-luciferase activity dose dependently.
Stable expression of Gli2 in MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in an increase in PTHrP
protein in the conditioned medium. Alternatively, MDA-MB-231 cells stably
transfected with Gli2-EnR, a repressor of Gli2 activity, exhibited a 72% to 93%
decrease in PTHrP mRNA by quantitative real-time PCR when compared with control
cells. To examine the effects of Gli2 on breast cancer-mediated osteolysis in
vivo, athymic nude mice were inoculated with MDA-MB-231 cells stably expressing
Gli2 or the empty vector. Following tumor cell inoculation via the left cardiac
ventricle, Gli2-expressing tumors caused significantly more osteolysis. Together,
these data suggest that PTHrP expression and osteolysis in vivo in human breast
cancer cells is driven at least in part by Gli2.

PMID: 16885353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cell Cycle. 2006 Aug;5(15):1612-5. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

Hedgehog signal transduction: signal integration and cross talk in development
and cancer.

Riobo NA(1), Lu K, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Hedgehog (HH) signaling regulates a diversity of processes involved in
developmental patterning, stem cell growth and maintenance, and cancer etiology. 
Despite its biological importance, the HH signal transduction pathway remains
largely mysterious. Our past understanding of the HH pathway signaling components
and mechanisms came from groundbreaking genetic and biochemical studies in the
fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Some of these mechanisms are strikingly
conserved in vertebrates, although some specific aspects are clearly divergent.
In this article, we discuss recent findings for cross talk in HH signal
transduction with PI3K signaling through Akt, and with PKC-delta signaling
through MEK-1, indicating that these pathways converge to control the Gli
transcription factor. The integration of these convergent pathways on the
regulation of mammalian Sonic Hedgehog signaling highlights their potential
involvement in the control of HH-dependent events in development and
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16880744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(16):6197-208.

The zinc finger transcription factor Gli2 mediates bone morphogenetic protein 2
expression in osteoblasts in response to hedgehog signaling.

Zhao M(1), Qiao M, Harris SE, Chen D, Oyajobi BO, Mundy GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
zhaom0@uthscsa.edu

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) plays a critical role in osteoblast
function. In Drosophila, Cubitus interruptus (Ci), which mediates hedgehog
signaling, regulates gene expression of dpp, the ortholog of mammalian BMP-2.
Null mutation of the transcription factor Gli2, a mammalian homolog of Ci,
results in severe skeletal abnormalities in mice. We hypothesize that Gli2
regulates BMP-2 gene transcription and thus osteoblast differentiation. In the
present study, we show that overexpression of Gli2 enhances BMP-2 promoter
activity and mRNA expression in osteoblast precursor cells. In contrast, knocking
down Gli2 expression by Gli2 small interfering RNA or genetic ablation of the
Gli2 gene results in significant inhibition of BMP-2 gene expression in
osteoblasts. Promoter analyses, including chromatin immunoprecipitation and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, provided direct evidence that Gli2
physically interacts with the BMP-2 promoter. Functional studies showed that Gli2
is required for osteoblast maturation in a BMP-2-dependent manner. Finally, Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) stimulates BMP-2 promoter activity and osteoblast differentiation,
and the effects of Shh are mediated by Gli2. Taken together, these results
indicate that Gli2 mediates hedgehog signaling in osteoblasts and is a powerful
activator of BMP-2 gene expression, which is required in turn for normal
osteoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1592805
PMID: 16880529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jun;5(6):674-83. Epub 2006 Jun 18.

Hedgehog signaling and response to cyclopamine differ in epithelial and stromal
cells in benign breast and breast cancer.

Mukherjee S(1), Frolova N, Sadlonova A, Novak Z, Steg A, Page GP, Welch DR,
Lobo-Ruppert SM, Ruppert JM, Johnson MR, Frost AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.

The hedgehog pathway regulates epithelial-mesenchymal interactions,
differentiation, proliferation and survival during development. Stimulation of
hedgehog signaling induces carcinogenesis or promotes cell survival in cancers of
multiple organs. Using real-time, quantitative PCR, laser capture
microdissection, and immunohistochemistry, distinctive patterns of expression of 
the hedgehog pathway members patched 1 (PTCH1), smoothened, GLI1, GLI2 and the 3 
hedgehog ligands were identified for epithelial cells and stromal fibroblasts in 
benign breast and breast cancer. Hedgehog ligands were expressed at higher levels
in some cancer epithelial cell lines compared to noncancerous epithelial cells.
Correspondingly, expression of GLI1, a transcription factor and transcriptional
product of hedgehog signaling, was increased 8-fold in cancer epithelial cell
lines; however, PTCH1, also a transcriptional target of hedgehog signaling in
many cell types, was not increased. GLI1 protein and mRNA, and PTCH1 and sonic
hedgehog (SHH) proteins were elevated in 3 of 10 breast cancers; however, PTCH1
transcripts were not consistently increased. Hedgehog-mediated transcription, as 
indicated by a reporter of GLI-dependent promoter activity and by expression of
GLI1 transcripts, was reduced by the hedgehog pathway inhibitor cyclopamine in
both MDA-MB-435 cancer epithelial cells and MCF10AT epithelial cells, a cell line
derived from benign breast. However, cyclopamine reduced viability of cancer
epithelial cell lines, including MDA-MB-435, but did not specifically affect
fibroblasts or epithelial cells from benign breast, including MCF10AT. Treatment 
with sonic hedgehog ligand diminished the cyclopamine-induced reduction in
GLI-dependent promoter activity in MCF10AT and MDA-MB-435 and viability of
MDA-MB-435. These results demonstrate modulation of GLI-mediated transcription in
both cancer and benign-derived epithelial cells by cyclopamine and sonic
hedgehog, and further suggest that hedgehog signaling contributes to the survival
of only the cancer epithelial cells. Determination as to whether the increase in 
GLI1 and SHH expression in breast cancer indicates a significant increase in
hedgehog signaling will require further evaluation.

PMCID: PMC1557635
PMID: 16855373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Biol. 2006 Aug 15;296(2):499-513. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

The role of floor plate contact in the elaboration of contralateral commissural
projections within the embryonic mouse spinal cord.

Kadison SR(1), Murakami F, Matise MP, Kaprielian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Kennedy Center Rm. 624, 1410 Pelham Parkway 
South, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. skadison@aecom.yu.edu

In vertebrate embryos, commissural axons extend toward and across the floor plate
(FP), an intermediate target at the ventral midline (VM) of the spinal cord.
After decussating, many commissural axons turn into the longitudinal plane and
elaborate diverse projections. FP contact is thought to alter the responsiveness 
of these axons so that they can exit the FP and adopt new trajectories. However, 
a requirement for the FP in shaping contralateral commissural projections has not
been established in higher vertebrates. Here we further analyze to what extent FP
contact is necessary for the elaboration of decussated commissural projections
both in cultured, FP-excised spinal cord preparations and in gli2-deficient mice,
which lack a FP. In FP-lacking spinal cords, we observe a large number of
appropriately projecting contralateral commissural projections in vivo and in
vitro. Surprisingly, even though gli2 mutants lack a FP, slit1-3 mRNA and their
receptors (Robo1/2) are expressed in a wild-type-like manner. In addition,
blocking Robo-Slit interactions in FP-lacking spinal cord explants prevents
commissural axons from leaving the VM and turning longitudinally. Thus, compared 
to FP contact, Slit-Robo interactions are more critical for driving commissural
axons out of the VM and facilitating the elaboration of a subset of contralateral
commissural projections.

PMID: 16854408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 1;66(13):6606-14.

Hair cycle-dependent basal cell carcinoma tumorigenesis in Ptc1neo67/+ mice
exposed to radiation.

Mancuso M(1), Leonardi S, Tanori M, Pasquali E, Pierdomenico M, Rebessi S, Di
Majo V, Covelli V, Pazzaglia S, Saran A.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Radiation Protection Unit, Ente per le Nuove Tecnologie,
l'Energia e l'Ambiente, CR-Casaccia, Via Anguillarese 301, 00060 Rome, Italy.

We examined the effects of hair cycle phase on basal cell carcinoma (BCC)
tumorigenesis induced by radiation in mice lacking one Patched allele
(Ptc1(neo67/+)). Our results show that Ptc1(neo67/+) mouse skin irradiated in
early anagen is highly susceptible to tumor induction, as a 3.2-fold incidence of
visible BCC-like tumors was observed in anagen-irradiated compared with
telogen-irradiated mice. Microscopic nodular BCC-like tumors were also enhanced
by irradiation during active hair-follicle growth phases. Interestingly,
histologic examination of the tumors revealed a qualitative difference in BCC
tumorigenesis depending on hair growth phase at the time of exposure. In fact, in
addition to typical BCC-like tumors, we observed development of a distinct basal 
cell tumor subtype characterized by anti-cytokeratin 14 and anti-smooth muscle
actin reactivity. These tumors showed relatively short latency and rapid growth
and were strictly dependent on age at irradiation, as they occurred only in mice 
irradiated in early anagen phase. Examination of anatomic and immunohistochemical
relationships revealed a close relation of these tumors with the follicular outer
root sheath of anagen skin. In contrast, there are strong indications for the
derivation of typical, smooth muscle actin-negative BCC-like tumors from cell
progenitors of interfollicular epidermis. These results underscore the role of
follicular bulge stem cells and their progeny with high self-renewal capacity in 
the formation of basal cell tumors and contribute to clarify the relationship
between target cell and tumor phenotype in BCC tumorigenesis induced by
radiation.

PMID: 16818633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6063-71.

Hedgehog signaling and Bmi-1 regulate self-renewal of normal and malignant human 
mammary stem cells.

Liu S(1), Dontu G, Mantle ID, Patel S, Ahn NS, Jackson KW, Suri P, Wicha MS.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0946, USA.

The epithelial components of the mammary gland are thought to arise from stem
cells with a capacity for self-renewal and multilineage differentiation.
Furthermore, these cells and/or their immediate progeny may be targets for
transformation. We have used both in vitro cultivation and a xenograft mouse
model to examine the role of hedgehog signaling and Bmi-1 in regulating
self-renewal of normal and malignant human mammary stem cells. We show that
hedgehog signaling components PTCH1, Gli1, and Gli2 are highly expressed in
normal human mammary stem/progenitor cells cultured as mammospheres and that
these genes are down-regulated when cells are induced to differentiate.
Activation of hedgehog signaling increases mammosphere-initiating cell number and
mammosphere size, whereas inhibition of the pathway results in a reduction of
these effects. These effects are mediated by the polycomb gene Bmi-1.
Overexpression of Gli2 in mammosphere-initiating cells results in the production 
of ductal hyperplasia, and modulation of Bmi-1 expression in
mammosphere-initiating cells alters mammary development in a humanized nonobese
diabetic-severe combined immunodeficient mouse model. Furthermore, we show that
the hedgehog signaling pathway is activated in human breast "cancer stem cells"
characterized as CD44+CD24-/lowLin-. These studies support a cancer stem cell
model in which the hedgehog pathway and Bmi-1 play important roles in regulating 
self-renewal of normal and tumorigenic human mammary stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4386278
PMID: 16778178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Pathol. 2006 Aug;209(4):501-11.

Peripheral chondrosarcoma progression is accompanied by decreased Indian Hedgehog
signalling.

Hameetman L(1), Rozeman LB, Lombaerts M, Oosting J, Taminiau AH, Cleton-Jansen
AM, Bovée JV, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Centre, The Netherlands.

Hedgehog (HH) signalling is important for specific developmental processes, and
aberrant, increased activity has been described in various tumours. Disturbed HH 
signalling has also been implicated in the hereditary syndrome, Multiple
Osteochondromas. Indian Hedgehog (IHH), together with parathyroid hormone-like
hormone (PTHLH), participates in the organization of growth plates in long bones.
PTHLH signalling is absent in osteochondromas, benign tumours arising adjacent to
the growth plate, but is reactivated when these tumours undergo malignant
transformation towards secondary peripheral chondrosarcoma. We describe a gradual
decrease in the expression of Patched (PTCH) and glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 1 (GLI1) (both transcribed upon IHH activity), and GLI2 with increasing
malignancy, suggesting that IHH signalling is inactive and PTHLH signalling is
IHH independent in secondary peripheral chondrosarcomas. cDNA expression
profiling and immunohistochemical studies suggest that transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta)-mediated proliferative signalling is active in high-grade 
chondrosarcomas since TGF-beta downstream targets were upregulated in these
tumours. This is accompanied by downregulation of energy metabolism-related genes
and upregulation of the proto-oncogene jun B. Thus, the tight regulation of
growth plate organization by IHH signalling is still seen in osteochondroma, but 
gradually lost during malignant transformation to secondary peripheral
chondrosarcoma and subsequent progression. TGF-beta signalling is stimulated
during secondary peripheral chondrosarcoma progression and could potentially
regulate the retained activity of PTHLH.

Copyright 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 16755518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Oct 1;140(19):2142-5.

Holoprosencephaly: clinical evaluation on audiological and brainstem
electrophysiological profiles.

Antoneli MZ(1), Zanchetta S, Zorzetto NL, Ribeiro LA, Richieri-Costa A.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Genética Clínica, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias
Craniofaciais, Universidade de São Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

This study evaluated audiological and electrophysiological profiles in 13
patients with holoprosencephaly. All patients had imaging evaluation by magnetic 
resonance imaging and molecular screening for the genes SHH, GLI2, and SIX3. Each
patient underwent clinical (otological and vestibular antecedents, otoscopy) and 
instrumental (tympanometry, auditory brainstem response--ABR) evaluation to
compare hearing and the electrophysiological profile possibly occurring in
patients with these mutations. To our knowledge there are no systematic studies
correlating molecular/imaging and evoked potentials in patients with HPE. Here,
we discuss the audiological and electrophysiological profiles of patients and the
possible role of the genes studied on the overall findings.

PMID: 16718676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):13-25. Epub 2006 May 16.

Functional compensation in Hedgehog signaling during mouse prostate development.

Doles J(1), Cook C, Shi X, Valosky J, Lipinski R, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Box 3236 Clinical
Science Center-G5, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Studies of hedgehog signaling in prostate development using anti-Shh antibodies, 
chemical inhibitors of hedgehog signaling and Shh(-/-) mutant mice have yielded
conflicting data regarding the requirements of hedgehog signaling for normal
ductal budding and glandular morphogenesis. We used transgenic mouse models in
combination with chemical inhibitors and renal grafting to clarify the role of Hh
signaling in prostate development. These studies showed that genetic loss of Shh 
is accompanied by an up-regulation of Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) and maintenance of Hh
pathway activity. We found that while neither Gli1 nor Gli3 are required for
normal prostate ductal budding, the urogenital sinus (UGS) of the Gli2(-/-)
mutant mouse displays aberrant ductal budding in utero. When grown as a
subcapsular graft, the Gli2(-/-) UGS exhibited prostatic differentiation but also
displayed areas of focal epithelial hyperplasia. Functional redundancy between
the three Gli transcription factors appears to mitigate the effect of Gli2 LOF as
evidenced by residual Hh pathway activity in the E14 Gli2(-/-) UGS that could be 
inhibited by cyclopamine treatment. Together, these studies reveal a surprising
degree of functional redundancy operating both at the level of the ligand and at 
the level of transcriptional regulation that effectively mitigates phenotypes
associated with Hh-signaling perturbations.

PMID: 16707121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):219-31. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Lef1 is required for the transition of Wnt signaling from mesenchymal to
epithelial cells in the mouse embryonic mammary gland.

Boras-Granic K(1), Chang H, Grosschedl R, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, 6318 Medical Sciences
Building, 1 King's College Road, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
M5S 1A8.

Inductive reciprocal signaling between mesenchymal and adjacent epithelia gives
rise to skin appendages such as hair follicles and mammary glands. Lef1-mediated 
canonical Wnt signaling is required for morphogenesis of these skin appendages
during embryogenesis. In order to define the role of canonical Wnt signaling
during early embryonic mammary gland development, we determined the temporal and 
spatial changes in Wnt signaling during embryogenesis in wild-type and
Lef1-deficient embryos harboring a Tcf/Lef1-betagal reporter (TOPGAL) transgene. 
In contrast to previous studies using TOPGAL mice from a distinct founder, we
observe that Wnt signaling acts initially on mesenchymal cells associated with
the sequential appearance of mammary placodes. As placode development progresses 
between 12.5 and 15.5 dpc, Wnt signaling progressively accumulates in the mammary
epithelial compartment. By 18.5 dpc, betagal activity is confined to mesenchymal 
and epithelial cells near the nipple region. In Lef1-deficient embryos, the
transition of Wnt signaling from mesenchyme to the mammary epithelia is blocked
for placodes #1, 4 and 5 despite the expression of Tcf1 in epithelial cells.
These placodes ultimately disappear by 15.5 dpc, while placodes 2 and 3 typically
did not form in the absence of Lef1. Progressive loss of placodes 1, 4, and 5 is 
accompanied by increased apoptosis in mesenchymal cells adjacent to the mammary
epithelial placodes. While factors important for embryonic mammary gland
development, such as FGF7, are expressed normally in Lef1-deficient animals, one 
mediator of the Hedgehog (Hh)-signaling pathway is aberrantly expressed.
Specifically, Shh, Ihh, and Gli2 are expressed in mammary epithelial cells at
levels in Lef1-deficient animals similar to wild-type littermates. However, the
signal for Ptc-1 is strongly reduced in mesenchymal cells surrounding the mammary
placode in Lef1 mutants relative to wild-type embryos. The loss of Ptc-1, both a 
receptor for and transcriptional target of Hh signaling, suggests that Hh
signaling is blocked in Lef1-deficient embryos. Thus, these data reveal distinct 
requirements of different mammary placodes for Lef1-dependent Wnt signaling. They
further define dynamic changes in which cells integrate Lef1-dependent Wnt
signaling during progression of embryonic mammary gland development.

PMID: 16678815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 14;281(28):19320-6. Epub 2006 May 1.

Gli2 is targeted for ubiquitination and degradation by beta-TrCP ubiquitin
ligase.

Bhatia N(1), Thiyagarajan S, Elcheva I, Saleem M, Dlugosz A, Mukhtar H,
Spiegelman VS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays a crucial role in embryogenesis and has
been linked to the development of several human malignancies. The transcription
factor Gli2 plays a key role in the transduction of Hh signals by modulating
transcription of some Hh target genes, yet the mechanisms that control Gli2
protein expression are largely unknown. Here we report that beta-transducin
repeat-containing protein (beta-TrCP) E3 ubiquitin ligase is required for Gli2
degradation. beta-TrCP2 directly binds wild type Gli2 and promotes its
ubiquitination. Single amino acid substitution in Gli2 putative binding site
inhibits its interaction with beta-TrCP2, its ubiquitination, and stabilizes the 
Gli2 protein. Stable Gli2 mutant is expressed in higher levels and is more potent
in the activation of Gli-dependent transcription as compared with wild type Gli2.
We also found that GLI2 protein is expressed highly in prostate cancer cell lines
and primary tumors, whereas the level of GLI2 mRNA is not appreciably different
in normal and neoplastic prostate. These data identify beta-TrCP2 as a pivotal
regulator of Gli2 expression and point to an important role for posttranslational
modulation of GLI2 protein levels in Hh pathway-associated human prostate cancer.

PMID: 16651270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Clin Genet. 2006 May;69(5):441-3.

Hemizygosity for chromosome 2q14.2-q22.1 spanning the GLI2 and PROC genes
associated with growth hormone deficiency, polydactyly, deep vein thrombosis and 
urogenital abnormalities.

Gustavsson P, Schoumans J, Staaf J, Jönsson G, Carlsson F, Kristoffersson U, Borg
A, Nordenskjöld M, Dahl N.

PMID: 16650085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 May;26(9):3365-77.

Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates Gli2 transcriptional activity by suppressing
its processing and degradation.

Pan Y(1), Bai CB, Joyner AL, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, Room W404, New 
York, NY 10021, USA.

Gli2 and Gli3 are the primary transcription factors that mediate Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) signals in the mouse. Gli3 mainly acts as a transcriptional repressor,
because the majority of full-length Gli3 protein is proteolytically processed.
Gli2 is mostly regarded as a transcriptional activator, even though it is also
suggested to have a weak repressing activity. What the molecular basis for its
possible dual function is and how its activity is regulated by Shh signaling are 
largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that unlike the results seen with Gli3 and
Cubitus Interruptus, the fly homolog of Gli, only a minor fraction of Gli2 is
proteolytically processed to form a transcriptional repressor in vivo and that in
addition to being processed, Gli2 full-length protein is readily degraded. The
degradation of Gli2 requires the phosphorylation of a cluster of numerous serine 
residues in its carboxyl terminus by protein kinase A and subsequently by casein 
kinase 1 and glycogen synthase kinase 3. The phosphorylated Gli2 interacts
directly with betaTrCP in the SCF ubiquitin-ligase complex through two binding
sites, which results in Gli2 ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the
proteasome. Both processing and degradation of Gli2 are suppressed by Shh
signaling in vivo. Our findings provide the first demonstration of a molecular
mechanism by which the Gli2 transcriptional activity is regulated by Shh
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1447407
PMID: 16611981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Aquat Toxicol. 2006 Jun 15;78(2):103-13. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Impairment of lower jaw growth in developing zebrafish exposed to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and reduced hedgehog expression.

Teraoka H(1), Dong W, Okuhara Y, Iwasa H, Shindo A, Hill AJ, Kawakami A, Hiraga
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen
University, Ebetsu 069-8501, Japan. hteraoka@rakuno.ac.jp

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has been shown to cause a multitude of
detrimental effects to developing zebrafish (Danio rerio). Previously, we
demonstrated that jaw growth was impaired by TCDD exposure, but the exact
mechanism underlying these malformations remained unknown. In the present study, 
we investigated the involvement of hedgehog genes and their downstream signaling 
in TCDD-mediated jaw malformation. We demonstrate that the developing lower jaw
expresses sonic hedgehog a (shha), sonic hedgehog b (shhb) and their receptors,
patched1 (ptc1) and patched2 (ptc2), as well as the downstream transcription
factors, gli1 and gli2a. Loss of Hh signaling in mutants (sonic you) and larvae
treated with a Hh inhibitor (cyclopamine), resulted in similar effects as those
caused by TCDD. Moreover, TCDD exposure caused downregulation of shha and shhb in
a manner dependent on aryl hydrocarbon receptor 2 (ahr2). Although this suggested
an involvement of Hh signaling in TCDD-mediated impairment of jaw growth, we did 
not observe downregulation of ptc1 and ptc2, receptors dependent on Hh signaling.
Furthermore, while the overall occurrence of apoptosis in the developing jaw was 
minimal, it was significantly increased in larvae treated with cyclopamine. In
contrast, both TCDD and cyclopamine markedly reduced immunoreactivity against
phosphorylated histone 3, a cell proliferation marker in the developing jaw.
Taken together, our data suggest that Ahr2-mediated downregulation of Hh
signaling, leading to a failure of cell proliferation, contributes to TCDD
induced inhibition of lower jaw growth. TCDD may impair jaw growth through other 
pathway(s) in addition to Hh signaling.

PMID: 16580747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Development. 2006 May;133(9):1799-809. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Sonic hedgehog regulates Gli activator and repressor functions with spatial and
temporal precision in the mid/hindbrain region.

Blaess S(1), Corrales JD, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The midbrain and anterior hindbrain offer an ideal system in which to study the
coordination of tissue growth and patterning in three dimensions. Two organizers 
that control anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (DV) development are known,
and the regulation of AP patterning by Fgf8 has been studied in detail. Much less
is known about the mechanisms that control mid/hindbrain development along the DV
axis. Using a conditional mutagenesis approach, we have determined how the
ventrally expressed morphogen sonic hedgehog (Shh) directs mid/hindbrain
development over time and space through positive regulation of the Gli activators
(GliA) and inhibition of the Gli3 repressor (Gli3R). We have discovered that
Gli2A-mediated Shh signaling sequentially induces ventral neurons along the
medial to lateral axis, and only before midgestation. Unlike in the spinal cord, 
Shh signaling plays a major role in patterning of dorsal structures (tectum and
cerebellum). This function of Shh signaling involves inhibition of Gli3R and
continues after midgestation. Gli3R levels also regulate overall growth of the
mid/hindbrain region, and this largely involves the suppression of cell death.
Furthermore, inhibition of Gli3R by Shh signaling is required to sustain
expression of the AP organizer gene Fgf8. Thus, the precise spatial and temporal 
regulation of Gli2A and Gli3R by Shh is instrumental in coordinating
mid/hindbrain development in three dimensions.

PMID: 16571630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Development. 2006 May;133(9):1811-21. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

The level of sonic hedgehog signaling regulates the complexity of cerebellar
foliation.

Corrales JD(1), Blaess S, Mahoney EM, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, 540 First Avenue New York, NY 10016, USA.

Foliation of the mouse cerebellum occurs primarily during the first 2 weeks after
birth and is accompanied by tremendous proliferation of granule cell precursors
(GCPs). We have previously shown that sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling correlates
spatially and temporally with fissure formation, and that Gli2 is the main
activator driving Shh induced proliferation of embryonic GCPs. Here, we have
tested whether the level of Shh signaling regulates the extent of cerebellar
foliation. By progressively lowering signaling by removing Gli1 and Gli2 or the
Shh receptor smoothened, we found the extent of foliation is gradually reduced,
and that this correlates with a decrease in the duration of GCP proliferation.
Importantly, the pattern of the remaining fissures in the mutants corresponds to 
the first fissures that form during normal development. In a complementary
manner, an increase in the level and length of Shh signaling results in formation
of an extra fissure in a position conserved in rat. The complexity of cerebellar 
foliation varies greatly between vertebrate species. Our studies have uncovered a
mechanism by which the level and length of Shh signaling could be integral to
determining the distinct number of fissures in each species.

PMID: 16571625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jul 1;312(11):1925-38. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Unique and complimentary activities of the Gli transcription factors in Hedgehog 
signaling.

Lipinski RJ(1), Gipp JJ, Zhang J, Doles JD, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, Madison, WI 53705-222, USA.

The Gli family of transcription factors (Gli1, 2 and 3) mediate the Hedgehog
morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of downstream target genes.
Aberrations in Hedgehog signaling seriously affect vertebrate development.
Postnatally, Hedgehog signaling has been postulated to play a pivotal role in
healing and repair processes and inappropriate pathway activation has been
implicated in several types of cancers. To better understand both the upstream
regulation of the Gli transcription factors, as well as their unique and
combinatorial roles in regulating the expression of Hedgehog target genes, we
have characterized embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Gli mutant mice. Stimulation
of wild-type MEFs by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) peptide elicited unique profiles of
induction of Hedgehog target genes Gli1, Ptc1, and Hip1. Gli2 loss-of-function
was associated with diminished Shh-induced target gene expression, while Gli3
loss-of-function was associated with increased basal and Shh-induced target gene 
expression. The loss of Gli1 alone had no effect on target gene induction but did
diminish Shh-induced target gene expression when combined with the loss of Gli2
or Gli3. Additionally, overexpression of Gli1 induced target gene expression in
Gli2(-/-)3(-/-) MEFs, while Shh stimulation did not. Using MEFs expressing only
Gli2 or Gli3, we found that both cyclopamine and the PKA activator forskolin
inhibited target gene induction mediated by Gli2 and Gli3. These results
demonstrate that Gli2 and Gli3 share common regulatory mechanisms and modulate
Hedgehog target gene expression directly and independently while also regulating 
Gli1 expression, which in specific contexts, coordinately contributes to target
gene activation.

PMID: 16571352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Mol Biol. 2006 Mar 23;7:13.

A potential role of alternative splicing in the regulation of the transcriptional
activity of human GLI2 in gonadal tissues.

Speek M(1), Njunkova O, Pata I, Valdre E, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee
15, 19086 Tallinn, Estonia. smart@kbfi.ee

BACKGROUND: Mammalian Gli proteins are important transcription factors involved
in the regulation of Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway. Association of
Gli2 with mammalian development and human disease led us to study the structure
and expression of the human GLI2.
RESULTS: We show that the region encoding GLI2 repressor domain is subject to
alternative splicing in the gonadal tissues and different cell lines. Two major
alternatively spliced forms of GLI2 mRNA arise from skipping exon 3 (GLI2Delta3) 
or exons 4 and 5 (GLI2Delta4-5). Both forms contain premature translational stop 
codons in the GLI2 open reading frame (ORF) starting from exon 2. Translation of 
GLI2Delta3 and GLI2Delta4-5 in vitro, initiated from downstream AUG codons,
produced N-terminally truncated proteins. In Gli-dependent transactivation assay,
expression of GLI2Delta3 induced activation of the reporter gene similar to that 
of the full-length construct (GLI2fl) containing complete ORF. However,
expression of the GLI2Delta4-5 resulted in about 10-fold increase in activation, 
suggesting that deletion of the major part of repressor domain was responsible
for the enhanced activation of GLI2 protein.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that in addition to proteolytic processing,
alternative splicing may be another important regulatory mechanism for the
modulation of repressor and activator properties of GLI2 protein.

PMCID: PMC1435915
PMID: 16553965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 21;103(12):4505-10. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Phosphoinositide 3-kinase and Akt are essential for Sonic Hedgehog signaling.

Riobó NA(1), Lu K, Ai X, Haines GM, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 1157 BRBII/III, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Hedgehogs (Hhs) are key signaling regulators of stem cell maintenance and tissue 
patterning in embryos, and activating mutations in the pathway that increase Gli 
transcriptional activity are causal in a diversity of cancers. Here, we report
that phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-kinase)-dependent Akt activation is essential
for Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling in the specification of neuronal fates in
chicken neural explants, chondrogenic differentiation of 10T1/2 cells, and Gli
activation in NIH 3T3 cells. Stimulation of PI3-kinase/Akt by insulin-like growth
factor I potentiates Gli activation induced by low levels of Shh; however,
insulin-like growth factor I alone is insufficient to induce Gli-dependent
transcription. Protein kinase A (PKA) and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta
sequentially phosphorylate Gli2 at multiple sites, identified by mutagenesis,
thus resulting in a reduction of its transcriptional activity. Gli2 mutant
proteins in which the major PKA and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta
phosphorylation sites were mutated to alanine remain fully transcriptionally
active; however, PKA-mutant Gli2 functions independently of Akt signaling,
indicating that Akt positively regulates Shh signaling by controlling
PKA-mediated Gli inactivation. Our findings provide a basis for the synergistic
role of PI3-kinase/Akt in Hh signaling in embryonic development and Hh-dependent 
tumors.

PMCID: PMC1450201
PMID: 16537363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Immunol. 2006 Apr;7(4):418-26. Epub 2006 Mar 5.

Hedgehog signaling controls thymocyte progenitor homeostasis and differentiation 
in the thymus.

El Andaloussi A(1), Graves S, Meng F, Mandal M, Mashayekhi M, Aifantis I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Rheumatology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Commitment of hematopoietic progenitors to the T cell lineage requires the
integration of multiple signaling pathways. Evidence has suggested involvement of
hedgehog (Hh) signaling in T cell differentiation through its signal transducer
smoothened (Smo). However, the precise function of the Hh pathway remains
controversial, mainly because T cell-specific in vivo genetic models have not
been used. Using pre-T cell-specific, mature T cell-specific and
poly(I).poly(C)-inducible deletions of Smo and antagonists of Smo signaling, we
report here that Hh is an essential positive regulator of T cell progenitor
differentiation. Furthermore, we localize Hh function to a stage preceding pre-T 
cell receptor signaling, connect Smo signaling to the activity of the Gli1 and
Gli2 transcription factors and demonstrate that Hh affects regulators of
thymocyte survival and proliferation.

PMID: 16518394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Jun;290(6):G1280-8. Epub 2006 Jan
26.

Increased apoptosis and accelerated epithelial migration following inhibition of 
hedgehog signaling in adaptive small bowel postresection.

Tang Y(1), Swietlicki EA, Jiang S, Buhman KK, Davidson NO, Burkly LC, Levin MS,
Rubin DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, MO 63110, USA.

The intestinal epithelium undergoes a marked adaptive response following loss of 
functional small bowel surface area characterized by increased crypt cell
proliferation and increased enterocyte migration from crypt to villus tip,
resulting in villus hyperplasia and enhanced nutrient absorption. Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling plays a critical role in regulating epithelial-mesenchymal interactions
during morphogenesis of the embryonic intestine. Our previous studies showed that
blocking Hh signaling in neonatal mice results in increased small intestinal
epithelial crypt cell proliferation and altered enterocyte fat absorption and
morphology. Hh family members are also expressed in the adult intestine, but
their role in the mature small bowel is unclear. With the use of a model of
intestinal adaptation following partial small bowel resection, the role of Hh
signaling in the adult gut was examined by determining the effects of blocking Hh
signaling on the regenerative response following loss of functional surface area.
Hh-inactivating monoclonal antibodies or control antibodies were administered to 
mice that sustained a 50% intestinal resection. mRNA analyses of the preoperative
ileum by quantitative real-time PCR revealed that Indian hedgehog was the most
abundant Hh family member. The Hh receptor Patched was more abundant than Patched
2. Analyses of downstream targets of Hh signaling demonstrated that Gli3 was
twofold more abundant than Gli1 and Gli2 and that bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)2 was most highly expressed compared with BMP1, -4, and -7. Following
intestinal resection, the expression of Hh, Patched, Gli, and most BMP genes was 
markedly downregulated in the remnant ileum, and, in anti-Hh antibody-treated
mice, expression of Patched 2 and Gli 1 was further suppressed. In Hh
antibody-treated mice following resection, the enterocyte migration rate from
crypt to villus tip was increased, and by 2 wk postoperation, apoptosis was
increased in the adaptive gut. However, crypt cell proliferation, villus height, 
and crypt depth were not augmented. These data indicate that Hh signaling plays a
role in adult gut epithelial homeostasis by regulating epithelial cell migration 
from crypt to villus tip and by enhancing apoptosis.

PMID: 16439469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genomics. 2006 May;87(5):616-32. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Overlapping and distinct transcriptional regulator properties of the GLI1 and
GLI2 oncogenes.

Eichberger T(1), Sander V, Schnidar H, Regl G, Kasper M, Schmid C, Plamberger S, 
Kaser A, Aberger F, Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The GLI transcription factors mediate the hedgehog signal in development and
carcinogenesis. Basal cell carcinoma can be caused by overexpression of either
GLI1 or GLI2. Though GLI1 and GLI2 have identical or very similar DNA binding
specificities, some of their activities are overlapping, some are clearly
distinct. We analyzed target gene specificities of GLI1 and constitutively active
GLI2 (GLI2DeltaN) by global expression profiling in an inducible,
well-characterized HaCaT keratinocyte expression system. Four hundred fifty-six
genes up- or downregulated at least twofold were identified. GLI target gene
profiles correlated well with the biological activities of these transcription
factors in hair follicles and basal cell carcinoma. Upregulation of largely
overlapping sets of target genes was effected by both factors, repression
occurred predominantly in response to GLI2. Also, significant quantitative
differences in response to GLI1 and GLI2DeltaN were found for a small number of
activated genes. Since we have not detected a putative processed GLI2 repressor, 
these results point to specific but indirect target gene repression by GLI2DeltaN
via preferential activation of one or more negative regulators.

PMID: 16434164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;66(2):839-45.

Protein kinase C-delta and mitogen-activated protein/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase-1 control GLI activation in hedgehog signaling.

Riobo NA(1), Haines GM, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

One third of all lethal cancers are associated with excessive activation of the
Hedgehog (HH) pathway by mutations of its signaling components or by increased
responsiveness of cells to the HH ligand. HH signaling through the GLI
transcription factors leads to increased cell proliferation by up-regulation of
the extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) pathway and by expression of S phase
cyclins. In this study, we have tested the hypothesis that the HH pathway can
integrate ERK signaling to modulate the activity of GLI. Using NIH 3T3 cells, we 
show that phorbol esters, acting through protein kinase C-delta (PKCdelta) and
mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 (MEK-1), fully 
stimulate the transcriptional activity of endogenous and overexpressed GLI
proteins, as assessed by GLI-luciferase reporter assays, and induce the
expression of endogenous GLI1 and PTCH-1 target genes, as assessed by reverse
transcription-PCR. Moreover, activation of GLI elicited by Sonic Hedgehog also
requires PKCdelta and MEK-1 function. Remarkably, coexpression of activated MEK-1
and GLI1 or GLI2 induced a 10-fold synergistic increase in GLI-luciferase
activity that was totally blocked by PD98059. The NH(2)-terminal region of GLI1
(amino acids 1-130) is required for sensing the ERK pathway, as deletion of this 
domain produces active GLI1 protein with greatly reduced response to activation
by MEK-1. Basic fibroblast growth factor activation of the ERK pathway also
stimulated GLI1 activity through its NH(2)-terminal domain. Our results identify 
PKCdelta and MEK-1 as essential, positive regulators of GLI-mediated HH
signaling. Furthermore, our findings suggest that tumors with deregulated HH and 
ERK synergize to stimulate cell proliferation pathways.

PMID: 16424016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Dev Biol. 2006 Mar 15;291(2):368-81. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Regulation of the Drosophila transcription factor, Cubitus interruptus, by two
conserved domains.

Croker JA(1), Ziegenhorn SL, Holmgren RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Robert H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208,
USA.

Hedgehog signaling is required for the development of many organisms, including
Drosophila. In flies, Hh patterns the embryonic epidermis and larval imaginal
discs by regulating the transcription factor, Cubitus interruptus (Ci). To date, 
three levels of regulation have been identified: proteolytic processing into a
repressor, nuclear import, and activation. In this report, we characterize the
function of two Ci domains that are conserved in the vertebrate homologues, GLI1,
GLI2, and GLI3. One domain includes the first two of five C(2)-H(2) zinc-fingers.
While conserved in all members of the GLI/Ci family, the first two fingers do not
appear to make significant contacts with the DNA target sequence. Ci protein
lacking this region is still able to interact with the cytoplasmic complex and
activate transcription in embryos and wing imaginal discs, but it is no longer
processed into the repressor form. The second domain, termed NR for "N-terminal
Regulatory", binds Suppressor of Fused. Deletion of this region has little effect
on embryonic patterning, but compromises cytoplasmic retention of Ci. Analysis of
the amino acid sequence of this domain identifies 11 perfectly conserved serines 
and one tyrosine. We propose that this region may be modified, possibly by
phosphorylation, to regulate Ci nuclear import.

PMID: 16413529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):569-78. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

GLI3-dependent transcriptional repression of Gli1, Gli2 and kidney patterning
genes disrupts renal morphogenesis.

Hu MC(1), Mo R, Bhella S, Wilson CW, Chuang PT, Hui CC, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Canada.

Truncating mutations in Gli3, an intracellular effector in the SHH-SMO-GLI
signaling pathway, cause renal aplasia/dysplasia in humans and mice. Yet, the
pathogenic mechanisms are undefined. Here, we report the effect of decreased
SHH-SMO signaling on renal morphogenesis, the expression of SHH target genes and 
GLI binding to Shh target genes. Shh deficiency or cyclopamine-mediated SMO
inhibition disrupted renal organogenesis, decreased expression of GLI1 and GLI2
proteins, but increased expression of GLI3 repressor relative to GLI3 activator. 
Shh deficiency decreased expression of kidney patterning genes (Pax2 and Sall1)
and cell cycle regulators (cyclin D1 and MYCN). Elimination of Gli3 in Shh(-/-)
mice rescued kidney malformation and restored expression of Pax2, Sall1, cyclin
D1, MYCN, Gli1 and Gli2. To define mechanisms by which SHH-SMO signaling controls
gene expression, we determined the binding of GLI proteins to 5' flanking regions
containing GLI consensus binding sequences in Shh target genes using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. In normal embryonic kidney tissue, GLI1 and/or GLI2 were
bound to each target gene. By contrast, treatment of embryonic kidney explants
with cyclopamine decreased GLI1 and/or GLI2 binding, and induced binding of GLI3.
However, cyclopamine failed to decrease Gli1 and Gli2 expression and branching
morphogenesis in Gli3-deficient embryonic kidney tissue. Together, these results 
demonstrate that SHH-SMO signaling controls renal morphogenesis via
transcriptional control of Gli, renal patterning and cell cycle regulator genes
in a manner that is opposed by GLI3.

PMID: 16396903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 1;290(1):1-12. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Mouse Rab23 regulates hedgehog signaling from smoothened to Gli proteins.

Eggenschwiler JT(1), Bulgakov OV, Qin J, Li T, Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10021, 
USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is required for the growth and patterning of many 
tissues in vertebrate embryos, but important aspects of the Shh signal
transduction pathway are poorly understood. For example, the vesicle transport
protein Rab23 is a cell autonomous negative regulator of Shh signaling, but the
process affected by Rab23 has not been defined. Here, we demonstrate that Rab23
acts upstream of Gli transcription factors in patterning neural cell types in the
spinal cord. Double mutant analysis indicates that the primary target of Rab23 is
the Gli2 activator and that Rab23 and Gli3 repressor have additive effects on
patterning. Analysis of Gli3 protein suggests that Rab23 also has a role in
promoting the production of Gli3 repressor. Although the membrane proteins
Patched and Smoothened change subcellular localization in response to Shh, double
mutant analysis demonstrates that Rab23 does not work through either Patched or
Smoothened. Instead, Rab23 appears to regulate subcellular localization of
essential components of the Hedgehog pathway that act downstream of Smoothened
and upstream of Gli proteins.

PMID: 16364285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Dyn. 2006 Mar;235(3):594-605.

Complementary Gli activity mediates early patterning of the mouse visual system.

Furimsky M(1), Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, Ottawa Health Research Institute and University of
Ottawa Eye Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. mfurimsky@ohri.ca

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway plays a key role in the development of
the vertebrate central nervous system, including the eye. This pathway is
mediated by the Gli transcription factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) that
differentially activate and repress the expression of specific downstream target 
genes. In this study, we investigated the roles of the three vertebrate Glis in
mediating midline Shh signaling in early ocular development. We examined the
ocular phenotypes of Shh and Gli combination mutant mouse embryos and monitored
proximodistal and dorsoventral patterning by the expression of specific eye
development regulatory genes using in situ hybridization. We show that midline
Shh signaling relieves the repressor activity of Gli3 adjacent to the midline and
then promotes eye pattern formation through the nonredundant activities of all
three Gli proteins. Gli3, in particular, is required to specify the dorsal optic 
stalk and to define the boundary between the optic stalk and the optic cup.

PMID: 16342201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS Genet. 2005 Dec;1(6):e64. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Medical sequencing of candidate genes for nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate.

Vieira AR(1), Avila JR, Daack-Hirsch S, Dragan E, Félix TM, Rahimov F, Harrington
J, Schultz RR, Watanabe Y, Johnson M, Fang J, O'Brien SE, Orioli IM, Castilla EE,
Fitzpatrick DR, Jiang R, Marazita ML, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Nonsyndromic or isolated cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P) occurs in 
wide geographic distribution with an average birth prevalence of 1/700. We used
direct sequencing as an approach to study candidate genes for CL/P. We report
here the results of sequencing on 20 candidate genes for clefts in 184 cases with
CL/P selected with an emphasis on severity and positive family history. Genes
were selected based on expression patterns, animal models, and/or role in known
human clefting syndromes. For seven genes with identified coding mutations that
are potentially etiologic, we performed linkage disequilibrium studies as well in
501 family triads (affected child/mother/father). The recently reported MSX1
P147Q mutation was also studied in an additional 1,098 cleft cases. Selected
missense mutations were screened in 1,064 controls from unrelated individuals on 
the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) diversity cell line panel. Our 
aggregate data suggest that point mutations in these candidate genes are likely
to contribute to 6% of isolated clefts, particularly those with more severe
phenotypes (bilateral cleft of the lip with cleft palate). Additional cases,
possibly due to microdeletions or isodisomy, were also detected and may
contribute to clefts as well. Sequence analysis alone suggests that point
mutations in FOXE1, GLI2, JAG2, LHX8, MSX1, MSX2, SATB2, SKI, SPRY2, and TBX10
may be rare causes of isolated cleft lip with or without cleft palate, and the
linkage disequilibrium data support a larger, as yet unspecified, role for
variants in or near MSX2, JAG2, and SKI. This study also illustrates the need to 
test large numbers of controls to distinguish rare polymorphic variants and
prioritize functional studies for rare point mutations.

PMCID: PMC1298935
PMID: 16327884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Differentiation. 2005 Oct;73(8):397-405.

Negative regulation of Gli1 and Gli2 activator function by Suppressor of fused
through multiple mechanisms.

Barnfield PC(1), Zhang X, Thanabalasingham V, Yoshida M, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Sick Children, Program in Developmental Biology, 101 College
Street, TMDT, Rm. 13-314, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1L7.

During animal development, the Hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction pathway plays
critical roles in cell fate determination and tissue patterning. In humans,
aberrant Hh signaling has been linked to several genetic disorders and cancers.
Binding of Hh to its receptor initiates a signaling cascade, which ultimately
results in the activation of the Gli/Ci transcription factors. Suppressor of
fused (Su(fu)) is a Gli/Ci-interacting protein, which acts as a negative
regulator of Hh signaling in Drosophila and vertebrates. Su(fu) is also
implicated as a tumor suppressor as its mutations have been found in
medulloblastoma and prostate cancer. Su(fu) is thought to act by preventing the
nuclear accumulation of Gli/Ci, however, mechanistic insight into its mode of
action has remained elusive. We demonstrate here that Su(fu) prevents the nuclear
accumulation of Gli1 and Gli2 through multiple mechanisms. While Su(fu) itself is
not subject to CRM1-dependent regulation, Su(fu) sequesters Gli1 in the cytoplasm
mostly through a mechanism that depends on the activity of the nuclear export
protein CRM1. In contrast, CRM1-mediated export is not required for Su(fu) to
sequester Gli2. Furthermore, we show that the N-terminus of Su(fu) is sufficient 
for Gli inactivation in the absence of cytoplasmic sequestration. Together, these
observations reveal that Su(fu) regulates the activity of Gli1 and Gli2 through
distinct cytoplasmic and nuclear mechanisms.

PMID: 16316410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Apr;290(4):L777-L789. Epub 2005 Nov 18.

Iroquois genes influence proximo-distal morphogenesis during rat lung
development.

van Tuyl M(1), Liu J, Groenman F, Ridsdale R, Han RN, Venkatesh V, Tibboel D,
Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Lung Biology, Hospital for Sick Children Research Inst., Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Lung development is a highly regulated process directed by mesenchymal-epithelial
interactions, which coordinate the temporal and spatial expression of multiple
regulatory factors required for proper lung formation. The Iroquois homeobox
(Irx) genes have been implicated in the patterning and specification of several
Drosophila and vertebrate organs, including the heart. Herein, we investigated
whether the Irx genes play a role in lung morphogenesis. We found that Irx1-3 and
Irx5 expression was confined to the branching lung epithelium, whereas Irx4 was
not expressed in the developing lung. Antisense knockdown of all pulmonary Irx
genes together dramatically decreased distal branching morphogenesis and
increased distention of the proximal tubules in vitro, which was accompanied by a
reduction in surfactant protein C-positive epithelial cells and an increase in
beta-tubulin IV and Clara cell secretory protein positive epithelial structures. 
Transmission electron microscopy confirmed the proximal phenotype of the
epithelial structures. Furthermore, antisense Irx knockdown resulted in loss of
lung mesenchyme and abnormal smooth muscle cell formation. Expression of
fibroblast growth factors (FGF) 1, 7, and 10, FGF receptor 2, bone morphogenetic 
protein 4, and Sonic hedgehog (Shh) were not altered in lung explants treated
with antisense Irx oligonucleotides. All four Irx genes were expressed in Shh-
and Gli(2)-deficient murine lungs. Collectively, these results suggest that Irx
genes are involved in the regulation of proximo-distal morphogenesis of the
developing lung but are likely not linked to the FGF, BMP, or Shh signaling
pathways.

PMID: 16299054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Neurosci. 2005 Nov 2;25(44):10119-30.

Molecular control of spinal accessory motor neuron/axon development in the mouse 
spinal cord.

Dillon AK(1), Fujita SC, Matise MP, Jarjour AA, Kennedy TE, Kollmus H, Arnold HH,
Weiner JA, Sanes JR, Kaprielian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA.

Within the developing vertebrate spinal cord, motor neuron subtypes are
distinguished by the settling positions of their cell bodies, patterns of gene
expression, and the paths their axons follow to exit the CNS. The inclusive set
of cues required to guide a given motor axon subtype from cell body to target has
yet to be identified, in any species. This is attributable, in part, to the
unavailability of markers that demarcate the complete trajectory followed by a
specific class of spinal motor axons. Most spinal motor neurons extend axons out 
of the CNS through ventral exit points. In contrast, spinal accessory motor
neurons (SACMNs) project dorsally directed axons through lateral exit points
(LEPs), and these axons assemble into the spinal accessory nerve (SAN). Here we
show that an antibody against BEN/ALCAM/SC1/DM-GRASP/MuSC selectively labels
mouse SACMNs and can be used to trace the pathfinding of SACMN axons. We use this
marker, together with a battery of transcription factor-deficient or guidance
cue/receptor-deficient mice to identify molecules required for distinct stages of
SACMN development. Specifically, we find that Gli2 is required for the initial
extension of axons from SACMN cell bodies, and that netrin-1 and its receptor Dcc
are required for the proper dorsal migration of these cells and the dorsally
directed extension of SACMN axons toward the LEPs. Furthermore, in the absence of
the transcription factor Nkx2.9, SACMN axons fail to exit the CNS. Together,
these findings suggest molecular mechanisms that are likely to regulate key steps
in SACMN development.

PMID: 16267219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Oct;4(10):1050-4. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastric cancer.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

Hedgehog, WNT, FGF and BMP signaling pathways network together during
embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Aberrant activation of
Hedgehog signaling pathway leads to pathological consequences in a variety of
human tumors, such as gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer. Endoscopic mucosal
resection (EMR), endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD), surgical gastrectomy and
chemotherapy are therapeutic options for gastric cancer; however, prognosis of
advanced gastric cancer patient is still poor. Here, Hedgehog signaling pathway
in human gastric cancer and its clinical applications will be reviewed. Human
SHH, IHH, DHH (Hedgehog homologs), HHAT (Hedgehog acyltransferase), HHIP
(Hedgehog-interacting protein), DISP1, DISP2, DISP3 (Dispatched homologs), PTCH1,
PTCH2 (Patched homologs), SMO (Smoothened homolog), KIF27, KIF7 (Costal-2
homologs), STK36 (Fused homolog), SUFU (SuFu homolog), DZIP1 (Iguana homolog),
GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (Cubitus interruptus homologs) are implicated in the Hedgehog
signaling. PTCH1, FOXM1 and CCND2 are direct transcriptional targets of Hedgehog 
signaling. Hedgehog signaling activation leads to cell proliferation through cell
cycle regulation. SHH regulates growth and differentiation within gastric mucosa 
through autocrine loop and FOXL1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. SHH
is implicated in stem/progenitor cell restitution of damaged gastric mucosa
during chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori. SHH up-regulation, IHH
upregulation and HHIP down-regulation lead to aberrant activation of Hedgehog
signaling through PTCH1 to GLI1 in gastric cancer. Small molecule compounds
targeted to SMO (KADD-cyclopamine, SANT1-4, Cur61414) as well as humanized
anti-SHH antibodies are potent anti-cancer drugs for gastric cancer. Cocktail of 
Hedgehog inhibitors would be developed as novel therapeutics for gastric cancer. 
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number polymorphism (CNP) of
Hedgehog signaling genes would be utilized for genetic screening of gastric
cancer, while cDNA-PCR, microarray and ELISA detecting aberrant Hedgehog
signaling activation would be utilized for therapeutic optional choice. Genetic
screening and precise selection of therapeutic options would contribute to the
realization of personalized medicine.

PMID: 16258256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS Genet. 2005 Oct;1(4):e53. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Gli2 and Gli3 localize to cilia and require the intraflagellar transport protein 
polaris for processing and function.

Haycraft CJ(1), Banizs B, Aydin-Son Y, Zhang Q, Michaud EJ, Yoder BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins are essential for cilia assembly and have
recently been associated with a number of developmental processes, such as
left-right axis specification and limb and neural tube patterning. Genetic
studies indicate that IFT proteins are required for Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling downstream of the Smoothened and Patched membrane proteins but upstream
of the Glioma (Gli) transcription factors. However, the role that IFT proteins
play in transduction of Shh signaling and the importance of cilia in this process
remain unknown. Here we provide insights into the mechanism by which defects in
an IFT protein, Tg737/Polaris, affect Shh signaling in the murine limb bud. Our
data show that loss of Tg737 results in altered Gli3 processing that abrogates
Gli3-mediated repression of Gli1 transcriptional activity. In contrast to the
conclusions drawn from genetic analysis, the activity of Gli1 and truncated forms
of Gli3 (Gli3R) are unaffected in Tg737 mutants at the molecular level,
indicating that Tg737/Polaris is differentially involved in specific activities
of the Gli proteins. Most important, a negative regulator of Shh signaling,
Suppressor of fused, and the three full-length Gli transcription factors localize
to the distal tip of cilia in addition to the nucleus. Thus, our data support a
model where cilia have a direct role in Gli processing and Shh signal
transduction.

PMCID: PMC1270009
PMID: 16254602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):984-91.

Gli3 null mice display glandular overgrowth of the developing stomach.

Kim JH(1), Huang Z, Mo R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Integrative Biology, The Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Canada. jae.kim@sickkids.ca

The role of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in various aspects of gut development 
is still poorly understood. In the developing stomach, Sonic (Shh) and Indian
(Ihh) hedgehog are expressed in both distinct and overlapping regions. Loss of
Sonic hedgehog function in the stomach results in a glandular phenotype of
intestinal transformation and overgrowth. These changes are reminiscent of the
pre-malignant lesion, intestinal metaplasia. To determine the role of
Hedgehog-related transcription factors, Gli2 and Gli3, in Shh signaling during
stomach development, we conducted a mutant analysis of glandular stomach from
Shh, Gli2, and Gli3 mutant mice. Although Gli2 principally mediates the activator
function of Shh, surprisingly we observed minimal changes in glandular
development in the Gli2 mutant stomach. Furthermore, Gli3, which typically
functions as a repressor of Hedgehog signal, showed a striking phenocopy of the
glandular expansion and intestinal transformation found in Shh mutant stomach. A 
reduction in apoptotic events was seen in all mutant stomachs with no appreciable
changes in proliferation. Both Shh and Gli3 mutant stomachs displayed early
changes of intestinal transformation but these did not impact on the overall
differentiation of the gastric epithelium. Interestingly, the observation that
Gli3 shares a similar glandular phenotype to Shh mutant stomach reveals a
possible novel role of Gli3 activator in the developing stomach. The embryonic
stomach is a unique model of the Hedgehog pathway function and one that may help 
to uncover some of the mechanisms underlying the development of intestinal
metaplasia.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16247775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 1;288(1):206-20. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Differential susceptibility of midbrain and spinal cord patterning to floor plate
defects in the talpid2 mutant.

Agarwala S(1), Aglyamova GV, Marma AK, Fallon JF, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurobiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-0248,
USA. agarwala@mail.utexas.edu

The chick talpid2 mutant displays polydactylous digits attributed to defects of
the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway. We examined the talpid2 neural tube and show
that patterning defects in the spinal cord and the midbrain are distinct from
each other and from the limb. Unlike the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) source in the limb,
the SHH-rich floor plate (FP) is reduced in the talpid2 midbrain. This is
accompanied by a severe depletion of medial cell populations that encounter high 
concentrations of SHH, an expansion of lateral cell populations that experience
low concentrations of SHH and a broad deregulation of HH's principal effectors
(PTC1, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3). Together with the failure of SHH misexpression to
rescue the talpid2 phenotype, these results suggest that talpid2 is likely to
have a tissue-autonomous, bidirectional (positive and negative) role in HH
signaling that cannot be attributed to the altered expression of several newly
cloned HH pathway genes (SUFU, DZIP1, DISP1, BTRC). Strikingly, FP defects in the
spinal cord are accompanied by relatively normal patterning in the talpid2
mutant. We propose that this differential FP dependence may be due to the
prolonged apposition of the notochord to the spinal cord, but not the midbrain
during development.

PMID: 16246323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Oct;125(4):638-46.

Modulation of hair growth with small molecule agonists of the hedgehog signaling 
pathway.

Paladini RD(1), Saleh J, Qian C, Xu GX, Rubin LL.

Author information: 
(1)Curis Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. rpaladini@curis.com

The hedgehog (Hh) family of intercellular signaling proteins is intricately
linked to the development and patterning of almost every major vertebrate organ
system. In the skin, sonic hedgehog (Shh) is required for hair follicle
morphogenesis during embryogenesis and for regulating follicular growth and
cycling in the adult. We recently described the identification and
characterization of synthetic, non-peptidyl small molecule agonists of the Hh
pathway. In this study, we examined the ability of a topically applied Hh-agonist
to modulate follicular cycling in adult mouse skin. We report that the Hh-agonist
can stimulate the transition from the resting (telogen) to the growth (anagen)
stage of the hair cycle in adult mouse skin. Hh-agonist-induced hair growth
caused no detectable differences in epidermal proliferation, differentiation, or 
in the endogenous Hh-signaling pathway as measured by Gli1, Shh, Ptc1, and Gli2
gene expression when compared with a normal hair cycle. In addition, we
demonstrate that Hh-agonist is active in human scalp in vitro as measured by Gli1
gene expression. These results suggest that the topical application of Hh-agonist
could be effective in treating conditions of decreased proliferation and aberrant
follicular cycling in the scalp including androgenetic alopecia (pattern hair
loss).

PMID: 16185261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Neurosci. 2005 Sep 7;25(36):8338-46.

Hedgehog antagonist REN(KCTD11) regulates proliferation and apoptosis of
developing granule cell progenitors.

Argenti B(1), Gallo R, Di Marcotullio L, Ferretti E, Napolitano M, Canterini S,
De Smaele E, Greco A, Fiorenza MT, Maroder M, Screpanti I, Alesse E, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza,
00161 Rome, Italy.

During the early development of the cerebellum, a burst of granule cell
progenitor (GCP) proliferation occurs in the outer external granule layer (EGL), 
which is sustained mainly by Purkinje cell-derived Sonic Hedgehog (Shh). Shh
response is interrupted once GCPs move into the inner EGL, where granule
progenitors withdraw proliferation and start differentiating and migrating toward
the internal granule layer (IGL). Failure to interrupt Shh signals results in
uncoordinated proliferation and differentiation of GCPs and eventually leads to
malignancy (i.e., medulloblastoma). The Shh inhibitory mechanisms that are
responsible for GCP growth arrest and differentiation remain unclear. Here we
report that REN, a putative tumor suppressor frequently deleted in human
medulloblastoma, is expressed to a higher extent in nonproliferating inner EGL
and IGL granule cells than in highly proliferating outer EGL cells. Accordingly, 
upregulated REN expression occurs along GCP differentiation in vitro, and, in
turn, REN overexpression promotes growth arrest and increases the proportion of
p27/Kip1+ GCPs. REN also impairs both Gli2-dependent gene transcription and
Shh-enhanced expression of the target Gli1 mRNA, thus antagonizing the
Shh-induced effects on the proliferation and differentiation of cultured GCPs.
Conversely, REN functional knock-down impairs Hedgehog antagonism and
differentiation and sustains the proliferation of GCPs. Finally, REN enhances
caspase-3 activation and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
biotinylated UTP nick end labeling apoptotic GCP numbers; therefore, the pattern 
of REN expression, its activity, and its antagonism on the Hedgehog pathway
suggest that this gene may represent a restraint of Shh signaling at the outer to
inner EGL GCP transitions. Medulloblastoma-associated REN loss of function might 
withdraw such a limiting signal for immature cell expansion, thus favoring
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16148242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Oncol Rep. 2005 Oct;14(4):1087-90.

Comparative genomics on Sonic hedgehog orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Indian hedgehog (IHH), and Desert hedgehog (DHH) are key
molecules for the integrome network in oncology and regenerative medicine.
Soluble Hedgehog ligands bind to Patched receptor to activate Smoothened
seven-transmembrane receptor with Frizzled domain. KIF27 and KIF7 are human
homologs of Drosophila Costal-2 (Cos2), associating with Smoothened, GLI homolog,
Fused, and microtubule. Smoothened activation leads to GLI1, GLI2, or
GLI3-dependent transcription of Hedgehog target genes. Here, comparative
proteomics analyses and comparative genomics analyses on SHH orthologs were
performed by using bioinformatics. Human SHH representative transcript was
assembled by using BX461534 EST, NM_000193.2 RefSeq, AA503654 EST, and AC078834.5
genome sequence. Human SHH mRNA was expressed in fetal brain, infant brain, and
also in colorectal cancer. Chimpanzee SHH gene, consisting of three exons, was
located within AC147335.2 genome sequence. Human SHH and chimpanzee SHH (462 aa) 
showed E284G and T416P amino-acid substitutions. Vertebrate SHH orthologs shared 
the common domain architecture, consisting of N-terminal signal peptide, Hedgehog
signaling domain, Hint domain, and C-terminal HPLGMxxxxS motif. Evolutionarily
conserved SHH promoter region (nucleotide position 104429-104083 of human genome 
sequence AC078834.5) was identified. Double bHLH binding sites, CCAAT box, and
TATA box were conserved among human SHH promoter, chimpanzee SHH promoter, rat
Shh promoter, and mouse Shh promoter.

PMID: 16142377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cancer Lett. 2005 Sep 28;227(2):99-104. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

Hedgehog signaling pathway as a therapeutic target in breast cancer.

Katano M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Graduate School of Medical Siences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
mkatano@tumor.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, which is well conserved even in mammals and 
other vertebrate species, has long been known to direct growth and patterning
during embryonic development. It has been shown that the Hh pathway also plays a 
critical role in mouse normal mammary gland development. Namely, it has been
shown that disruption of the Hh pathway-related genes such as Patched-1 and Gli2 
leads to ductal dysplasias that closely resemble some hyperplasia of human
breast. In addition, it has been reported that breast carcinoma cells have
disruption of these genes. These findings strongly indicate a contribution of the
Hh pathway to development of human breast carcinoma. In fact, constitutive
activation of the Hh pathway was found in most of 52 surgically resected breast
carcinoma specimens. Interestingly, exposure to cyclopamine, a steroidal alkaroid
that blocks the Hh pathway, suppressed the growth of the Hh pathway-activated
breast carcinoma cells. Thus, the Hh pathway may function in progression of
breast carcinoma. In this short review, possibilities of the Hh pathway as a new 
therapeutic target in breast carcinoma will be mainly discussed.

PMID: 16112412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2005 Aug;63(2):121-30.

Growth hormone deficiency and combined pituitary hormone deficiency: does the
genotype matter?

Dattani MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Institute for Child Health,
London, UK. mdattani@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The past 12 years have witnessed an explosion in our understanding of the
development of the anterior pituitary gland, and of mechanisms that underlie the 
diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency (GHD) and combined pituitary hormone
deficiency (CPHD). The anterior pituitary is the end-product of a carefully
orchestrated pattern of expression of signalling molecules and transcription
factors that leads to the development of this complex organ secreting six
hormones from five different cell types. Naturally occurring and transgenic
murine models have demonstrated a role for many of these molecules in the
aetiology of GHD/CPHD. These include the transcription factors HESX1, PROP1,
POU1F1, LHX3, LHX4, GLI2 and SOX3. Depending upon the expression patterns of
these molecules, the phenotype may consist of isolated hypopituitarism, or more
complex disorders such as septo-optic dysplasia (SOD) and holoprosencephaly. The 
phenotype and the mode of inheritance can be highly variable. Novel mutations
within the GH-1 and GHRHR genes have also shed light on the phenotype and
pathogenesis of isolated GHD (IGHD). To date, genetic mutations have been
identified in a modest proportion of patients with IGHD/CPHD and associated
syndromes such as SOD. It is, however, clear that many genes remain to be
identified, and characterization of these will further elucidate the pathogenesis
of these complex conditions.

PMID: 16060904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Aug 1;14(15):2181-8. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

A previously unidentified amino-terminal domain regulates transcriptional
activity of wild-type and disease-associated human GLI2.

Roessler E(1), Ermilov AN, Grange DK, Wang A, Grachtchouk M, Dlugosz AA, Muenke
M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, NHGRI, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Zinc finger-containing Gli proteins mediate responsiveness to Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling, with Gli2 acting as the major transcriptional activator in this
pathway in mice. The discovery of disease-associated mutations points to a
critical role for GLI2 in human Hh signaling as well. Here, we show that human
GLI2 contains previously undescribed 5' sequence, extending the amino-terminus an
additional 328 amino acids. In vitro, transcriptional activity of full-length
GLI2 is up to 30 times lower than that of GLI2DeltaN (previously thought to
represent the entire GLI2 protein), revealing the presence of an amino-terminal
repressor domain in the full-length protein. GLI2DeltaN also exhibits potent
transcriptional activity in vivo: overexpression in mouse skin leads to the
formation of Hh-independent epithelial downgrowths resembling basal cell
carcinomas, which in humans are associated with constitutive Hh signaling. The
discovery of this additional, functionally relevant GLI2 sequence led us to
re-examine several pathogenic human GLI2 mutants, now containing the entire
amino-terminal domain. On the basis of the functional domains affected by the
mutations, mutant GLI2 proteins exhibited either loss-of-function or
dominant-negative activity. Moreover, deletion of the amino-terminus abrogated
dominant-negative activity of mutant GLI2, revealing that this domain is required
for transcriptional repressor activity of pathogenic GLI2. Our results establish 
the presence of an amino-terminal transcriptional repressor domain that plays a
critical role in modulating the function of wild-type GLI2 and is essential for
dominant-negative activity of a GLI2 mutant associated with human disease.

PMID: 15994174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Dermatol Sci. 2005 Jul;39(1):39-51. Epub 2005 Apr 18.

Microarray profiles of human basal cell carcinoma: insights into tumor growth and
behavior.

Howell BG(1), Solish N, Lu C, Watanabe H, Mamelak AJ, Freed I, Wang B, Sauder DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287-0900, USA.

PURPOSE: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common human neoplasm. Much
interest lies in determining the genetic basis of BCC to explain the unique
locally invasive phenotype and infrequent metastatic behavior of these skin
tumors.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to examine a gene expression profile for BCC to elucidate
new molecules responsible for its unique growth characteristics.
METHODS: We analyzed gene expression patterns of 50 BCC tumors using spotted cDNA
microarrays of 1718 characterized human genes related to cancer and immunity.
This is the largest and most comprehensive gene expression study ever performed
for BCC. Nodular and sclerosing histological subtypes of BCC were examined and
compared to normal control skin. After statistical filtering, 374 significantly
dysregulated genes were sorted by hierarchical clustering to determine trends of 
gene expression and similarities between patient gene expression profiles.
RESULTS: A total of 165 upregulated genes and 115 downregulated genes were
identified. These covered a range of categories, including extracellular matrix, 
cell junctions, motility, metastasis, oncogenes, tumor suppressors, DNA repair,
cell cycle, immune regulation and angiogenesis. Clusters of genes were either
commonly dysregulated across the 50 patient sample, or selectively affected in
subsets of tumors. Histological subtypes were not distinguishable by hierarchical
clustering. Many of the genes elucidated, including collagen type IV subunits and
other novel candidates, possess functions related to extracellular matrix
remodeling and metastasis.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a gene profile which may explain the invasive
growth yet rarely metastatic behavior of BCC. The genes identified may also be
potential targets for therapeutics aimed at further controlling invasiveness and 
local destruction of BCC.

PMID: 15978418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dev Biol. 2005 Jun 15;282(2):550-70.

Gli function is essential for motor neuron induction in zebrafish.

Vanderlaan G(1), Tyurina OV, Karlstrom RO, Chandrasekhar A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211,
USA.

The Gli family of zinc-finger transcription factors mediates Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling in all vertebrates. However, their roles in ventral neural tube
patterning, in particular motor neuron induction, appear to have diverged across 
species. For instance, cranial motor neurons are essentially lost in zebrafish
detour (gli1(-)) mutants, whereas motor neuron development is unaffected in mouse
single gli and some double gli knockouts. Interestingly, the expression of some
Hh-regulated genes (ptc1, net1a, gli1) is mostly unaffected in the detour mutant 
hindbrain, suggesting that other Gli transcriptional activators may be involved. 
To better define the roles of the zebrafish gli genes in motor neuron induction
and in Hh-regulated gene expression, we examined these processes in you-too (yot)
mutants, which encode dominant repressor forms of Gli2 (Gli2(DR)), and following 
morpholino-mediated knockdown of gli1, gli2, and gli3 function. Motor neuron
induction at all axial levels was reduced in yot (gli2(DR)) mutant embryos. In
addition, Hh target gene expression at all axial levels except in rhombomere 4
was also reduced, suggesting an interference with the function of other Glis.
Indeed, morpholino-mediated knockdown of Gli2(DR) protein in yot mutants led to a
suppression of the defective motor neuron phenotype. However, gli2 knockdown in
wild-type embryos generated no discernable motor neuron phenotype, while gli3
knockdown reduced motor neuron induction in the hindbrain and spinal cord.
Significantly, gli2 or gli3 knockdown in detour (gli1(-)) mutants revealed roles 
for Gli2 and Gli3 activator functions in ptc1 expression and spinal motor neuron 
induction. Similarly, gli1 or gli3 knockdown in yot (gli2(DR)) mutants resulted
in severe or complete loss of motor neurons, and of ptc1 and net1a expression, in
the hindbrain and spinal cord. In addition, gli1 expression was greatly reduced
in yot mutants following gli3, but not gli1, knockdown, suggesting that Gli3
activator function is specifically required for gli1 expression. These
observations demonstrate that Gli activator function (encoded by gli1, gli2, and 
gli3) is essential for motor neuron induction and Hh-regulated gene expression in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC2219918
PMID: 15890329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mamm Genome. 2005 Mar;16(3):164-70.

Genetic analysis of anal atresia in pigs: evidence for segregation at two main
loci.

Cassini P(1), Montironi A, Botti S, Hori T, Okhawa H, Stella A, Andersson L,
Giuffra E.

Author information: 
(1)Parco Tecnologico Padano, Centro Ricerche Studi Agroalimentari, Polo
Universitario, via A. Einstein 2, 26900, Lodi, Italy.

Anal atresia is a relatively common congenital malformation that occurs in about 
1 out of 5000 infants, caused by abnormal hindgut development of the embryo,
often associated with other developmental anomalies (e.g., Currarino,
Townes-Brock, Pallister-Hall syndromes, and VATER association). Genetic analysis 
in human families is exceedingly difficult due to the multifactorial nature of
the trait. In pigs, anal atresia occurs at a higher incidence (0.18%) than in
humans. A complete genome scan (165 microsatellite markers) was performed using a
backcross pedigree previously obtained by crossing affected animals from a
partially inbred line, selected for a high incidence of anal atresia, with an
unaffected male of a different breed (Meishan). The data set was analyzed with
classical linkage (TWOPOINT) and nonparametric genetic methods (NPL,
Non-Parametric Linkage, and TDT, Transmission Disequilibrium Test). Both methods 
support association of the trait with two loci on Chromosomes 9 and 15. GLI2
(GLI-Kruppel family member GLI2) was identified as a positional candidate gene
based on comparative mapping; radiation hybrid mapping confirmed that this locus 
is located within the QTL region.

PMID: 15834633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 16;24(26):4232-42.

Rare amplicons implicate frequent deregulation of cell fate specification
pathways in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Snijders AM(1), Schmidt BL, Fridlyand J, Dekker N, Pinkel D, Jordan RC, Albertson
DG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, Box 0808,
San Francisco, CA 94143-0808, USA.

Genomes of solid tumors are characterized by gains and losses of regions, which
may contribute to tumorigenesis by altering gene expression. Often the
aberrations are extensive, encompassing whole chromosome arms, which makes
identification of candidate genes in these regions difficult. Here, we focused on
narrow regions of gene amplification to facilitate identification of genetic
pathways important in oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) development. We used
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) to define minimum common
amplified regions and then used expression analysis to identify candidate driver 
genes in amplicons that spanned <3 Mb. We found genes involved in integrin
signaling (TLN1), survival (YAP1, BIRC2), and adhesion and migration (TLN1,
LAMA3, MMP7), as well as members of the hedgehog (GLI2) and notch (JAG1, RBPSUH, 
FJX1) pathways to be amplified and overexpressed. Deregulation of these and other
members of the hedgehog and notch pathways (HHIP, SMO, DLL1, NOTCH4) implicates
deregulation of developmental and differentiation pathways, cell fate
misspecification, in oral SCC development.

PMID: 15824737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 9;24(25):4026-36.

Gli1 is important for medulloblastoma formation in Ptc1+/- mice.

Kimura H(1), Stephen D, Joyner A, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Germline mutations in the human homolog of the patched1 (PTCH1) are associated
with basal cell nevus carcinoma syndrome (BCNS or Gorlin syndrome), which is
characterized by developmental anomalies, radiation hypersensitivity and a
predisposition to medulloblastomas and skin tumors. Patched1 (Ptc1) functions as 
a receptor for Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in a wide range of biological processes.
Binding of Shh to Ptc1 results in activation of Smoothened (Smo), which in turn
stimulates expression of downstream target genes including Ptc1 and Gli1. Gli1 is
a member of a family of DNA-binding zinc-finger proteins, including Gli2 and
Gli3, that function in transcription control. Here, we report that inactivation
of both Gli1 alleles in Ptc1+/- mice significantly reduces spontaneous
medulloblastoma formation. Therefore, Gli1 is not only a marker of pathway
activation but also plays a functional role in medulloblastoma formation.
Interestingly, Gli2 levels were elevated in medulloblastoma cells but not in
normal granule neuron precursors during cerebellar development in mice lacking
Gli1. In cultured fibroblasts, Gli1 was more potent than Gli2 at inducing cell
transformation. These results demonstrate that Gli1 plays a central role in
medulloblastoma formation in Ptc1+/- mice and that Gli2 may also contribute to
oncogenesis.

PMID: 15806168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21022-8. Epub 2005 Mar 26.

Hedgehog signaling induces cardiomyogenesis in P19 cells.

Gianakopoulos PJ(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is a critical signaling factor for a variety of
developmental pathways during embryogenesis, including the specification of
left-right asymmetry in the heart. Mice that lack Hedgehog signaling show a delay
in the induction of cardiomyogenesis, as indicated by a delayed expression of
Nkx2-5. To further examine a role for Shh in cardiomyogenesis, clonal populations
of P19 cells that stably express Shh, termed P19(Shh) cells, were isolated. In
monolayer P19(Shh) cultures the Shh pathway was functional as shown by the
up-regulation of Ptc1 and Gli1 expression, but no cardiac muscle markers were
activated. However, Shh expression induced cardiomyogenesis following cellular
aggregation, resulting in the expression of factors expressed in cardiac muscle
including GATA-4, MEF2C, and Nkx2-5. Furthermore, aggregated P19 cell lines
expressing Gli2 or Meox1 also up-regulated the expression of cardiac muscle
factors, leading to cardiomyogenesis. Meox1 up-regulated the expression of Gli1
and Gli2 and, thus, can modify the Shh signaling pathway. Finally, Shh, Gli2, and
Meox1 all up-regulated BMP-4 expression, implying that activation of the Hedgehog
pathway can regulate bone morphogenetic protein signals. Taken together, we
propose a model in which Shh, functioning via Gli1/2, can specify mesodermal
cells into the cardiac muscle lineage.

PMID: 15793308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Gene Expr Patterns. 2005 Apr;5(4):529-31. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

Asymmetric expression of Gli transcription factors in Hensen's node.

Granata A(1), Quaderi NA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th Floor
New Hunt's House, Guy's Hospital Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Avian left-right (L/R) axis determination involves the establishment of
asymmetric gene expression in Hensen's node, resulting in two discrete signalling
pathways on the left and right sides of the embryo. The extracellular signalling 
molecule Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) is known to be an important left-side determinant. 
Transcription of Shh is initially bilateral in Hensen's node (stage 4), but is
restricted to the left side by stage 5. The Gli genes (Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3) are
the main transcriptional mediators of the Hedgehog pathway in vertebrates. GLI1
and GLI2 are primarily transcriptional activators of Hedgehog target genes, while
GLI3 is primarily a transcriptional repressor of Hedgehog targets. In order to
gain insight into the mechanisms of asymmetrical Hedgehog signal transduction in 
the node, we have analysed the expression patterns of the Gli genes in Hensen's
node from stage 4 to stage 8. Here, we reveal that the Gli genes are
asymmetrically expressed in Hensen's node: Gli1 and Gli2, are expressed on the
left side, while Gli3 is expressed on the right side.

PMID: 15749082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Curr Opin Oncol. 2005 Mar;17(2):160-6.

Basal cell nevus syndrome.

High A(1), Zedan W.

Author information: 
(1)Department Level 6, Medical & Dental School University of Leeds, UK.
a.s.high@leeds.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Basal cell nevus syndrome (BCNS), is a hereditary condition
transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait exhibiting high penetrance and
variable expressivity. Inherited or spontaneous mutations in the human homologue 
of the Drosophila patched gene underlie the disorder and in addition to tumor
predisposition, are associated with a range of 'patterning' defects. Recent
advances, with glimpses of possible therapies are emerging, but because of the
wide-ranging nature of phenotypic expression and overlap with other syndromes,
there is difficulty. Finally, because of the importance of PTCH and paralogous
genes in many species other than humans, reports appear in a correspondingly wide
range of journals, which makes 'keeping abreast' difficult.
RECENT FINDINGS: Progress has been achieved in understanding the role of Gli-1,
2, & 3 in development of 'sporadic' BCCs and BCNS. Expression of PTCH1 is now
known to be regulated by alternative promoters and a single functional
Gli-binding site. Expression of FOXE1 as a new transcriptional target of Gli2 has
been demonstrated in human epidermis and BCCs. Finally, the discovery of Shh
pathway inhibitors such as cyclopamine, a naturally occurring alkaloid and
ornithine decarboxylase inhibition suggest possible interventional therapies.
SUMMARY: In BCNS, phenotype does not correlate with position of mutations within 
Patched, suggesting genetic makeup and environment modulate effects of premature 
protein truncation induced by PTCH mutation. These developmental abnormalities
occur as a result of haplo-insufficiency in heterozygotes for the mutated gene,
whereas neoplastic complications arise from a classical two-hit tumor suppressor 
gene model. Attention is therefore turning toward TP53 and PTCH associations.

PMID: 15725922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):15700-8. Epub 2005 Feb 3.

Regulation and function of the sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway in
isolated gastric parietal cells.

Stepan V(1), Ramamoorthy S, Nitsche H, Zavros Y, Merchant JL, Todisco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Shh (Sonic hedgehog) regulates gastric epithelial cell differentiation. We
reported that incubation of purified canine parietal cells with epidermal growth 
factor (EGF) for 6-16 h, stimulates H(+)/K(+)-ATPase alpha-subunit gene
expression through the activation of Akt. We explored if Shh mediates some of the
actions of EGF in the parietal cells. EGF induced a 6-fold increase in Shh
expression, measured by Western blots, after 5 h of incubation. This effect was
inhibited by both the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 and by
transduction of the cells with an adenoviral vector expressing dominant negative 
Akt. EGF stimulated the release of Shh-like immunoreactivity from the parietal
cells, after 16 h of incubation. Shh induced H(+)/K(+)-ATPase alpha-subunit gene 
expression, assessed by Northern blots, it stimulated a luciferase reporter
plasmid containing the EGF-responsive sequence (ERE) of the canine
H(+)/K(+)-ATPase alpha-subunit gene promoter, and it induced parietal cell
nuclear protein binding to the ERE. Gli transcription factors mediate the
intracellular actions of Shh. Co-transfection of the parietal cells with the
H(+)/K(+)-luc plasmid together with one expressing Gli2, induced
H(+)/K(+)-luciferase activity 5-fold, whereas co-transfection of the cells with
the H(+)/K(+)-luc plasmid together with one expressing dominant negative Gli2,
inhibited EGF induction of H(+)/K(+)-luciferase activity. Identical results were 
observed in the presence of the Shh signal transduction pathway inhibitor,
cyclopamine. Transfection of the cells with dominant negative Akt inhibited EGF, 
but not Shh stimulation of H(+)/K(+)-ATPase-luciferase activity. Thus, EGF but
not Shh signals through Akt. Preincubation of the cells for 16 h with either Shh 
or EGF enhanced histamine-stimulated [(14)C]aminopyrine uptake by 50%. In
conclusions, some of the actions of EGF in the parietal cells are mediated by the
sequential activation of the Akt and the Shh signal transduction pathways. These 
effects might represent novel mechanisms mediating the actions of growth factors 
on gastric epithelial cell differentiation.

PMID: 15691835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Pathol. 2005 Mar;205(4):476-82.

Absence of IHH and retention of PTHrP signalling in enchondromas and central
chondrosarcomas.

Rozeman LB(1), Hameetman L, Cleton-Jansen AM, Taminiau AH, Hogendoorn PC, Bovée
JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Enchondromas and conventional central chondrosarcomas are, respectively, benign
and malignant hyaline cartilage-forming tumours that originate in the medulla of 
bone. In order to gain a better understanding of the molecular process underlying
malignant transformation of enchondroma, and to investigate whether there is a
biological difference between conventional central cartilaginous tumours and
those of enchondromatosis or with phalangeal localization, a series of 64
enchondromas (phalanx, n = 21; enchondromatosis, n = 15) and 89 chondrosarcomas
(phalanx, n = 17; enchondromatosis, n = 13) was collected. Indian Hedgehog
(IHH)/parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHrP) signalling, an important
pathway in chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation within the normal growth
plate, was studied by immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of PTHrP,
PTHR1, Bcl-2, p21, cyclin D1, and cyclin E. Quantitative real-time PCR for IHH,
PTCH, SMO, and GLI2 was performed on a subset of tumours. The data show that IHH 
signalling is absent in enchondromas and central chondrosarcomas, while PTHrP
signalling is active. There was no difference in the expression of any of the
molecules between 35 enchondromas and 26 grade I central chondrosarcomas,
indicating that PTHrP signalling is not important in malignant transformation of 
enchondroma. Higher expression of PTHR1 and Bcl-2 was associated with increasing 
histological grade in chondrosarcoma, suggesting involvement in tumour
progression. No difference was found between samples from enchondromatosis
patients and solitary cases, suggesting no difference in PTHrP signalling. A
small subset of phalangeal chondrosarcomas demonstrated down-regulation of PTHrP,
which may be related to its more indolent clinical behaviour. Thus, in both
enchondromas and central chondrosarcomas, PTHrP signalling is active and
independent of IHH signalling, irrespective of the presence or absence of
enchondromatosis.

PMID: 15685701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Int J Oncol. 2005 Feb;26(2):545-9.

Identification and characterization of rat Desert hedgehog and Indian hedgehog
genes in silico.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Desert hedgehog (DHH) and Indian hedgehog (IHH) bind to
Patched family receptors (PTCH1 and PTCH2) to transduce signals to GLI1, GLI2 and
GLI3. GLI family transcription factors then activate transcription of Hedgehog
target genes, such as FOXE1 and FOXM1 encoding Forkhead-box transcription
factors. Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in a variety of human
tumors, such as gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer, breast
cancer, prostate cancer, basal cell carcinoma and brain tumors. Rat orthologs for
human DHH and IHH remain to be identified. Here, we identified and characterized 
rat Dhh and Ihh genes by using bioinformatics. Rat Dhh complete coding sequence
(CDS) was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 426397-426963,
429715-429976 and 430244-430898 of the AC114446.3 genome sequence. Rat Ihh
complete CDS was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 63433-64033,
66432-66693 and 68242-69169 of AC095777.6 genome sequence. Rat Dhh mRNA was
expressed in prostate, duodenum and dorsal root ganglia, while rat Ihh mRNA was
expressed in cartilage. Rat Dhh showed 99.7% total-amino-acid identity with mouse
Dhh, and 96.5% total-amino-acid identity with human DHH. Rat Ihh and human IHH
were shorter than mouse Ihh by 38 amino acids. Rat Ihh showed 97.6%
total-amino-acid identity with mouse Ihh and 94.4% total-amino-acid identity with
human IHH. Hedgehog family proteins consist of signal peptide, Hedgehog ligand
peptide and C-terminal peptide. Hedgehog ligand peptides derived from mammalian
Hedgehog family proteins were conserved well, while C-terminal peptides were
relatively divergent. The HPLGMXXXXS motif in the C-terminus was conserved in Shh
orthologs and Ihh orthologs, but not in Dhh orthologs.

PMID: 15645142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Genes Dev. 2005 Jan 15;19(2):214-23. Epub 2004 Dec 29.

Sustained Hedgehog signaling is required for basal cell carcinoma proliferation
and survival: conditional skin tumorigenesis recapitulates the hair growth cycle.

Hutchin ME(1), Kariapper MS, Grachtchouk M, Wang A, Wei L, Cummings D, Liu J,
Michael LE, Glick A, Dlugosz AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Temporally and spatially constrained Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates cyclic
growth of hair follicle epithelium while constitutive Hh signaling drives the
development of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs), the most common cancers in humans.
Using mice engineered to conditionally express the Hh effector Gli2, we show that
continued Hh signaling is required for growth of established BCCs. Transgene
inactivation led to BCC regression accompanied by reduced tumor cell
proliferation and increased apoptosis, leaving behind a small subset of
nonproliferative cells that could form tumors upon transgene reactivation. Nearly
all BCCs arose from hair follicles, which harbor cutaneous epithelial stem cells,
and reconstitution of regressing tumor cells with an inductive mesenchyme led to 
multilineage differentiation and hair follicle formation. Our data reveal that
continued Hh signaling is required for proliferation and survival of established 
BCCs, provide compelling support for the concept that these tumors represent an
aberrant form of follicle organogenesis, and uncover potential limitations to
treating BCCs using Hh pathway inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC545881
PMID: 15625189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Biol. 2005 Jan 15;277(2):537-56.

Zebrafish Gli3 functions as both an activator and a repressor in Hedgehog
signaling.

Tyurina OV(1), Guner B, Popova E, Feng J, Schier AF, Kohtz JD, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-9297,
USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates cell differentiation and patterning in a wide
variety of embryonic tissues. In vertebrates, at least three Gli transcription
factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) are involved in Hh signal transduction.
Comparative studies have revealed divergent requirements for Gli1 and Gli2 in
zebrafish and mouse. Here, we address the question of whether Gli3 function has
also diverged in zebrafish and analyze the regulatory interactions between Hh
signaling and Gli activity. We find that zebrafish Gli3 has an early function as 
an activator of Hh target genes that overlaps with Gli1 activator function in the
ventral neural tube. In vitro reporter analysis shows that Gli3 cooperates with
Gli1 to activate transcription in the presence of high concentrations of Hh.
During late somitogenesis stages, Gli3 is required as a repressor of the Hh
response. Gli3 shares this repressor activity with Gli2 in the dorsal spinal
cord, hindbrain, and midbrain, but not in the forebrain. Consistently, zebrafish 
Gli3 blocks Gli1-mediated activation of a reporter gene in the absence of Hh in
vitro. In the eye, Gli3 is also required for proper ath5 expression and the
differentiation of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). These results reveal a
conserved role for Gli3 in vertebrate development and uncover novel regional
functions and regulatory interactions among gli genes.

PMID: 15617692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Dyn. 2005 Feb;232(2):282-92.

Expression of the mouse Fgf15 gene is directly initiated by Sonic hedgehog
signaling in the diencephalon and midbrain.

Saitsu H(1), Komada M, Suzuki M, Nakayama R, Motoyama J, Shiota K, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted molecule that is thought to regulate tissue
growth and patterning in vertebrate embryos. Although it has been reported that
Gli transcription factors mediate Shh signaling to the nucleus, little is known
about developmental target genes of Gli. In the previous genetic study, we showed
that Shh is required for Fgf15 expression in the diencephalon and midbrain. Here,
we examined whether Fgf15 is a direct target of Shh signaling through Gli. Shh
was expressed in the midline cells and Fgf15 in the medial region of the
diencephalon/midbrain by the seven-somite stage. The Fgf15 expression domain
coincided with that of Gli1 and overlapped with that of Gli2 at this stage. Fgf15
expression in the diencephalon/midbrain was greatly reduced in the seven-somite
Shh mutant embryos. Transgenic analysis showed that the 3.6-kb 5'-flanking region
of the Fgf15 gene is sufficient for induction of Fgf15 in the medial/ventral
diencephalon/midbrain. Luciferase assay showed that the 3.6-kb Fgf15
enhancer/promoter was activated by Gli2. A Gli-binding site was located 1 kb
upstream of the transcription start site and was required for expression in the
medial/ventral diencephalon/midbrain in transgenic embryos and for activation in 
luciferase assay. These findings indicate that Fgf15 is directly regulated by Shh
signaling through Gli proteins.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15614767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Dev Dyn. 2005 Feb;232(2):479-86.

Expression of a novel zebrafish zinc finger gene, gli2b, is affected in Hedgehog 
and Notch signaling related mutants during embryonic development.

Ke Z(1), Emelyanov A, Lim SE, Korzh V, Gong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117604.

Gli zinc-finger proteins are known as downstream mediators of the evolutionary
conserved Hedgehog pathway. In zebrafish, gli2 functions differently from Gli2 in
mammals. This difference could be due to the gli2 duplication in teleosts
evolution and partial redundancy between two duplicated genes. Here, we report a 
novel zebrafish gli2-like cDNA. Its structure, genetic location, and distinct
expression pattern in the central nervous system suggested that this gene might
represent a second gli2 of teleosts, and we named it gli2b. gli2b was expressed
in the neural keel, excluding the forebrain-midbrain boundary, while gli2
expression complemented this pattern. After 24 hours postfertilization, several
specific domains of gli2b expression were observed in the lateral and medial
hindbrain and hypothalamus. In mutants affecting the Hedgehog and Notch signaling
pathways, gli2b expression was either disrupted or extended in different regions.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15614761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):345-57. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Gli2 and Gli3 have redundant and context-dependent function in skeletal muscle
formation.

McDermott A(1), Gustafsson M, Elsam T, Hui CC, Emerson CP Jr, Borycki AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Firth Court,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The Gli family of zinc finger transcription factors are mediators of Shh
signalling in vertebrates. In previous studies, we showed that Shh signalling,
via an essential Gli-binding site in the Myf5 epaxial somite (ES) enhancer, is
required for the specification of epaxial muscle progenitor cells. Shh signalling
is also required for the normal mediolateral patterning of myogenic cells within 
the somite. In this study, we investigate the role and the transcriptional
activities of Gli proteins during somite myogenesis in the mouse embryo. We
report that Gli genes are differentially expressed in the mouse somite. Gli2 and 
Gli3 are essential for Gli1 expression in somites, establishing Gli2 and Gli3 as 
primary mediators and Gli1 as a secondary mediator of Shh signalling. Combining
genetic studies with the use of a transgenic mouse line expressing a reporter
gene under the control of the Myf5 epaxial somite enhancer, we show that Gli2 or 
Gli3 is required for Myf5 activation in the epaxial muscle progenitor cells.
Furthermore, Gli3, but not Gli2 represses Myf5 transcription in a dose-dependent 
manner in the absence of Shh. Finally, we provide evidence that hypaxial and
myotomal gene expression is mispatterned in Gli2-/-Gli3-/- and Gli3-/-Shh-/-
somites. Together, our data demonstrate both positive and negative regulatory
functions for Gli2 and Gli3 in the control of Myf5 activation in the epaxial
muscle progenitor cells and in dorsoventral and mediolateral patterning of the
somite.

PMID: 15604102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Oncol. 2004 Dec;25(6):1875-80.

KIF27 is one of orthologs for Drosophila Costal-2.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Signals of Hedgehog family proteins (SHH, IHH and DHH) are transduced through
Patched family receptors (PTCH1 and PTCH2) and Smoothened (SMO) to GLI family
transcription factors (GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3). SHH plays a key role in development 
and progression of pancreatic cancer, gastric cancer, basal cell carcinoma, and
brain tumors. Drosophila Costal-2 (Cos2) is implicated in the Hedgehog pathway
through the interaction with Smoothened (Smo), Cubitus interruptus (Ci), Fused
(Fu), and microtubule; however, mammalian ortholog of Drosophila Cos2 remained to
be identified. Here we identified and characterized human ortholog of Drosophila 
Cos2 by using bioinformatics. Full-length Drosophila Cos2 was most homologous to 
human KIF27, followed by mouse Kif7, and other KIF family members. KIF27 gene at 
human chromosome 9q22.1 and KIF7 gene at human chromosome 15q26.1 were paralogs
within the human genome. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that KIF27, Kif7, KIF4A, 
KIF4B and KIF21A constitute the KIF27 subfamily among mammalian Kinesin family.
Drosophila Cos2 protein consists of Kinesin motor (KISc) domain, Ci-binding
domain, and Smo-binding domain. KIF27 itself shared the common domain structure
with Drosophila Cos2, while other members of KIF27 subfamily shared partial
domain structure with Drosophila Cos2. These facts indicate that KIF27 is one of 
mammalian orthologs for Drosophila Cos2.

PMID: 15547729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Genes Dev. 2004 Nov 15;18(22):2724-9.

MIM/BEG4, a Sonic hedgehog-responsive gene that potentiates Gli-dependent
transcription.

Callahan CA(1), Ofstad T, Horng L, Wang JK, Zhen HH, Coulombe PA, Oro AE.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology and Department of Pathology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a critical role during development and
carcinogenesis. While Gli family members govern the transcriptional output of Shh
signaling, little is known how Gli-mediated transcriptional activity is
regulated. Here we identify the actin-binding protein Missing in Metastasis (MIM)
as a new Shh-responsive gene. Together, Gli1 and MIM recapitulate Shh-mediated
epidermal proliferation and invasion in regenerated human skin. MIM is part of a 
Gli/Suppressor of Fused complex and potentiates Gli-dependent transcription using
domains distinct from those used for monomeric actin binding. These data define
MIM as both a Shh-responsive gene and a new member of the pathway that modulates 
Gli responses during growth and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC528890
PMID: 15545630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7724-31.

Activation of the BCL2 promoter in response to Hedgehog/GLI signal transduction
is predominantly mediated by GLI2.

Regl G(1), Kasper M, Schnidar H, Eichberger T, Neill GW, Philpott MP, Esterbauer 
H, Hauser-Kronberger C, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Genomics, University of Salzburg,
Salzburg, Austria.

Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (HH)/GLI signaling pathway has been
implicated in the development of basal cell carcinoma (BCC). The zinc finger
transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2 are considered mediators of the HH signal in 
epidermal cells, although their tumorigenic nature and their relative
contribution to tumorigenesis are only poorly understood. To shed light on the
respective role of these transcription factors in epidermal neoplasia, we
screened for genes preferentially regulated either by GLI1 or GLI2 in human
epidermal cells. We show here that expression of the key antiapoptotic factor
BCL2 is predominantly activated by GLI2 compared with GLI1. Detailed promoter
analysis and gel shift assays identified three GLI binding sites in the human
BCL2 cis-regulatory region. We found that one of these binding sites is critical 
for conferring GLI2-specific activation of the human BCL2 promoter and that the
selective induction of BCL2 expression depends on the zinc finger DNA binding
domain of GLI2. In vivo, GLI2 and BCL2 were coexpressed in the outer root sheath 
of hair follicles and BCC and in plasma cells that infiltrated BCC tumor islands.
On the basis of the latter observation, we analyzed plasma cell-derived tumors
and found strong expression of GLI2 and BCL2 in neoplastic cells of plasmacytoma 
patients, implicating HH/GLI signaling in the development of plasma cell-derived 
malignancies. The results reveal a central role for GLI2 in activating the
prosurvival factor BCL2, which may represent an important mechanism in the
development or maintenance of cancers associated with inappropriate HH signaling.

PMID: 15520176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5581-90. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Spatial pattern of sonic hedgehog signaling through Gli genes during cerebellum
development.

Corrales JD(1), Rocco GL, Blaess S, Guo Q, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The cerebellum consists of a highly organized set of folia that are largely
generated postnatally during expansion of the granule cell precursor (GCP) pool. 
Since the secreted factor sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in Purkinje cells and
functions as a GCP mitogen in vitro, it is possible that Shh influences foliation
during cerebellum development by regulating the position and/or size of lobes. We
studied how Shh and its transcriptional mediators, the Gli proteins, regulate GCP
proliferation in vivo, and tested whether they influence foliation. We
demonstrate that Shh expression correlates spatially and temporally with
foliation. Expression of the Shh target gene Gli1 is also highest in the anterior
medial cerebellum, but is restricted to proliferating GCPs and Bergmann glia. By 
contrast, Gli2 is expressed uniformly in all cells in the developing cerebellum
except Purkinje cells and Gli3 is broadly expressed along the anteroposterior
axis. Whereas Gli mutants have a normal cerebellum, Gli2 mutants have greatly
reduced foliation at birth and a decrease in GCPs. In a complementary study using
transgenic mice, we show that overexpressing Shh in the normal domain does not
grossly alter the basic foliation pattern, but does lead to prolonged
proliferation of GCPs and an increase in the overall size of the cerebellum.
Taken together, these studies demonstrate that positive Shh signaling through
Gli2 is required to generate a sufficient number of GCPs for proper lobe growth.

PMID: 15496441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Nov 1;13(21):2595-606. Epub 2004 Sep 14.

Requirement of the forkhead gene Foxe1, a target of sonic hedgehog signaling, in 
hair follicle morphogenesis.

Brancaccio A(1), Minichiello A, Grachtchouk M, Antonini D, Sheng H, Parlato R,
Dathan N, Dlugosz AA, Missero C.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), via Pietro Castellino
111, 80131 Napoli, Italy.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXE1 is mutated in patients with
Bamforth-Lazarus syndrome that exhibit hair follicle defects, suggesting a
possible role for Foxe1 in hair follicle morphogenesis. Here, we report that
Foxe1 is specifically expressed in the lower undifferentiated compartment of the 
hair follicle, at a time and site that parallel activation of the Shh signaling
pathway. The Foxe1 protein is also expressed in human and mouse basal cell
carcinoma in which hedgehog signaling is constitutively activated, whereas it is 
undetectable in normal epidermis and squamous cell carcinoma. Moreover,
expression of a dominant-negative form of Gli2 in skin results in complete
suppression of Foxe1 expression in the hair follicle, whereas transcriptionally
active Gli2 stimulates activity of the Foxe1 promoter. Foxe1-null skin displays
aberrant hair formation with the production of thinner and curly pelage hairs.
Although the hair follicle internal structure is conserved and several lineage
markers are properly expressed, the orderly downgrowth of follicles is strikingly
disrupted, causing disorientation, misalignment and aberrantly shaped of hair
follicles. Our findings provide a strong indication that the defect in
Bamforth-Lazarus syndrome is due to altered FOXE1 function in the hair follicle, 
and is independent of systemic defects present in affected individuals. In
addition, we establish Foxe1 as a downstream target of the Shh/Gli pathway in
hair follicle morphogenesis, and as a crucial player for correct hair follicle
orientation into the dermis and subcutis.

PMID: 15367491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell. 2004 Aug 20;118(4):505-16.

Dynamic changes in the response of cells to positive hedgehog signaling during
mouse limb patterning.

Ahn S(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In the vertebrate limb, the posteriorly located zone of polarizing activity (ZPA)
regulates digit identity through the morphogen Sonic Hedgehog (Shh). By
genetically marking Shh-responding cells in mice, we have addressed whether the
cumulative influence of positive Shh signaling over time and space reflects a
linear gradient of Shh responsiveness and whether Shh could play additional roles
in limb patterning. Our results show that all posterior limb mesenchyme cells, as
well as the ectoderm, respond to Shh from the ZPA and become the bone, muscle,
and skin of the posterior limb. Further, the readout of Shh activator function
integrated over time and space does not display a stable and linear gradient
along the A-P axis, as in a classical morphogen view. Finally, by fate mapping
Shh-responding cells in Gli2 and Gli3 mutant limbs, we demonstrate that a
specific level of positive Hh signaling is not required to specify digit
identities.

PMID: 15315762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 24;101(34):12561-6. Epub 2004 Aug 16.

Inhibition of prostate cancer proliferation by interference with SONIC
HEDGEHOG-GLI1 signaling.

Sanchez P(1), Hernández AM, Stecca B, Kahler AJ, DeGueme AM, Barrett A, Beyna M, 
Datta MW, Datta S, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute and Department of Cell Biology, New York University School 
of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Prostate cancer is the most common solid tumor in men, and it shares with all
cancers the hallmark of elevated, nonhomeostatic cell proliferation. Here we have
tested the hypothesis that the SONIC HEDGEHOG (SHH)-GLI signaling pathway is
implicated in prostate cancer. We report expression of SHH-GLI pathway components
in adult human prostate cancer, often with enhanced levels in tumors versus
normal prostatic epithelia. Blocking the pathway with cyclopamine or anti-SHH
antibodies inhibits the proliferation of GLI1+/PSA+ primary prostate tumor
cultures. Inversely, SHH can potentiate tumor cell proliferation, suggesting that
autocrine signaling may often sustain tumor growth. In addition, pathway blockade
in three metastatic prostate cancer cell lines with cyclopamine or through GLI1
RNA interference leads to inhibition of cell proliferation, suggesting
cell-autonomous pathway activation at different levels and showing an essential
role for GLI1 in human cells. Our data demonstrate the dependence of prostate
cancer on SHH-GLI function and suggest a novel therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC514658
PMID: 15314219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. BMC Genomics. 2004 Jul 22;5(1):49.

The FU gene and its possible protein isoforms.

Østerlund T(1), Everman DB, Betz RC, Mosca M, Nöthen MM, Schwartz CE,
Zaphiropoulos PG, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences at Novum, Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 57 Huddinge,
Sweden. torben.osterlund@klkemi.mas.lu.se

BACKGROUND: FU is the human homologue of the Drosophila gene fused whose product 
fused is a positive regulator of the transcription factor Cubitus interruptus
(Ci). Thus, FU may act as a regulator of the human counterparts of Ci, the GLI
transcription factors. Since Ci and GLI are targets of Hedgehog signaling in
development and morphogenesis, it is expected that FU plays an important role in 
Sonic, Desert and/or Indian Hedgehog induced cellular signaling.
RESULTS: The FU gene was identified on chromosome 2q35 at 217.56 Mb and its
exon-intron organization determined. The human developmental disorder Syndactyly 
type 1 (SD1) maps to this region on chromosome 2 and the FU coding region was
sequenced using genomic DNA from an affected individual in a linked family. While
no FU mutations were found, three single nucleotide polymorphisms were
identified. The expression pattern of FU was thoroughly investigated and all
examined tissues express FU. It is also clear that different tissues express
transcripts of different sizes and some tissues express more than one transcript.
By means of nested PCR of specific regions in RT/PCR generated cDNA, it was
possible to verify two alternative splicing events. This also suggests the
existence of at least two additional protein isoforms besides the FU protein that
has previously been described. This long FU and a much shorter isoform were
compared for the ability to regulate GLI1 and GLI2. None of the FU isoforms
showed any effects on GLI1 induced transcription but the long form can enhance
GLI2 activity. Apparently FU did not have any effect on SUFU induced inhibition
of GLI.
CONCLUSIONS: The FU gene and its genomic structure was identified. FU is a
candidate gene for SD1, but we have not identified a pathogenic mutation in the
FU coding region in a family with SD1. The sequence information and expression
analyses show that transcripts of different sizes are expressed and subjected to 
alternative splicing. Thus, mRNAs may contain different 5'UTRs and encode
different protein isoforms. Furthermore, FU is able to enhance the activity of
GLI2 but not of GLI1, implicating FU in some aspects of Hedgehog signaling.

PMCID: PMC512281
PMID: 15268766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3593-604. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

Transduction of graded Hedgehog signaling by a combination of Gli2 and Gli3
activator functions in the developing spinal cord.

Lei Q(1), Zelman AK, Kuang E, Li S, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UMDNJ/Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The three vertebrate Gli proteins play a central role in mediating Hedgehog
(Hh)-dependent cell fate specification in the developing spinal cord; however,
their individual contributions to this process have not been fully characterized.
In this paper, we have addressed this issue by examining patterning in the spinal
cord of Gli2;Gli3 double mutant embryos, and in chick embryos transfected with
dominant activator forms of Gli2 and Gli3. In double homozygotes, Gli1 is also
not expressed; thus, all Gli protein activities are absent in these mice. We show
that Gli3 contributes activator functions to ventral neuronal patterning, and
plays a redundant role with Gli2 in the generation of V3 interneurons. We also
show that motoneurons and three classes of ventral neurons are generated in the
ventral spinal cord in double mutants, but develop as intermingled rather than
discrete populations. Finally, we provide evidence that Gli2 and Gli3 activators 
control ventral neuronal patterning by regulating progenitor segregation. Thus,
multiple ventral neuronal types can develop in the absence of Gli function, but
require balanced Gli protein activities for their correct patterning and
differentiation.

PMID: 15215207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Genes Dev. 2004 Jul 1;18(13):1565-76. Epub 2004 Jun 15.

iguana encodes a novel zinc-finger protein with coiled-coil domains essential for
Hedgehog signal transduction in the zebrafish embryo.

Wolff C(1), Roy S, Lewis KE, Schauerte H, Joerg-Rauch G, Kirn A, Weiler C,
Geisler R, Haffter P, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Genetics, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Signaling by lipid-modified secreted glycoproteins of the Hedgehog family play
fundamental roles during pattern formation in animal development and in humans;
dysfunction of Hedgehog pathway components is frequently associated with a
variety of congenital abnormalities and cancer. Transcriptional regulation of
Hedgehog target genes is mediated by members of the Gli zinc-finger transcription
factors. The relative nuclear concentrations of Gli activator (Gli(act)) and
repressor (Gli(rep)) forms, together with their nucleocytoplasmic trafficking,
appear to be critical determinants for target gene expression. Whereas such
stringent controls of Gli activity are critical in ensuring appropriate levels of
pathway activation, the mechanisms by which these processes are regulated remain 
inadequately understood. Here, using genetic analysis, we show that the zebrafish
iguana gene product acts downstream of the Smoothened protein to modulate Gli
activity in the somites of the developing embryo. Positional cloning reveals that
iguana encodes the zebrafish ortholog of Dzip1, a novel zinc-finger/coiled-coil
domain protein that we show can shuttle between the cytoplasm and nucleus in a
manner correlated with Hedgehog pathway activity.

PMCID: PMC443519
PMID: 15198976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Jun;122(6):1503-9.

GLI2 is expressed in normal human epidermis and BCC and induces GLI1 expression
by binding to its promoter.

Ikram MS(1), Neill GW, Regl G, Eichberger T, Frischauf AM, Aberger F, Quinn A,
Philpott M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cutaneous Research, Barts and The London Queen Mary's School of
Medicine & Dentistry, University of London, UK. m.s.ikram@qmul.ac.uk

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) binds to its receptor patched (PTCH), leading to the
activation and repression of target genes via the GLI family of zinc-finger
transcription factors. Deregulation of the Shh pathway is associated with basal
cell carcinoma (BCC) due to upregulation of GLI1 and GLI2. We recently
demonstrated a positive feedback loop between GLI1 and GLI2, which revealed that 
GLI1 may be a direct target of GLI2. Using band shift and luciferase reporter
assays, we now show that GLI2 binds the GLI-binding consensus sequence in the
GLI1 promoter. These data suggest that GLI2 directly activates GLI1 and that
retrovirally expressed GLI2 induces expression of endogenous GLI1 in human
primary keratinocytes. Finally, using in situ hybridization, we show that GLI2 is
expressed in the interfollicular epidermis and the outer root sheath of hair
follicles in normal skin as well as in BCC tumor islands. These results suggest
an important role for GLI2 in regulating epidermal proliferation and skin
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15175043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 May;122(5):1180-7.

FOXE1, a new transcriptional target of GLI2 is expressed in human epidermis and
basal cell carcinoma.

Eichberger T(1), Regl G, Ikram MS, Neill GW, Philpott MP, Aberger F, Frischauf
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

Sonic hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a key role in epidermal development and skin 
cancer. Mutational inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene patched (PTCH) leads
to constitutive activation of the Hh signaling pathway, resulting in activation
of target gene transcription by the zinc finger transcription factors GLI1 and
GLI2. Recent experiments in mice point to GLI2 as the key mediator of Hh
signaling in skin. We have concentrated on the identification of candidate
mediators of GLI2 function in the human epidermis. We show here that the
forkhead/winged-helix domain transcription factor FOXE1 is likely to be a direct 
GLI2 target gene. The kinetics of FOXE1 induction are similar to the known direct
target PTCH, and a 2.5 kb upstream fragment containing five GLI-binding sites
activates transcription in a reporter assay. We show by in situ hybridization
that FOXE1 is expressed in the outer root sheath of the hair follicle, where
murine Gli2 is also expressed. FOXE1 expression is also found in basal
keratinocytes of the human epidermis and basal cell carcinoma (BCC). These data
point to a putative role of FOXE1 in mediating Hh signaling in the human
epidermis downstream of GLI2.

PMID: 15140221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Gene. 2004 Apr 14;330:101-14.

Expression of the PTCH1 tumor suppressor gene is regulated by alternative
promoters and a single functional Gli-binding site.

Agren M(1), Kogerman P, Kleman MI, Wessling M, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience at NOVUM, Center for Nutrition and Toxicology,
Karolinska Institute, Huddinge 141 57, Sweden.

The PTCH1 tumor suppressor gene encodes a receptor for secreted hedgehog (HH)
ligands and is important for proper proliferation, differentiation and patterning
in almost every tissue and organ during embryogenesis. The PTCH1 protein works as
a negative regulator of the HH-signaling pathway by repressing downstream
signaling by the coreceptor smoothened (SMOH). Mutations in PTCH1 lead to
constitutive expression of HH target genes and a relationship between mutated
PTCH1 and the most common tumor form in the Western world, Basal Cell Carcinoma
(BCC) has been clearly established. We here show that PTCH1 is transcriptionally 
regulated by three independent promoters generating transcripts with alternative 
first exons. We demonstrate that only one of two putative Gli-binding sites that 
were identified in the promoter region of PTCH1 is functional, and that the
transactivating Gli proteins, GLI1, Gli2 and GLI3, bind and enhance transcription
through this site. Moreover, a strong repression of both basal and induced PTCH1 
transcription was observed following expression of a truncated version of GLI3.
Most interestingly, the upstream components in the HH-signaling cascade, Sonic HH
(SHH) and SMOH, solely operate through the functional Gli-binding site because
mutation of the Gli-binding site resulted in the disappearance of the enhanced
transcription induced by the Gli proteins, as well as by SHH or SMOH. This
finding suggests that transcriptional activation of the PTCH1 gene mediated via
the HH-signaling pathway is dependent on the single functional Gli-binding site.

PMID: 15087129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 4;279(23):23874-81. Epub 2004 Mar 23.

Disruption of Meox or Gli activity ablates skeletal myogenesis in P19 cells.

Petropoulos H(1), Gianakopoulos PJ, Ridgeway AG, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Gli2 and Meox1 are transcription factors that are expressed in the developing
somite and play roles in the commitment of cells to the skeletal muscle lineage. 
To further define their roles in regulating myogenesis, the function of wild type
and dominant-negative forms of Gli2 and Meox1 were examined in the context of
differentiating P19 stem cells. We found that Gli2 overexpression up-regulated
transcript levels of Meox1 and, conversely, Meox1 overexpression resulted in the 
upregulation of Gli2 transcripts. Furthermore, dominant-negative forms of either 
Meox1 or Gli2 disrupted the ability of P19 cells to commit to the muscle lineage 
and to properly express either Gli2 or Meox1, respectively. Finally, Pax3
transcripts were induced by Gli2 overexpression and lost in the presence of
either mutants Meox1 or Gli2. Taken together, these results support the existence
of a regulatory loop between Gli2, Meox1, and Pax3 that is essential for
specification of mesodermal cells into the muscle lineage.

PMID: 15039437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Mar 10;294(1):210-22.

Impaired endochondral bone development and osteopenia in Gli2-deficient mice.

Miao D(1), Liu H, Plut P, Niu M, Huo R, Goltzman D, Henderson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Calcium Research Laboratory, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Mice homozygous for targeted disruption of the zinc finger domain of Gli2
(Gli2(zfd/zfd)) die at birth with developmental defects in several organ systems 
including the skeleton. The current studies were undertaken to define the role of
Gli2 in endochondral bone development by characterizing the molecular defects in 
the limbs and vertebrae of Gli2(zfd/zfd) mice. The bones of mutant mice removed
by cesarian section at E16.5 and E18.5 demonstrated delayed endochondral
ossification. This was accompanied by an increase in the length of cartilaginous 
growth plates, reduced bone tissue in the femur and tibia and by failure to
develop the primary ossification centre in vertebral bodies. The growth plates of
tibiae and vertebrae exhibited increased numbers of proliferating and
hypertrophic chondrocytes with no apparent alteration in matrix mineralisation.
The changes in growth plate morphology were accompanied by an increase in
expression of FGF2 in proliferating chondrocytes and decreased expression of
Indian hedgehog (Ihh), patched (Ptc) and parathyroid-hormone-related protein
(PTHrP) in prehypertrophic cells. Furthermore, there was a reduction in
expression of angiogenic molecules in hypertrophic chondrocytes, which was
accompanied by a decrease in chondroclasts at the cartilage bone interface, fewer
osteoblasts lining trabecular surfaces and a reduced volume of metaphyseal bone. 
These results indicate that functional Gli2 is necessary for normal endochondral 
bone development and that its absence results in increased proliferation of
immature chondrocytes and decreased resorption of mineralised cartilage and bone 
formation.

PMID: 14980515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Plant J. 2004 Feb;37(4):617-25.

Glycerol-insensitive Arabidopsis mutants: gli1 seedlings lack glycerol kinase,
accumulate glycerol and are more resistant to abiotic stress.

Eastmond PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNAP, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, UK.
pje4@york.ac.uk

The aim of this study was to investigate the process of glycerol catabolism in
germinating Arabidopsis seed. A genetic screen was performed to isolate
glycerol-insensitive (gli) mutant seedlings. Three separate mutant loci were
identified (gli1, gli2 and gli3). Of these, only gli1 is unable to utilise
glycerol. Following germination, gli1 seedlings transiently accumulate glycerol
derived from the breakdown of storage oil and are more resistant to hyperosmotic 
stress, salt stress, oxidative stress, freezing and desiccation. Enzyme assays
revealed that gli1 lacks glycerol kinase activity. GLI1 mapped to chromosome 1
near the putative glycerol kinase gene NHO1. Mutations in this gene were
identified in three independent gli1 alleles. A cDNA encoding GLI1 was cloned and
its function was proven by complementation of an Escherichia coli glycerol kinase
(glpK) deletion strain. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that GLI1 is
expressed in all tissues, but is transiently upregulated during early
post-germinative growth and leaf senescence. These data show that glycerol kinase
is required for glycerol catabolism in Arabidopsis and that the accumulation of
glycerol can enhance resistance to a variety of abiotic stresses associated with 
dehydration.

PMID: 14756771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Dev Cell. 2004 Jan;6(1):103-15.

All mouse ventral spinal cord patterning by hedgehog is Gli dependent and
involves an activator function of Gli3.

Bai CB(1), Stephen D, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, and Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

An important question is how the gradient of Hedgehog is interpreted by cells at 
the level of the Gli transcription factors. The full range of Gli activity and
its dependence on Hh have not been determined, although the Gli2 activator and
Gli3 repressor have been implicated. Using the spinal cord as a model system, we 
demonstrate that Gli3 can transduce Hedgehog signaling as an activator. All
expression of the Hh target gene Gli1 is dependent on both Gli2 and Gli3. Unlike 
Gli2, however, Gli3 requires endogenous Gli1 for induction of floor plate and V3 
interneurons. Strikingly, embryos lacking all Gli function develop motor neurons 
and three ventral interneuron subtypes, similar to embryos lacking Hh signaling
and Gli3. Therefore, in the spinal cord all Hh signaling is Gli dependent.
Furthermore, a combination of Gli2 and Gli3 is required to regulate motor neuron 
development and spatial patterning of ventral spinal cord progenitors.

PMID: 14723851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Oncogene. 2004 Feb 12;23(6):1263-74.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GLI2 antagonizes contact inhibition and
differentiation of human epidermal cells.

Regl G(1), Kasper M, Schnidar H, Eichberger T, Neill GW, Ikram MS, Quinn AG,
Philpott MP, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, A-5020 
Salzburg, Austria.

In stratified epidermis, activation of the Hh/Gli signal transduction pathway has
been implicated in the control of cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. The
zinc-finger transcription factor Gli2 has been identified as critical mediator of
the Hh signal at the distal end of the pathway, but the molecular mechanisms by
which Gli2 regulates cell proliferation or induces epidermal malignancies such as
basal cell carcinoma are still unclear. Here, we provide evidence for a role of
human GLI2 in antagonizing contact inhibition and epidermal differentiation. We
show by gene expression profiling that activation of the GLI2 oncogene in human
keratinocytes activates the transcription of a number of genes involved in cell
cycle progression such as E2F1, CCND1, CDC2 and CDC45L, while it represses genes 
associated with epidermal differentiation. Analysis of the proliferative effect
of GLI2 revealed that GLI2 is able to induce G1-S phase progression in
contact-inhibited keratinocytes. Detailed time-course experiments identified E2F1
as early transcriptional target of GLI2. Further, we show that GLI2 expression in
human keratinocytes results in a marked downregulation of epidermal
differentiation markers. The data suggest a role for GLI2 in Hh-induced epidermal
neoplasia by opposing epithelial cell cycle arrest signals and epidermal
differentiation.

PMID: 14691458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):337-45. Epub 2003 Dec 17.

Hedgehog-GLI signaling regulates the behavior of cells with stem cell properties 
in the developing neocortex.

Palma V(1), Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute and Department of Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine,
540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Stem cells are crucial for normal development and homeostasis, and their
misbehavior may be related to the origin of cancer. Progress in these areas has
been difficult because the mechanisms regulating stem cell lineages are not well 
understood. Here, we have investigated the role of the SHH-GLI pathway in the
developing mouse neocortex. The results show that SHH signaling endogenously
regulates the number of embryonic and postnatal mouse neocortical cells with stem
cell properties, and controls precursor proliferation in a
concentration-dependent manner in cooperation with EGF signaling. These findings 
identify a crucial mechanism for the regulation of the number of cells with stem 
cell properties that is unexpectedly conserved in different stem cell niches.

PMID: 14681189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Development. 2003 Dec;130(25):6233-43. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Interplays of Gli2 and Gli3 and their requirement in mediating Shh-dependent
sclerotome induction.

Buttitta L(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 115 West
University Parkway, Baltimore, MD 21210, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for sclerotome development in the
mouse. Gli2 and Gli3 are thought to be the primary transcriptional mediators of
Shh signaling; however, their roles in Shh induction of sclerotomal genes have
not been investigated. Using a combination of mutant analysis and in vitro
explant assays, we demonstrate that Gli2 and Gli3 are required for Shh-dependent 
sclerotome induction. Gli2(-/-)Gli3(-/-) embryos exhibit a severe loss of
sclerotomal gene expression, and somitic mesoderm from these embryos cannot
activate sclerotomal genes in response to exogenous Shh. We find that one copy of
either Gli2 or Gli3 is required to mediate Shh induction of sclerotomal markers
Pax1 and Pax9 in vivo and in vitro. Although Gli2 is generally considered an
activator and Gli3 a repressor, our results also reveal a repressor function for 
Gli2 and an activator function for Gli3 in the developing somite. To further
dissect the function of each Gli, we used adenovirus to overexpress Gli1, Gli2
and Gli3 in presomitic mesoderm explants. We find that each Gli preferentially
activates a distinct set of Shh target genes, suggesting that the functions of
Shh in patterning, growth and negative feedback are divided preferentially
between different Gli proteins in the somite.

PMID: 14602680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Nov 11;100(23):13424-9. Epub 2003 Oct 27.

Loss-of-function mutations in the human GLI2 gene are associated with pituitary
anomalies and holoprosencephaly-like features.

Roessler E(1), Du YZ, Mullor JL, Casas E, Allen WP, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Roeder 
ER, Ming JE, Ruiz i Altaba A, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1852, USA.

Diminished Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling is associated with the most common
forebrain defect in humans, holoprosencephaly (HPE), which includes cyclopia, a
phenotype also seen in mice and other vertebrates with defective Shh signaling.
The secreted protein Shh acts as a crucial factor that patterns the ventral
forebrain and is required for the division of the primordial eye field and brain 
into two discrete halves. Gli2 is one of three vertebrate transcription factors
implicated as obligatory mediators of Shh signal transduction. Here, we show that
loss-of-function mutations in the human GLI2 gene are associated with a
distinctive phenotype (within the HPE spectrum) whose primary features include
defective anterior pituitary formation and pan-hypopituitarism, with or without
overt forebrain cleavage abnormalities, and HPE-like midfacial hypoplasia. We
also demonstrate that these mutations lack GLI2 activity. We report on a
functional association between GLI2 and human disease and highlight the role of
GLI2 in human head development.

PMCID: PMC263830
PMID: 14581620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Surgery. 2003 Aug;134(2):345-50.

Defective sonic hedgehog signaling in esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Spilde TL(1), Bhatia AM, Mehta S, Ostlie DJ, Hembree MJ, Preuett BL, Prasadan K, 
Li Z, Snyder CL, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, The Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas
City, MO 64108, USA.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula 
(EA/TEF) remains unknown. We have found previously that an initial esophageal
atresia, followed by an abnormal (absent) branching pattern of the middle branch 
of a trifurcation of the lung/tracheal bud, leads to the neonatal finding of TEF.
Mice null mutant for hedgehog signaling can experience the development of EA/TEF,
but the mechanism for this development is also unknown. Given that EA/TEF in
humans appears not to be due to genetic defects, a hedgehog mutation cause seems 
very unlikely. However, defective hedgehog signaling that is caused by
environmental effects in the human embryo likely could be implicated. We studied 
a teratogen-induced model of EA/TEF to determine the mechanism by which defective
hedgehog signaling may lead to EA/TEF.
METHODS: We injected Adriamycin into pregnant rats to induce EA/TEF in rat
embryos. We first quantified sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway molecule
expression using real-time, semiquantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction for Shh, Shh receptors (patched and smoothened), and downstream
intracellular targets of those receptors (Gli family members). On the basis of
these findings, we then developed an in vitro culture system for the day-12
embryonic TEF and manipulated Shh signaling using either exogenous Shh or Shh
inhibitors.
RESULTS: By reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, a unique difference 
between the fistula tract and control tissues was that Gli-2 (downstream
signaling molecule of Shh) messenger RNA levels were much lower in the fistula
tract than in the adjacent esophagus (P =.002). Surprisingly, in the culture
experiments, the fistula tract was induced to branch by exogenous Shh. Such
branching of the fistula was unexpected and further supports the presumed
respiratory origin of the fistula tract because the normal lung, but not normal
esophagus, branched in response to Shh. The Shh inhibitor had no effect, which
indicated that defective signaling, rather than hyperfunctioning Shh, is critical
to the nonbranching phenotype of the fistula tract in TEF.
CONCLUSIONS: The recapitulation of respiratory developmental morphogenesis by the
fistula tract of TEF in the presence of exogenous Shh, together with the
quantitative reduction in normal, endogenous levels of Gli-2, strongly suggests
that 1 mechanism for the formation of the fistula tract is the lack of proper Shh
signaling because of Gli-2 deficiency, with subsequent straight, nonbranching
caudal growth of the fistula tract. This deficiency can be rescued by excess
exogenous Shh, thus reestablishing respiratory morphogenesis.

PMID: 12947339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. EMBO Rep. 2003 Aug;4(8):761-5.

Gli proteins and the control of spinal-cord patterning.

Jacob J(1), Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The secreted protein sonic hedgehog (Shh) is crucial for the specification of
neuronal subtype identity in the vertebrate neural tube. Zinc-finger proteins of 
the Gli family are known to be transcriptional mediators of Shh signalling, and
to coordinately pattern the dorsal-ventral axis of the spinal cord. Recent
studies indicate that additional signals may provide positional information in
parallel to Shh to specify neuronal fate in this tissue. We review the role of
Gli proteins in spinal-cord development and propose that various upstream
patterning signals may be integrated by the Gli proteins to direct a coherent
programme of neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1326336
PMID: 12897799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Curr Biol. 2003 Jul 15;13(14):1169-81.

Multiple muscle cell identities induced by distinct levels and timing of hedgehog
activity in the zebrafish embryo.

Wolff C(1), Roy S, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Intercellular Signalling Group, Centre for Developmental Genetics,
University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: In the zebrafish embryo, the differentiation of distinct muscle fiber
types has been shown to require the activity of members of the Hedgehog (Hh)
family of secreted proteins. Evidence from other systems suggests that Hh behaves
as a morphogen, inducing cell fates in a concentration-dependent manner. Exactly 
how Hh signaling contributes to the generation of the correct pattern of cells
within the zebrafish myotome, however, has remained obscure.
RESULTS: Here, we distinguish four distinct myotomal cell identities in the
zebrafish embryo on the basis of their position, morphology, and gene expression 
patterns. Using morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) to diminish the activities of
the Hh pathway components Patched (Ptc), Fused (Fu), and Suppressor of Fused
(Su(fu)), and the teratogen cyclopamine to inhibit the Hh transducer Smoothened
(Smo), we show that the appropriate differentiation of each cell type depends
upon the levels and range of Hh signaling within the myotome. In addition, by
transiently modulating Hh activity by using cyclopamine and a heat-inducible
transgene, we demonstrate that the competence of myotomal cells to respond to Hh 
changes with time. Finally, we show that the Gli1 and Gli2 transcription factors 
mediate most of the response of myotomal cells to Hh.
CONCLUSIONS: Hh signaling acts in a dosage-dependent manner to specify cell fate 
in the zebrafish myotome. Allocation of the correct number of cells to a specific
fate depends upon the range of Hh activity. The timing of exposure to Hh
determines the response of cells to the signal.

PMID: 12867027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 Jul;23(3):440-50.

Gli2 is required for normal Shh signaling and oligodendrocyte development in the 
spinal cord.

Qi Y(1), Tan M, Hui CC, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated that oligodendrocyte progenitor (OLP) cells are 
induced from the ventral neural tube by the ventral midline signal, Sonic
hedgehog (Shh). In this study, we investigated the role of Gli2 signal transducer
in Shh induction of oligodendrocytes by studying oligodendrocyte development in
Gli2-null mutants. In the absence of Gli2, the Olig1/2+ oligodendrogenic domain
in the ventral spinal neuroepithelium is markedly reduced, and the initial
production of OLP cells from the ventral neuroepithelium is much decreased and
delayed. However, at late gestation stages, there is no discernible difference in
the steady-state number of OLPs between the wild type and mutants. Interestingly,
the initial delay and reduction of OLP production in the mutants is associated
with a delayed expression of myelin-specific genes and oligodendrocyte
differentiation. In contrast to oligodendrogenesis in the spinal cord,
oligodendrocyte development in the forebrain is unaffected by Gli2 mutation.
Together, our studies have suggested that Gli2 plays an important role in
regulating oligodendrocyte specification and differentiation in the caudal neural
tube.

PMID: 12837627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Dev Biol. 2003 Jul 1;259(1):150-61.

Differential requirement for Gli2 and Gli3 in ventral neural cell fate
specification.

Motoyama J(1), Milenkovic L, Iwama M, Shikata Y, Scott MP, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Group, Brain Research Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa,
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jun@brain.riken.go.jp

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) directs the development of ventral cell fates, including
floor plate and V3 interneurons, in the mouse neural tube. Here, we show that the
transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3, mediators of Shh signaling, are required for
the development of the ventral cell fates but make distinct contributions to
controlling cell fates at different locations along the rostral-caudal axis.
Mutants lacking Patched1 (Ptc1), the putative receptor of Shh, were used to
analyze Gli functions. Ptc1(-/-) mutants develop floor plate, motor neuron, and
V3 interneuron progenitors in lateral and dorsal regions, suggesting that the
normal role of Ptc1 is to suppress ventral cell development in dorsal neural
tube. The Ptc1(-/-) phenotype is rescued, with restoration of dorsal cell types, 
by the lack of Gli2, but only in the caudal neural tube. In triple mutants of
Gli2, Gli3, and Ptc1, dorsal and lateral cell fates are restored in the entire
neural tube. These observations suggest that Gli2 is essential for ventral
specification in the caudal neural tube, and that in more rostral regions, only
Gli3 can promote development of ventral cells if Gli2 is absent. Thus, Shh
signaling is mediated by overlapping but distinct functions of Gli2 and Gli3, and
their relative contributions vary along the rostral-caudal axis.

PMID: 12812795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Br J Dermatol. 2003 May;148(5):892-7.

Expression of the GLI2 oncogene and its isoforms in human basal cell carcinoma.

Tojo M(1), Kiyosawa H, Iwatsuki K, Nakamura K, Kaneko F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine, 1 
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of the patched (Ptc) gene, a developmental regulator
implicated in the signalling pathway via sonic hedgehog (Shh) and smoothened
(Smo), play an essential pathogenic role in the development of basal cell
carcinomas (BCCs). We previously reported the upregulation of Shh signal
transducers, including Ptc, Smo and hedgehog-interacting protein, in BCCs. In
vertebrates, specific downstream effectors in the Shh signalling pathway include 
three zinc-finger transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Gli1 possesses only
an activation domain, while Gli2 and Gli3 contain both activation and repression 
domains. It remains unclear which of these transcription factors are responsible 
for the development of BCCs.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the expression pattern of Gli2 mRNA by human BCCs in
comparison with those by normal human skin and various skin tumours.
METHODS: We performed quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction analyses with a series of samples from BCCs, other skin tumours and
normal skin.
RESULTS: We found that Gli2 mRNA expression was enhanced in the BCCs we examined,
whereas there was no significant increase in other skin tumours or normal skin.
Of four spliced Gli2 isoforms designated Gli2alpha, beta, gamma and delta, the
expression of Gli2beta mRNA was increased the most in BCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: As Gli2beta is an isoform spliced at the first splicing site
containing a repression domain and consists of an intact activation domain, its
overexpression may lead to the upregulation of the Shh signalling pathway,
thereby inducing BCCs.

PMID: 12786818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Biol. 2003 May 15;257(2):343-55.

The amino-terminal region of Gli3 antagonizes the Shh response and acts in
dorsoventral fate specification in the developing spinal cord.

Meyer NP(1), Roelink H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Department of Biological Structure,
Center for Developmental Biology, University of Washington, Box 357420, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.

A concentration gradient of Shh is thought to pattern the ventral neural tube,
and these ventral cell types are absent in shh-/- mice. Based on in vitro and
genetic studies, the zinc finger-containing transcription factors Gli 1, 2, and 3
are mediators of the Shh intracellular response. The floorplate and adjacent cell
types are absent in gli1-/-;gli2-/- mice, but part of the Shh-/- phenotype in the
neural tube is alleviated in the Shh-/-;gli3-/- double mutant. This is consistent
with the predicted role of Gli3 as a repressor of the Shh response. Gli3
repressor activity is blocked by Shh. In order to test the role of the repressor 
form of Gli3 in the neural tube, a truncated version of Gli3 (Gli3R*) was
designed to mimic a Pallister Hall allele. Gli3R* acts as a constitutive
repressor independent of Shh signaling. Misexpression of Gli3R* in the chick
neural tube caused a ventral expansion of class-I, dorsal progenitor proteins and
a loss of class-II, ventral progenitor proteins consistent with expected activity
as a repressor of the Shh response. Activation of the BMP response is sufficient 
to maintain gli3 expression in neural plate explants, which might be a mechanism 
by which BMPs antagonize the Shh response.

PMID: 12729563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2003 May 1;257(1):140-52.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) cells arise from cranial neural crest and
adenohypophyseal regions of the neural plate in the zebrafish, Danio rerio.

Whitlock KE(1), Wolf CD, Boyce ML.

Author information: 
(1)Field of Genetics and Development/Neurobiology and Behavior, Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
kew13@cornell.edu

The olfactory placodes generate the primary sensory neurons of the olfactory
sensory system. Additionally, the olfactory placodes have been proposed to
generate a class of neuroendocrine cells containing gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH). GnRH is a multifunctional decapeptide essential for the
development of secondary sex characteristics in vertebrates as well as a
neuromodulator within the central nervous system. Here, we show that endocrine
and neuromodulatory GnRH cells arise from two separate, nonolfactory regions in
the developing neural plate. Specifically, the neuromodulatory GnRH cells of the 
terminal nerve arise from the cranial neural crest, and the endocrine GnRH cells 
of the hypothalamus arise from the adenohypophyseal region of the developing
anterior neural plate. Our findings are consistent with cell types generated by
the adenohypophysis, a source of endocrine tissue in vertebrate animals, and by
neural crest, a source of cells contributing to the cranial nerves. The
adenohypophysis arises from a region of the anterior neural plate flanked by the 
olfactory placode fields at early stages of development, and premigratory cranial
neural crest lies adjacent to the caudal edge of the olfactory placode domain
[Development 127 (2000), 3645]. Thus, the GnRH cells arise from tissue closely
associated with the developing olfactory placode, and their different
developmental origins reflect their different functional roles in the adult
animal.

PMID: 12710963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Mar;38(3):465-8.

A role for sonic hedgehog signaling in the pathogenesis of human
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Spilde T(1), Bhatia A, Ostlie D, Marosky J, Holcomb G 3rd, Snyder C, Gittes G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, Children's
Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri 64108, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Many theories of the pathogenesis of esophageal atresia with 
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) have been proposed, but no specific mechanism 
has been demonstrated. The authors previously reported data suggesting a
respiratory origin of the fistula tract in the rat model and in humans. Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) "knockout" mice have the VACTERL association, and thus it was
hypothesized that defects in Shh signaling may exist in the human neonatal EA/TEF
fistula tract.
METHODS: With IRB approval, human proximal esophageal pouch and distal fistula
samples were removed at the time of standard repair of EA/TEF in accordance with 
what the surgeons deemed appropriate in preparation for anastomosis. Tissues were
processed for HE, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and
immunohistochemistry. Normal embryonic lung cDNA was used as a positive control
for the RT-PCR reactions.
RESULTS: As expected, Shh was present by immunohistochemistry in the proximal
esophageal pouch, but was specifically absent in the distal fistula tract. Gli-1,
-2, and -3 (all intracellular mediators of Shh signaling) were present in the
proximal pouch and distal esophagus by RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of Shh signaling in the developing fistula tract of the 
human neonate was surprising given that Shh normally is present in esophagus and 
other gut components. These results support the conclusion that the fistula tract
is not an esophaguslike structure, despite both its histologic appearance and its
use as an esophageal replacement. Also, like in Shh-null mutant mice, aberrant
Shh signaling may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of EA/TEF in humans.

Copyright 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12632368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Development. 2003 Apr;130(8):1565-77.

A novel function for Hedgehog signalling in retinal pigment epithelium
differentiation.

Perron M(1), Boy S, Amato MA, Viczian A, Koebernick K, Pieler T, Harris WA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Bat. 445 Université Paris XI, 91405
Orsay, France. muriel.perron@emex.u-psud.fr

Sonic hedgehog is involved in eye field separation along the proximodistal axis. 
We show that Hh signalling continues to be important in defining aspects of the
proximodistal axis as the optic vesicle and optic cup mature. We show that two
other Hedgehog proteins, Banded hedgehog and Cephalic hedgehog, related to the
mouse Indian hedgehog and Desert hedgehog, respectively, are strongly expressed
in the central retinal pigment epithelium but excluded from the peripheral
pigment epithelium surrounding the ciliary marginal zone. By contrast, downstream
components of the Hedgehog signalling pathway, Gli2, Gli3 and X-Smoothened, are
expressed in this narrow peripheral epithelium. We show that this zone contains
cells that are in the proliferative state. This equivalent region in the adult
mammalian eye, the pigmented ciliary epithelium, has been identified as a zone in
which retinal stem cells reside. These data, combined with double labelling and
the use of other retinal pigment epithelium markers, show that the retinal
pigment epithelium of tadpole embryos has a molecularly distinct peripheral to
central axis. In addition, Gli2, Gli3 and X-Smoothened are also expressed in the 
neural retina, in the most peripheral region of the ciliary marginal zone, where 
retinal stem cells are found in Xenopus, suggesting that they are good markers
for retinal stem cells. To test the role of the Hedgehog pathway at different
stages of retinogenesis, we activated the pathway by injecting a
dominant-negative form of PKA or blocking it by treating embryos with
cyclopamine. Embryos injected or treated at early stages display clear
proximodistal defects in the retina. Interestingly, the main phenotype of embryos
treated with cyclopamine at late stages is a severe defect in RPE
differentiation. This study thus provides new insights into the role of Hedgehog 
signalling in the formation of the proximodistal axis of the eye and the
differentiation of retinal pigment epithelium.

PMID: 12620982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Development. 2003 Apr;130(8):1549-64.

Genetic analysis of zebrafish gli1 and gli2 reveals divergent requirements for
gli genes in vertebrate development.

Karlstrom RO(1), Tyurina OV, Kawakami A, Nishioka N, Talbot WS, Sasaki H, Schier 
AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.
karlstrom@bio.umass.edu

Gli proteins regulate the transcription of Hedgehog (Hh) target genes. Genetic
studies in mouse have shown that Gli1 is not essential for embryogenesis, whereas
Gli2 acts as an activator of Hh target genes. In contrast, misexpression studies 
in Xenopus and cultured cells have suggested that Gli1 can act as an activator of
Hh-regulated genes, whereas Gli2 might function as a repressor of a subset of Hh 
targets. To clarify the roles of gli genes during vertebrate development, we have
analyzed the requirements for gli1 and gli2 during zebrafish embryogenesis. We
report that detour (dtr) mutations encode loss-of-function alleles of gli1. In
contrast to mouse Gli1 mutants, dtr mutants and embryos injected with gli1
antisense morpholino oligonucleotides display defects in the activation of Hh
target genes in the ventral neuroectoderm. Mutations in you-too (yot) encode
C-terminally truncated Gli2. We find that these truncated proteins act as
dominant repressors of Hh signaling, in part by blocking Gli1 function. In
contrast, blocking Gli2 function by eliminating full-length Gli2 results in minor
Hh signaling defects and uncovers a repressor function of Gli2 in the
telencephalon. In addition, we find that Gli1 and Gli2 have activator functions
during somite and neural development. These results reveal divergent requirements
for Gli1 and Gli2 in mouse and zebrafish and indicate that zebrafish Gli1 is an
activator of Hh-regulated genes, while zebrafish Gli2 has minor roles as a
repressor or activator of Hh targets.

PMID: 12620981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Biol. 2003 Feb 1;254(1):19-35.

Multiple roles for Hedgehog signaling in zebrafish pituitary development.

Sbrogna JL(1), Barresi MJ, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

The endocrine-secreting lobe of the pituitary gland, or adenohypophysis, forms
from cells at the anterior margin of the neural plate through inductive
interactions involving secreted morphogens of the Hedgehog (Hh), fibroblast
growth factor (FGF), and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) families. To better
understand when and where Hh signaling influences pituitary development, we have 
analyzed the effects of blocking Hh signaling both pharmacologically (cyclopamine
treatments) and genetically (zebrafish Hh pathway mutants). While current models 
state that Shh signaling from the oral ectoderm patterns the pituitary after
placode induction, our data suggest that Shh plays a direct early role in both
pituitary induction and patterning, and that early Hh signals comes from adjacent
neural ectoderm. We report that Hh signaling is necessary between 10 and 15 h of 
development for induction of the zebrafish adenohypophysis, a time when shh is
expressed only in neural tissue. We show that the Hh responsive genes ptc1 and
nk2.2 are expressed in preplacodal cells at the anterior margin of the neural
tube at this time, indicating that these cells are directly receiving Hh signals.
Later (15-20 h) cyclopamine treatments disrupt anterior expression of nk2.2 and
Prolactin, showing that early functional patterning requires Hh signals.
Consistent with a direct role for Hh signaling in pituitary induction and
patterning, overexpression of Shh results in expanded adenohypophyseal expression
of lim3, expansion of nk2.2 into the posterior adenohypophysis, and an increase
in Prolactin- and Somatolactin-secreting cells. We also use the zebrafish Hh
pathway mutants to document the range of pituitary defects that occur when
different elements of the Hh signaling pathway are mutated. These defects,
ranging from a complete loss of the adenohypophysis (smu/smo and yot/gli2
mutants) to more subtle patterning defects (dtr/gli1 mutants), may correlate to
human Hh signaling mutant phenotypes seen in Holoprosencephaly and other
congenital disorders. Our results reveal multiple and distinct roles for Hh
signaling in the formation of the vertebrate pituitary gland, and suggest that Hh
signaling from neural ectoderm is necessary for induction and functional
patterning of the vertebrate pituitary gland.

PMID: 12606279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Nat Genet. 2003 Mar;33(3):416-21. Epub 2003 Feb 18.

Notch1 functions as a tumor suppressor in mouse skin.

Nicolas M(1), Wolfer A, Raj K, Kummer JA, Mill P, van Noort M, Hui CC, Clevers H,
Dotto GP, Radtke F.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University Lausanne,
1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

Notch proteins are important in binary cell-fate decisions and inhibiting
differentiation in many developmental systems, and aberrant Notch signaling is
associated with tumorigenesis. The role of Notch signaling in mammalian skin is
less well characterized and is mainly based on in vitro studies, which suggest
that Notch signaling induces differentiation in mammalian skin. Conventional gene
targeting is not applicable to establishing the role of Notch receptors or
ligands in the skin because Notch1-/- embryos die during gestation. Therefore, we
used a tissue-specific inducible gene-targeting approach to study the
physiological role of the Notch1 receptor in the mouse epidermis and the corneal 
epithelium of adult mice. Unexpectedly, ablation of Notch1 results in epidermal
and corneal hyperplasia followed by the development of skin tumors and
facilitated chemical-induced skin carcinogenesis. Notch1 deficiency in skin and
in primary keratinocytes results in increased and sustained expression of Gli2,
causing the development of basal-cell carcinoma-like tumors. Furthermore, Notch1 
inactivation in the epidermis results in derepressed beta-catenin signaling in
cells that should normally undergo differentiation. Enhanced beta-catenin
signaling can be reversed by re-introduction of a dominant active form of the
Notch1 receptor. This leads to a reduction in the signaling-competent pool of
beta-catenin, indicating that Notch1 can inhibit beta-catenin-mediated signaling.
Our results indicate that Notch1 functions as a tumor-suppressor gene in
mammalian skin.

PMID: 12590261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Genes Dev. 2003 Jan 15;17(2):282-94.

Sonic hedgehog-dependent activation of Gli2 is essential for embryonic hair
follicle development.

Mill P(1), Mo R, Fu H, Grachtchouk M, Kim PC, Dlugosz AA, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, and
Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a critical role in hair follicle development
and skin cancer, but how it controls these processes remains unclear. Of the
three Gli transcription factors involved in transducing Shh signals in
vertebrates, we demonstrate here that Gli2 is the key mediator of Shh responses
in skin. Similar to Shh(-/-) mice, Gli2(-/-) mutants exhibit an arrest in hair
follicle development with reduced cell proliferation and Shh-responsive gene
expression, but grossly normal epidermal differentiation. By transgenic rescue
experiments, we show that epidermal Gli2 function alone is sufficient to restore 
hair follicle development in Gli2(-/-) skin. Furthermore, only a constitutively
active form of Gli2, but not wild-type Gli2, can activate Shh-responsive gene
expression and promote cell proliferation in Shh(-/-) skin. These observations
indicate that Shh-dependent Gli2 activator function in the epidermis is essential
for hair follicle development. Our data also reveal that Gli2 mediates the
mitogenic effects of Shh by transcriptional activation of cyclin D1 and cyclin D2
in the developing hair follicles. Together, our results suggest that
Shh-dependent Gli2 activation plays a critical role in epithelial homeostasis by 
promoting proliferation through the transcriptional control of cell cycle
regulators.

PMCID: PMC195973
PMID: 12533516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Dev Biol. 2002 Dec 15;252(2):241-56.

Migration of zebrafish spinal motor nerves into the periphery requires multiple
myotome-derived cues.

Zeller J(1), Schneider V, Malayaman S, Higashijima S, Okamoto H, Gui J, Lin S,
Granato M.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan

In vertebrate embryos, spinal motor neurons project through segmentally
reiterated nerves into the somites. Here, we report that zebrafish secondary
motor neurons, which are similar to motor neurons in birds and mammals, depend on
myotomal cues to navigate into the periphery. We show that the absence of
myotomal adaxial cells in you-too/gli2 embryos severely impairs secondary motor
axonal pathfinding, including their ability to project into the somites.
Moreover, in diwanka mutant embryos, in which adaxial cells are present but fail 
to produce cues essential for primary motor growth cones to pioneer into the
somites, secondary motor axons display similar pathfinding defects. The
similarities between the axonal defects in you-too/gli2 and diwanka mutant
embryos strongly suggest that pathfinding of secondary motor axons depends on
myotome-derived cues, and that the diwanka gene is a likely candidate to produce 
or encode such a cue. Our experiments also demonstrate that diwanka plays a
central role in the migration of primary and secondary motor neurons, suggesting 
that both neural populations share mechanisms underlying axonal pathfinding. In
summary, we provide compelling evidence that myotomal cells produce multiple
signals to initiate and control the migration of spinal nerve axons into the
somites.

PMID: 12482713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 15;16(22):2865-78.

Dorsal-ventral patterning of the spinal cord requires Gli3 transcriptional
repressor activity.

Persson M(1), Stamataki D, te Welscher P, Andersson E, Böse J, Rüther U, Ericson 
J, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institute, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays a critical role in organizing cell pattern in the
developing spinal cord. Gli proteins are thought to mediate Shh signaling, but
their role in directing neural tube patterning remains unclear. Here we identify 
a role for Gli3 transcriptional repressor activity in patterning the intermediate
region of the spinal cord that complements the requirement for Gli2 in ventral
regions. Moreover, blocking all Gli responses results in a complete dorsalization
of ventral spinal cord, indicating that in addition to the specific roles of Gli2
and Gli3 in the neural tube, there is functional redundancy between Gli proteins.
Finally, analysis of Shh/Gli3 compound mutant mice substantiates the idea that
ventral patterning may involve a mechanism independent, or parallel, to graded
Shh signaling. However, even in the absence of graded Shh signaling, Gli3 is
required for the dorsal-ventral patterning of the intermediate neural tube.
Together these data raise the possibility that Gli proteins act as common
mediators integrating Shh signals, and other sources of positional information,
to control patterning throughout the ventral neural tube.

PMCID: PMC187477
PMID: 12435629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4753-61.

Gli2, but not Gli1, is required for initial Shh signaling and ectopic activation 
of the Shh pathway.

Bai CB(1), Auerbach W, Lee JS, Stephen D, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The Shh signaling pathway is required in many mammalian tissues for embryonic
patterning, cell proliferation and differentiation. In addition, inappropriate
activation of the pathway has been implicated in many human tumors. Based on
transfection assays and gain-of-function studies in frog and mouse, the
transcription factor Gli1 has been proposed to be a major mediator of Shh
signaling. To address whether this is the case in mouse, we generated a Gli1 null
allele expressing lacZ. Strikingly, Gli1 is not required for mouse development or
viability. Of relevance, we show that all transcription of Gli1 in the nervous
system and limbs is dependent on Shh and, consequently, Gli1 protein is normally 
not present to transduce initial Shh signaling. To determine whether Gli1
contributes to the defects seen when the Shh pathway is inappropriately activated
and Gli1 transcription is induced, Gli1;Ptc double mutants were generated. We
show that Gli1 is not required for the ectopic activation of the Shh signaling
pathway or to the early embryonic lethal phenotype in Ptc null mutants. Of
significance, we found instead that Gli2 is required for mediating some of the
inappropriate Shh signaling in Ptc mutants. Our studies demonstrate that, in
mammals, Gli1 is not required for Shh signaling and that Gli2 mediates
inappropriate activation of the pathway due to loss of the negative regulator
Ptc.

PMID: 12361967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Neurooncol. 2002 Sep;59(2):107-15.

Patched and smoothened mRNA expression in human astrocytic tumors inversely
correlates with histological malignancy.

Katayam M(1), Yoshida K, Ishimori H, Katayama M, Kawase T, Motoyama J, Kamiguchi 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Brain Science Group, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako,
Saitama, Japan. mkatayama-nsu@umin.ac.jp

Patched (Ptc) is a transmembrane receptor for sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
functionally associated with another transmembrane protein, smoothened (Smo). Ptc
is a tumor suppressor gene whereas Smo serves as a proto-oncogene of
neuroectodermal tumors. Their downstream molecules, Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3, are
oncogenes of glioblastomas. We have analyzed mRNA expression of Ptc, Smo, and Gli
family members in human astrocytic tumors. The mRNA expression was quantified by 
real-time polymerase chain reactions in 40 tumors (diffuse astrocytomas; 6 cases:
anaplastic astrocytomas; 12 cases: glioblastomas; 22 cases) and four cell lines
derived from astrocytic tumors. The MIB-1 proliferating cell indices (PCIs) of
these tumors were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. In comparison with the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification, the amount of Ptc and Smo mRNAs
decreased in proportion to the progression of histological maliganancy, and
similar results were obtained with astrocytic tumor-derived cell lines. However, 
there was no remarkable correlation between the mRNA expression level of each
gene and the MIB-1 PCIs. The mRNA expression level of Gli1 was variable and
highly elevated in two cases. No remarkable features were found clinically or
histologically in these two cases. In summary, our results indicate that Ptc and 
Smo mRNA levels have an inverse correlation with histological malignancy and
suggest that these gene products are implicated in the suppression of astrocytic 
tumors. In contrast, there was no significant correlation between the mRNA levels
of the Gli family members and histological malignancy, suggesting that Gli
proteins are not associated with the progression of astrocytic tumors.

PMID: 12241103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 15;62(18):5308-16.

Dissecting the oncogenic potential of Gli2: deletion of an NH(2)-terminal
fragment alters skin tumor phenotype.

Sheng H(1), Goich S, Wang A, Grachtchouk M, Lowe L, Mo R, Lin K, de Sauvage FJ,
Sasaki H, Hui CC, Dlugosz AA.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Dermatology, University of
Michigan, 1500 E Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Development of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) in skin is associated with
uncontrolled Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, which operates primarily through the
Gli family of transcription factors. Gli2 is a mediator of physiological Shh
signaling in skin and is sufficient to produce BCCs when overexpressed by use of 
a Keratin 5 (K5) promoter. Analysis of Gli protein deletion mutants has
identified an NH(2)-terminal transcription repressor domain in Gli2 but not Gli1.
To assess the potential involvement of the Gli2 repressor domain in skin tumor
development, we overexpressed the Gli2DeltaN2 mutant in transgenic mice by use of
the K5 promoter. K5-Gli2DeltaN2 mice developed a variety of skin tumors
resembling human trichoblastomas, cylindromas, basaloid follicular hamartomas,
and rarely, BCCs. In striking contrast, K5-Gli2 mice overexpressing wild-type
Gli2 developed only BCCs. Other differences between tumors arising in these two
sets of transgenic mice included their gross appearance, growth rate, and
predilection for specific body sites. However, the expression levels of Shh
target genes, which reflect the magnitude of Shh pathway activation, were not
dramatically different. Tumors from K5-Gli2DeltaN2 mice, unlike human or mouse
BCCs, gave rise to cell lines that constitutively expressed Shh target genes in
vitro and were tumorigenic in nude mice. Interestingly, the phenotype of
K5-Gli2DeltaN2 mice was strikingly similar to that reported after K5
promoter-driven overexpression of GLI1, which lacks an NH(2)-terminal region
homologous to the Gli2 repressor domain. These results underscore the qualitative
difference in oncogenicity of GLI1 and Gli2 when overexpressed in skin, and
reveal a previously unanticipated role for the Gli2 NH(2) terminus in defining
tumor phenotype.

PMID: 12235001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 15;249(2):349-66.

Sonic hedgehog activates mesenchymal Gli1 expression during prostate ductal bud
formation.

Lamm ML(1), Catbagan WS, Laciak RJ, Barnett DH, Hebner CM, Gaffield W,
Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Ductal budding in the developing prostate is a testosterone-dependent event that 
involves signaling between the urogenital sinus epithelium (UGE) and urogenital
sinus mesenchyme (UGM). We show here that ductal bud formation is associated with
focused expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in the epithelium of nascent prostate 
buds and in the growing tips of elongating prostate ducts. This pattern of
localized Shh expression occurs in response to testosterone stimulation. The gene
for the Shh receptor, Ptc1, is expressed in the UGM, as are the members of the
Gli gene family of transcriptional regulators (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3). Expression 
of Ptc1, Gli1, and Gli2 is localized primarily to mesenchyme surrounding prostate
buds, whereas Gli3 is expressed diffusely throughout the UGM. A strong dependence
of Gli1 (and Ptc1) expression on Shh signaling is demonstrated by induction of
expression in both the intact urogenital sinus and the isolated UGM by exogenous 
SHH peptide. A similar dependence of Gli2 and Gli3 expression on Shh is not
observed. Nonetheless, the chemical inhibitor of Shh signaling, cyclopamine,
produced a graded inhibition of Gli gene expression (Gli1>Gli2>Gli3) in
urogenital sinus explants that was paralleled by a severe inhibition of ductal
budding.

PMID: 12221011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Dev Growth Differ. 2002 Aug;44(4):257-71.

Conserved expression control and shared activity between cognate T-box genes Tbx2
and Tbx3 in connection with Sonic hedgehog signaling during Xenopus eye
development.

Takabatake Y(1), Takabatake T, Sasagawa S, Takeshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Informatics, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

Tbx2 and Tbx3 are considered to be cognate genes within a Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of
T-box genes and are expressed in closely overlapping areas in a variety of
tissues, including the eye. Herein, we show that misexpression of Tbx2 and Tbx3
in Xenopus embryos gave rise to defective eye morphogenesis, which was
reminiscent of the defect caused by attenuated Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling.
Indeed, Tbx2/3 misexpression suppressed Gli1, Gli2, Ptc2 and Pax2, mediators or
targets of Hedgehog (Hh) signals. From these data, Tbx2/3 may have a shared
function in inhibiting Gli-dependent Shh signaling during eye development.
Conversely, the expression of Tbx2/3 was severely affected by both Shh and a
putative dominant negative form of Hh, as well as by both transactivator and
transrepressor forms of Gli-fusion proteins, suggesting that the expression of
Tbx2/3 may be regulated by a Gli-dependent Hh signal transduction pathway.
Because the Shh signal has been considered to play crucial roles in the formation
of the proximal-distal and dorsal-ventral axes in the eyes, these findings about 
the mutual regulatory mechanism between Tbx2/3 and Gli-dependent Hh signaling
provide valuable insight into the cause of the localized expression of Tbx2/3 and
their role during the formation of these axes. In addition, our findings also
imply the conserved regulation and shared activity between the cognate genes of
Tbx2 and Tbx3.

PMID: 12175361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 15;21(36):5529-39.

Human GLI2 and GLI1 are part of a positive feedback mechanism in Basal Cell
Carcinoma.

Regl G(1), Neill GW, Eichberger T, Kasper M, Ikram MS, Koller J, Hintner H, Quinn
AG, Frischauf AM, Aberger F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Salzburg, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

Transgenic mouse models have provided evidence that activation of the zinc-finger
transcription factor GLI1 by Hedgehog (Hh)-signalling is a key step in the
initiation of the tumorigenic programme leading to Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC).
However, the downstream events underlying Hh/GLI-induced BCC development are
still obscure. Using in vitro model systems to analyse the effect of
Hh/GLI-signalling in human keratinocytes, we identified a positive feedback
mechanism involving the zinc finger transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2.
Expression of GLI1 in human keratinocytes induced the transcriptional activator
isoforms GLI2alpha and GLI2beta. Both isoforms were also shown to be expressed at
elevated levels in 21 BCCs compared to normal skin. Detailed time course
experiments monitoring the transcriptional response of keratinocytes either to
GLI1 or to GLI2 suggest that GLI1 is a direct target of GLI2, while activation of
GLI2 by GLI1 is likely to be indirect. Furthermore, expression of either GLI2 or 
GLI1 led to an increase in DNA-synthesis in confluent human keratinocytes. Taken 
together, these results suggest an important role of the positive GLI1-GLI2
feedback loop in Hh-mediated epidermal cell proliferation.

PMID: 12165851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 1;248(1):143-56.

Twist plays an essential role in FGF and SHH signal transduction during mouse
limb development.

O'Rourke MP(1), Soo K, Behringer RR, Hui CC, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW
2145, Australia.

Loss of Twist gene function arrests the growth of the limb bud shortly after its 
formation. In the Twist(-/-) forelimb bud, Fgf10 expression is reduced, Fgf4 is
not expressed, and the domain of Fgf8 and Fgfr2 expression is altered. This is
accompanied by disruption of the expression of genes (Shh, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and 
Ptch) associated with SHH signalling in the limb bud mesenchyme, the
down-regulation of Bmp4 in the apical ectoderm, the absence of Alx3, Alx4, Pax1, 
and Pax3 activity in the mesenchyme, and a reduced potency of the limb bud
tissues to differentiate into osteogenic and myogenic tissues. Development of the
hindlimb buds in Twist(-/-) embryos is also retarded. The overall activity of
genes involved in SHH signalling is reduced.Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression is lost or
reduced in the apical ectoderm, but other genes (Fgf10, Fgfr2) involved with FGF 
signalling are expressed in normal patterns. Twist(+/-);Gli3(+/XtJ) mice display 
more severe polydactyly than that seen in either Twist(+/-) or Gli3(+/XtJ) mice, 
suggesting that there is genetic interaction between Twist and Gli3 activity.
Twist activity is therefore essential for the growth and differentiation of the
limb bud tissues as well as regulation of tissue patterning via the modulation of
SHH and FGF signal transduction.

PMID: 12142027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Aug 6;99(16):10476-81. Epub 2002 Jul 24.

Sonic hedgehog rescues cranial neural crest from cell death induced by ethanol
exposure.

Ahlgren SC(1), Thakur V, Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. ahlgren@caltech.edu

Alcohol is a teratogen that induces a variety of abnormalities including brain
and facial defects [Jones, K. & Smith, D. (1973) Lancet 2, 999-1001], with the
exact nature of the deficit depending on the time and magnitude of the dose of
ethanol to which developing fetuses are exposed. In addition to abnormal facial
structures, ethanol-treated embryos exhibit a highly characteristic pattern of
cell death. Dying cells are observed in the premigratory and migratory neural
crest cells that normally populate most facial structures. The observation that
blocking Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling results in similar craniofacial
abnormalities prompted us to examine whether there was a link between this aspect
of fetal alcohol syndrome and loss of Shh. We demonstrate that administration of 
ethanol to chick embryos results in a dramatic loss of Shh, as well as a loss of 
transcripts involved in Shh signaling pathways. In contrast, other signaling
molecules examined do not demonstrate such dramatic changes. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that both the ethanol-induced cranial neural crest cell death and the
associated craniofacial growth defect can be rescued by application of Shh. These
data suggest that craniofacial anomalies resulting from fetal alcohol exposure
are caused at least partially by loss of Shh and subsequent neural crest cell
death.

PMCID: PMC124946
PMID: 12140368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Dev Biol. 2002 May 15;245(2):280-90.

Indian hedgehog as a progesterone-responsive factor mediating
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the mouse uterus.

Matsumoto H(1), Zhao X, Das SK, Hogan BL, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7336, USA.

Genes encoding components of the hedgehog signaling pathway are dynamically
expressed in the mouse uterus preparing for implantation. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), 
patched (Ptc), and Gli3 are expressed at low levels in the endometrial epithelium
on day 1 of pregnancy. Transcription of Ihh increases dramatically in the luminal
epithelium and glands from day 3, reaching very high levels on day 4. Over the
same period, Ptc, Gli1, Gli2, and noggin are strongly upregulated in the
underlying mesenchymal stroma. Transcription of Ihh in ovariectomized mice is
induced by progesterone but not by estrogen. Lower induction of Ihh, Ptc, and
Hoxa10 is seen in response to progesterone in the uteri of Pgr(-/-) mutant mice
lacking progesterone nuclear steroid receptor. This finding suggests that the
hormone may regulate Ihh through both nuclear receptor-dependent and -independent
pathways. We describe a method for culturing uterine explants in the absence of
epithelium. Under these conditions, recombinant N-SHH protein promotes the
proliferation of mesenchyme cells and the expression of noggin. We propose that
IHH made by the epithelium normally functions as a paracrine growth factor for
stromal cells during the early stages of pregnancy.

PMID: 11977981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Development. 2002 Mar;129(6):1327-38.

Pax6 regulates specification of ventral neurone subtypes in the hindbrain by
establishing progenitor domains.

Takahashi M(1), Osumi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that generation of different kinds of neurones is
controlled by combinatorial actions of homeodomain (HD) proteins expressed in the
neuronal progenitors. Pax6 is a HD protein that has previously been shown to be
involved in the differentiation of the hindbrain somatic (SM) motoneurones and V1
interneurones in the hindbrain and/or spinal cord. To investigate in greater
depth the role of Pax6 in generation of the ventral neurones, we first examined
the expression patterns of HD protein genes and subtype-specific neuronal markers
in the hindbrain of the Pax6 homozygous mutant rat. We found that Islet2 (SM
neurone marker) and En1 (V1 interneurone marker) were transiently expressed in a 
small number of cells, indicating that Pax6 is not directly required for
specification of these neurones. We also observed that domains of all other HD
protein genes (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Irx3, Dbx2 and Dbx1) were shifted and their
boundaries became blurred. Thus, Pax6 is required for establishment of the
progenitor domains of the ventral neurones. Next, we performed Pax6
overexpression experiments by electroporating rat embryos in whole embryo
culture. Pax6 overexpression in the wild type decreased expression of Nkx2.2, but
ectopically increased expression of Irx3, Dbx1 and Dbx2. Moreover,
electroporation of Pax6 into the Pax6 mutant hindbrain rescued the development of
Islet2-positive and En1-positive neurones. To know reasons for perturbed
progenitor domain formation in Pax6 mutant, we examined expression patterns of
Shh signalling molecules and states of cell death and cell proliferation. Shh was
similarly expressed in the floor plate of the mutant hindbrain, while the
expressions of Ptc1, Gli1 and Gli2 were altered only in the progenitor domains
for the motoneurones. The position and number of TUNEL-positive cells were
unchanged in the Pax6 mutant. Although the proportion of cells that were
BrdU-positive slightly increased in the mutant, there was no relationship with
specific progenitor domains. Taken together, we conclude that Pax6 regulates
specification of the ventral neurone subtypes by establishing the correct
progenitor domains.

PMID: 11880342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 3;277(18):15393-9. Epub 2002 Feb 20.

Beta-catenin is essential and sufficient for skeletal myogenesis in P19 cells.

Petropoulos H(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Wnt1 and Wnt3a are signaling factors known to play a role in the induction of
myogenesis in the myotome of the differentiating somite. Both factors may
transduce their signal by a conserved pathway that leads to transcriptional
regulation by beta-catenin/Lef1. beta-Catenin and Lef1 are found in the myotome
prior to MyoD expression. We have utilized the P19 cell system to study the
mechanisms by which Wnt3a may activate MyoD expression and subsequent skeletal
muscle development. We have isolated P19 cell lines that stably express either
Wnt3a or activated beta-catenin and found that aggregation of these cells results
in the induction of myogenesis compared with control cells. Pax3, Gli2, Mox1, and
Six1 were expressed during Wnt3a and beta-catenin-induced differentiation prior
to MyoD expression. Furthermore, we have shown that the nuclear function of
beta-catenin was essential for skeletal myogenesis in P19 cells by overexpression
of a dominant negative beta-catenin/engrailed chimera. Primitive streak factors
were present, but expression of Pax3, Mox1, Gli2, and Six1 was lost in these
cells, indicating that nuclear beta-catenin is essential for specification of
mesodermal precursors to the myogenic lineage. Therefore, Wnt signaling, acting
via beta-catenin, is necessary and sufficient for skeletal myogenesis in P19
cells.

PMID: 11856745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Biol. 2001 Oct 1;238(1):133-44.

The Gli2 transcription factor is required for normal mouse mammary gland
development.

Lewis MT(1), Ross S, Strickland PA, Sugnet CW, Jimenez E, Hui C, Daniel CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Sinsheimer Laboratories, University of California,
Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA. mike.lewis@uchsc.edu

The hedgehog signal transduction network performs critical roles in mediating
cell-cell interactions during embryogenesis and organogenesis. Loss-of-function
or misexpression mutation of hedgehog network components can cause birth defects,
skin cancer, and other tumors. The Gli gene family (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) encodes
zinc finger transcription factors that act as mediators of hedgehog signal
transduction. In this study, we investigate the role of Gli2 in mammary gland
development. Mammary expression of Gli2 is developmentally regulated in a tissue 
compartment-specific manner. Expression is exclusively stromal during virgin
stages of development but becomes both epithelial and stromal during pregnancy
and lactation. The null phenotype with respect to both ductal and alveolar
development was examined by transplantation rescue of embryonic mammary glands
into physiologically normal host females. Glands derived from both wild type and 
null embryo donors showed ductal outgrowths that developed to equivalent extents 
in virgin hosts. However, in null transplants, ducts were frequently distended or
irregularly shaped and showed a range of histological alterations similar to
micropapillary ductal hyperplasias in the human breast. Alveolar development
during pregnancy was not overtly affected by loss of Gli2 function. Ductal
defects were not observed when homozygous null epithelium was transplanted into a
wild type stromal background, indicating that Gli2 function is required primarily
in the stroma for proper ductal development. DeltaGli2 heterozygotes also
demonstrated an elevated frequency and severity of focal ductal dysplasia
relative to that of wild type littermate- and age-matched control animals.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11783999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5161-72.

Gli1 can rescue the in vivo function of Gli2.

Bai CB(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In mice, three Gli genes are thought to mediate sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
collectively. Mis-expression studies and analysis of null mutants for each gene
have indicated that the Gli proteins have different functions. In particular,
Gli1 appears to be a constitutive activator, and Gli2 and Gli3 have repressor
functions. To determine the precise functional differences between Gli1 and Gli2,
we have expressed Gli1 in place of Gli2 from the endogenous Gli2 locus in mice.
Strikingly, a low level of Gli1 can rescue all the Shh signaling defects in Gli2 
mutants; however, only in the presence of a wild-type Shh gene. These studies
demonstrate that only the activator function of Gli2 is actually required, and
indicates that in specific situations, Shh can modulate the ability of Gli1 to
activate target genes. Furthermore, expression of both copies of Gli1 in place of
Gli2 does not disrupt spinal cord patterning, but does result in new
gain-of-function defects that lead to lethality. We show that the defects are
enhanced when Gli3 function is reduced, demonstrating that an important
difference between Gli1 and Gli2 is the ability of Gli1 to antagonize Gli3
function.

PMID: 11748151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3497-509.

Zebrafish smoothened functions in ventral neural tube specification and axon
tract formation.

Varga ZM(1), Amores A, Lewis KE, Yan YL, Postlethwait JH, Eisen JS, Westerfield
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
varga@uni-freiburg.de

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling patterns many vertebrate tissues. shh mutations
dramatically affect mouse ventral forebrain and floor plate but produce minor
defects in zebrafish. Zebrafish have two mammalian Shh orthologs, sonic hedgehog 
and tiggy-winkle hedgehog, and another gene, echidna hedgehog, that could have
overlapping functions. To examine the role of Hedgehog signaling in zebrafish, we
have characterized slow muscle omitted (smu) mutants. We show that smu encodes a 
zebrafish ortholog of Smoothened that transduces Hedgehog signals. Zebrafish
smoothened is expressed maternally and zygotically and supports specification of 
motoneurons, pituitary cells and ventral forebrain. We propose that smoothened is
required for induction of lateral floor plate and a subpopulation of hypothalamic
cells and for maintenance of medial floor plate and hypothalamic cells.

PMID: 11566855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Am J Pathol. 2001 Aug;159(2):765-74.

Anorectal malformations caused by defects in sonic hedgehog signaling.

Mo R(1), Kim JH, Zhang J, Chiang C, Hui CC, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Anorectal malformations are a common clinical problem affecting the development
of the distal hindgut in infants. The spectrum of anorectal malformations ranges 
from the mildly stenotic anus to imperforate anus with a fistula between the
urinary and intestinal tracts to the most severe form, persistent cloaca. The
etiology, embryology, and pathogenesis of anorectal malformations are poorly
understood and controversial. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is an endoderm-derived
signaling molecule that induces mesodermal gene expression in the chick hindgut. 
However, the role of Shh signaling in mammalian hindgut development is unknown.
Here, we show that mutant mice with various defects in the Shh signaling pathway 
exhibit a spectrum of distal hindgut defects mimicking human anorectal
malformations. Shh null-mutant mice display persistent cloaca. Mutant mice
lacking Gli2 or Gli3, two zinc finger transcription factors involved in Shh
signaling, respectively, exhibit imperforate anus with recto-urethral fistula and
anal stenosis. Furthermore, persistent cloaca is also observed in
Gli2(-/-);Gli3(+/-), Gli2(+/-);Gli3(-/-), and Gli2(-/-);Gli3(-/-) mice
demonstrating a gene dose-dependent effect. Therefore, Shh signaling is essential
for normal development of the distal hindgut in mice and mutations affecting Shh 
signaling produce a spectrum of anorectal malformations that may reveal new
insights into their human disease equivalents.

PMCID: PMC1850556
PMID: 11485934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):159-62.

Expression pattern of Irx1 and Irx2 during mouse digit development.

Zülch A(1), Becker MB, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.

Irx1 and Irx2 are members of the murine Iroquois homeobox (Irx) gene family. In
this study, we describe the dynamic expression pattern of these genes during limb
development with a focus on digit formation. We further present a comparative
expression analysis with Gli genes (Gli1, Gli2, Gli3). Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 were 
suggested for candidate regulators of the Irx genes. The expression was studied
between E11.5 and E14.5 when the digits are being formed. Irx1 and Irx2 reproduce
the developmental program of the digits in time and space and the Irx1 provides
an early and excellent marker for this process. Our analysis also indicates that 
the expression of Irx1, Gli1 and Irx2, Gli2 are relative to each other. In
contrast, Gli3 exhibits a different expression pattern.

PMID: 11472848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):155-8.

Irx1 and Irx2 expression in early lung development.

Becker MB(1), Zülch A, Bosse A, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

We describe a comparative lung expression analysis of the murine Irx1 and Irx2
genes. At embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5), the Irx1 and Irx2 expression starts in the
foregut region, where the laryngo-tracheal groove will form. The expression is
prominent in the lung epithelium during glandular development. It declines at the
end of the canalicular phase. We further compare the Irx1 and Irx2 expression
domains to Gli1, 2, 3 and Mash1. Their homologues in Drosophila melanogaster are 
known as regulative partners of the iroquois complex. The Irx and Gli genes are
coexpressed in the developing lungs at the same time. Their transcripts are not
localised in the same cells but adjacent to each other in either mesenchymal or
epithelial structures. It is thought that the lung development is regulated by
the mesenchymal/epithelial interactions.

PMID: 11472847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2001 Jan;6(1):53-66.

Hedgehog signaling in mouse mammary gland development and neoplasia.

Lewis MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Department of Physiology,
Denver 80262, USA. mike.lewis@uchsc.edu

Genetic analyses of two hedgehog signal transduction network genes, Patched-1 and
Gli2, has demonstrated a critical role for hedgehog signaling in mediating
epithelial-stromal tissue interactions during ductal development. Disruption of
either gene leads to similar, yet distinct, defects in ductal morphogenesis.
Defects are mainly ductal dysplasias that closely resemble some hyperplasias of
the human breast. Phenotypic analyses have been coupled with in situ
hybridization, transplantation and tissue recombination analyses to formulate a
model for tissue compartment-specific control of mouse mammary gland development 
by hedgehog signaling. In addition, the similarities among hedgehog
mutation-induced ductal dysplasias and human breast pathologies suggest a role
for altered hedgehog signaling in the development of mammary cancer.

PMID: 11467452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Differentiation. 2001 Mar;67(3):84-91.

Gli2 mediation of hedgehog signals in slow muscle induction in zebrafish.

Du SJ(1), Dienhart M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Marine Biotechnology, University of Maryland Biotechnology
Institute, 710 E. Pratt St., Baltimore, MD 21202, USA. dus@umbi.umd.edu

Zebrafish skeletal muscles are composed of two major types of muscle fibers,
broadly classified as fast or slow fibers. Recent studies have demonstrated that 
members of the Hedgehog (Hh) family induce the formation of slow muscle fibers.
Hedgehog signals are secreted proteins that function through the transcription
factor Glis. We report here the characterization of a zebrafish Gli2 expression
in slow and fast muscle cells and the study of the roles of Hedgehogs and Gli2 in
zebrafish muscle development using two mutant strains; sonic-you (syu) and
you-too (yot), respective for sonic hedgehog (shh) and Gli2 mutation. We have
demonstrated that Shh and Gli2 mutation causes similar defects in slow muscle
formation. There is, however, a difference in the degree of defect between these 
two mutants. In yot mutant embryos, development of slow muscles was completely
blocked, whereas in syu mutant embryos, a small number of slow muscle cells could
still form, suggesting that other Hhs were also involved in slow muscle
induction. Induction of slow muscles by other Hhs appeared to require Gli2,
because ectopic expression of Echidna hedgehog (Ehh) and Tiggy-winkle hedgehog
(Twhh) failed to induce slow muscles in yot mutant embryos. Together, these data 
suggest that further Hhs, other than Shh, are also involved in the induction and 
differentiation of slow muscle cells and that Gli2 is required by Shh, Twhh, and 
Ehh, thus playing a key role in the induction and differentiation of slow muscle 
cells.

PMID: 11428131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Genes Dev. 2001 Jun 15;15(12):1563-76.

The u-boot mutation identifies a Hedgehog-regulated myogenic switch for
fiber-type diversification in the zebrafish embryo.

Roy S(1), Wolff C, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Intercellular Signaling Group, Centre for Developmental Genetics,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

Developmental programs that govern the embryonic diversification of distinct
kinds of muscles in vertebrates remain obscure. For instance, the most widely
recognized attribute of early diversity among skeletal myoblasts is their ability
to differentiate exclusively into fibers with slow or fast contractile
properties. However, we know little about the developmental basis and genetic
regulation of this seminal event in vertebrate myogenesis. Here we show that in
the zebrafish, the u-boot gene acts as a myogenic switch that regulates the
choice of myoblasts to adopt slow versus fast fiber developmental pathways. In
u-boot mutant embryos, slow muscle precursors abort their developmental program, 
failing to activate expression of the homeobox gene prox1 and transfating into
muscle cells with fast fiber properties. Using oligonucleotide-mediated
translational inhibition, we have investigated the role of prox1 in this program.
We find that it functions in the terminal step of the u-boot controlled slow
fiber developmental pathway in the regulation of slow myofibril assembly. Our
findings provide new insight into the genetic control of slow versus fast fiber
specification and differentiation and indicate that dedicated developmental
pathways exist in vertebrates for the elaboration of distinct elements of
embryonic muscle pattern.

PMCID: PMC312718
PMID: 11410536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Curr Biol. 2001 May 15;11(10):769-73.

Wnt signals are targets and mediators of Gli function.

Mullor JL(1), Dahmane N, Sun T, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

There is growing evidence that Gli proteins participate in the mediation of
Hedgehog and FGF signaling in neural and mesodermal development. However, little 
is known about which genes act downstream of Gli proteins. Here we show the
regulation of members of the Wnt family by Gli proteins in different contexts.
Our findings indicate that Gli2 regulates Wnt8 expression in the ventral marginal
zone of the early frog embryo: activating Gli2 constructs induce ectopic Wnt8
expression in animal cap explants, whereas repressor forms inhibit its endogenous
expression in the marginal zone. Using truncated Frizzled and dominant-negative
Wnt constructs, we then show the requirement of at least two Wnt proteins, Wnt8
and Wnt11, for Gli2/3-induced posterior mesodermal development. Blocking Wnt
signals, however, inhibits Gli2/3-induced morphogenesis, but not mesodermal
specification. Gli2/3 may therefore normally coordinate the action of these two
Wnt proteins, which regulate distinct downstream pathways. In addition, the
finding that Gli1 consistently induces a distinct set of Wnt genes in animal cap 
explants and in skin tumors suggests that Wnt regulation by Gli proteins is
general. Such a mechanism may link signals that induce Gli activity, such as FGFs
and Hedgehogs, with Wnt function.

PMID: 11378387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Invest Dermatol. 2001 May;116(5):739-42.

Activation of expression of hedgehog target genes in basal cell carcinomas.

Bonifas JM(1), Pennypacker S, Chuang PT, McMahon AP, Williams M, Rosenthal A, De 
Sauvage FJ, Epstein EH Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, San Francisco General Hospital, California, USA.

Mutations in hedgehog signaling pathway genes, especially PTC1 and SMO, are
pivotal to the development of basal cell carcinomas. The study of basal cell
carcinoma gene expression not only may elucidate mechanisms by which hedgehog
signaling abnormalities produce aberrant tumor cell behavior but also can provide
data on in vivo hedgehog target gene control in humans. We have found, in
comparison with normal skin, that basal cell carcinomas have increased levels of 
mRNA for PTC1, GLI1, HIP, WNT2B, and WNT5a; decreased levels of mRNA for c-MYC,
c-FOS, and WNT4; and unchanged levels of mRNA for PTC2, GLI2, WNT7B, and BMP2 and
4. These findings suggest that mutations in hedgehog signaling pathway genes may 
exert both cell autonomous and indirect effects and indicate that basal cell
carcinoma tumor cells have a phenotype that at least in some aspects resembles
that of epidermal stem cells.

PMID: 11348463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 1;276(22):19033-9. Epub 2001 Mar 21.

Pax3 is essential for skeletal myogenesis and the expression of Six1 and Eya2.

Ridgeway AG(1), Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Building, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Pax3 is a paired box transcription factor expressed during somitogenesis that has
been implicated in initiating the expression of the myogenic regulatory factors
during myogenesis. We find that Pax3 is necessary and sufficient to induce
myogenesis in pluripotent stem cells. Pax3 induced the expression of the
transcription factor Six1, its cofactor Eya2, and the transcription factor Mox1
prior to inducing the expression of MyoD and myogenin. Overexpression of a
dominant negative Pax3, engineered by fusing the active transcriptional
repression domain of mouse EN-2 in place of the Pax3 transcriptional activation
domain, completely abolished skeletal myogenesis without inhibiting
cardiogenesis. Expression of the dominant negative Pax3 resulted in a loss of
expression of Six1, Eya2, and endogenous Pax3 as well as a down-regulation in the
expression of Mox1. No effect was found on the expression of Gli2. These results 
indicate that Pax3 activity is essential for skeletal muscle development, the
expression of Six1 and Eya2, and is involved in regulating its own expression. In
summary, the combined approach of expressing both a wild type and dominant
negative transcription factor in stem cells has identified a cascade of
transcriptional events controlled by Pax3 that are necessary and sufficient for
skeletal myogenesis.

PMID: 11262400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Pediatr Surg. 2001 Feb;36(2):381-4.

Murine models of VACTERL syndrome: Role of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway.

Kim PC(1), Mo R, Hui Cc C.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Infection, Immunity, Injury and Repair and Developmental Biology, 
Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Surgery,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: VACTERL syndrome is a common surgical condition affecting the
development of many midaxial organs. The etiology, embryology, and pathogenesis
of the VACTERL syndrome are not known. The authors report here new mouse models
of VACTERL syndrome involving the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway.
METHODS: Mutant mice involving Shh signaling, the Shh transcription factors
Gli2-/- and Gli3-/-, Gli2-/-;Gli3+/- double heterozygotes, and Shh-/- were
analyzed.
RESULTS: In addition to reported vertebral, anal, tracheoesophageal, and limb
anomalies, mutant mice display cardiac, renal, and associated anomalies, namely
congenital diaphragmatic hernia and omphalocele, known to be associated in
VACTERL syndrome. The Shh transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3 have specific and
overlapping roles in the induction of VACTERL phenotypes in a gene-dose dependent
manner in these mutants.
CONCLUSION: To the authors' knowledge, these mutant mice represent the first
animal model that mimics the human VACTERL syndrome, and suggests that
aberrations in Shh signaling might be involved in the VACTERL syndrome.

PMID: 11172440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(5):2314-23.

Human GLI-2 is a tat activation response element-independent Tat cofactor.

Browning CM(1), Smith MJ, Clark NM, Lane BR, Parada C, Montano M, KewalRamani VN,
Littman DR, Essex M, Roeder RG, Markovitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0640,USA.

Zinc finger-containing GLI proteins are involved in the development of
Caenorhabditis elegans, Xenopus, Drosophila, zebrafish, mice, and humans. In this
study, we show that an isoform of human GLI-2 strongly synergizes with the Tat
transactivating proteins of human immunodeficiency virus types 1 and 2 (HIV-1 and
-2) and markedly stimulates viral replication. GLI-2 also synergizes with the
previously described Tat cofactor cyclin T1 to stimulate Tat function.
Surprisingly, GLI-2/Tat synergy is not dependent on either a typical GLI DNA
binding site or an intact Tat activation response element but does require an
intact TATA box. Thus, GLI-2/Tat synergy results from a mechanism of action which
is novel both for a GLI protein and for a Tat cofactor. These findings link the
GLI family of transcriptional and developmental regulatory proteins to Tat
function and HIV replication.

PMCID: PMC114814
PMID: 11160734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(5):2301-13.

GLI-2 modulates retroviral gene expression.

Smith MJ(1), Gitlin SD, Browning CM, Lane BR, Clark NM, Shah N, Rainier S,
Markovitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0640, USA.

GLI proteins are involved in the development of mice, humans, zebrafish,
Caenorhabditis elegans, Xenopus, and Drosophila. While these zinc
finger-containing proteins bind to TG-rich promoter elements and are known to
regulate gene expression in C. elegans and Drosophila, mechanistic understanding 
of how regulation is mediated through naturally occurring transcriptional
promoters is lacking. One isoform of human GLI-2 appears to be identical to a
factor previously called Tax helper protein (THP), thus named due to its ability 
to interact with a TG-rich element in the human T-lymphotropic virus type 1
(HTLV-1) enhancer thought to mediate transcriptional stimulation by the Tax
protein of HTLV-1. We now demonstrate that, working through its TG-rich binding
site and adjacent elements, GLI-2/THP actually suppresses gene expression driven 
by the HTLV-1 promoter. GLI-2/THP has no effect on the HTLV-2 promoter, activates
expression from the promoters of human immunodeficiency virus types 1 and (HIV-1 
and -2), and stimulates HIV-1 replication. Both effective suppression and
activation of gene expression and viral replication require the first of the five
zinc fingers, which is not necessary for DNA binding, to be intact. Thus, not
only can GLI-2/THP either activate or suppress gene expression, depending on the 
promoter, but the same domain (first zinc finger) mediates both effects. These
findings suggest a role for GLI-2 in retroviral gene regulation and shed further 
light on the mechanisms by which GLI proteins regulate naturally occurring
promoters.

PMCID: PMC114813
PMID: 11160733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mech Dev. 2000 Dec;99(1-2):159-62.

Hexokinase I is a Gli2-responsive gene expressed in the embryonic CNS.

Brewster R(1), Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program, NYU School of
Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Little is known about the downstream genes regulated by Gli zinc finger
transcription factors, which are targets and mediators of Hedgehog signaling.
Specifically, the identity and regulation of genes which mediate Gli2 function in
neurogenesis are unclear. We describe here the cloning of frog Hexokinase I (HKI)
as a Gli2-responsive gene. We show that HKI expression is induced by Gli2 and
that it is detected in defined neuronal populations. Since the primary energy
source of the brain is derived from glucose metabolism and hexokinase catalyses
the first and rate limiting step in this process, the conversion of glucose into 
glucose-6-phosphate, these findings suggest a link between the regulation of
neuronal induction and differentiation.

PMID: 11091085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mech Dev. 2000 Nov;98(1-2):171-4.

Similar expression and regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 in the chick limb bud.

Schweitzer R(1), Vogan KJ, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Gli genes encode a family of zinc finger transcription factors that mediate
signaling by Hedgehog proteins. We have cloned the chick Gli3 gene and studied
its expression in developing chick limbs. Gli3 expression is highly similar to
that of chick Gli2. Gli3 mRNA is evenly distributed in the early limb mesenchyme 
and subsequently downregulated in the posterior mesenchyme by the polarizing
activity of Sonic hedgehog. At later stages, Gli3 is expressed in the distal limb
mesenchyme.

PMID: 11044624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cancer Res. 2000 Oct 1;60(19):5386-9.

Regulation of gli activity by all-trans retinoic acid in mouse keratinocytes.

Goyette P(1), Allan D, Peschard P, Chen CF, Wang W, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for many normal developmental
processes. The Shh signal is interpreted by the Gli transcription factors.
Elevated Gli-1 expression has been associated with several neoplasms, including
basal cell carcinoma. All-trans retinoic acid (RA) has strong effects on
epidermal growth and differentiation and has been used for the treatment of
various epithelial disorders. In this report, we show that RA can inhibit Gli
activity in immortalized murine keratinocytes in a RA receptor-specific manner.
This inhibition may occur, at least in part, through sequestration of the
transcriptional coactivator cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding
protein and suggests a novel effect of retinoid excess on Shh signaling.

PMID: 11034076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4395-405.

Gli2 functions in FGF signaling during antero-posterior patterning.

Brewster R(1), Mullor JL, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Patterning along the anteroposterior (A-P) axis involves the interplay of
secreted and transcription factors that specify cell fates in the mesoderm and
neuroectoderm. While FGF and homeodomain proteins have been shown to play
different roles in posterior specification, the network coordinating their
effects remains elusive. Here we have analyzed the function of Gli zinc-finger
proteins in mesodermal A-P patterning. We find that Gli2 is sufficient to induce 
ventroposterior development, functioning in the FGF-brachyury regulatory loop.
Gli2 directly induces brachyury, a gene required and sufficient for mesodermal
development, and Gli2 is in turn induced by FGF signaling. Moreover, the homeobox
gene Xhox3, a critical determinant of posterior development, is also directly
regulated by Gli2. Gli3, but not Gli1, has an activity similar to that of Gli2
and is expressed in ventroposterior mesoderm after Gli2. These findings uncover a
novel function of Gli proteins, previously only known to mediate hedgehog
signals, in the maintenance and patterning of the embryonic mesoderm. More
generally, our results suggest a molecular basis for an integration of FGF and
hedgehog inputs in Gli-expressing cells that respond to these signals.

PMID: 11003839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1047-54. Epub 2000 Sep 21.

The sonic hedgehog-patched-gli pathway in human development and disease.

Villavicencio EH(1), Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone PM.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Medical School and the Children's Memorial Institute
for Education and Research, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

PMCID: PMC1288546
PMID: 11001584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Development. 2000 Oct;127(19):4293-301.

Expression of the vertebrate Gli proteins in Drosophila reveals a distribution of
activator and repressor activities.

Aza-Blanc P(1), Lin HY, Ruiz i Altaba A, Kornberg TB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The Cubitus interruptus (Ci) and Gli proteins are transcription factors that
mediate responses to Hedgehog proteins (Hh) in flies and vertebrates,
respectively. During development of the Drosophila wing, Ci transduces the Hh
signal and regulates transcription of different target genes at different
locations. In vertebrates, the three Gli proteins are expressed in overlapping
domains and are partially redundant. To assess how the vertebrate Glis correlate 
with Drosophila Ci, we expressed each in Drosophila and monitored their behaviors
and activities. We found that each Gli has distinct activities that are
equivalent to portions of the regulatory arsenal of Ci. Gli2 and Gli1 have
activator functions that depend on Hh. Gli2 and Gli3 are proteolyzed to produce a
repressor form able to inhibit hh expression. However, while Gli3 repressor
activity is regulated by Hh, Gli2 repressor activity is not. These observations
suggest that the separate activator and repressor functions of Ci are unevenly
partitioned among the three Glis, yielding proteins with related yet distinct
properties.

PMID: 10976059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mech Dev. 2000 Sep;96(2):165-74.

Zebrafish mutations in Gli-mediated hedgehog signaling lead to lens
transdifferentiation from the adenohypophysis anlage.

Kondoh H(1), Uchikawa M, Yoda H, Takeda H, Furutani-Seiki M, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, 1-3 Yamadaoka,
Suita, 565-0871, Osaka, Japan. j61056@center.osaka-u.ac.jp

It is known that the earliest lens marker delta-crystallin is expressed
abundantly in Rathke's pouch of the chicken, suggesting a close relationship
between the cell states of the adenohypophysis (pituitary) anlage and the early
lens. We show here that the zebrafish midline mutants you-too (yot) and iguana
(igu) develop lenses from the adenohypophysis anlage. The early adenohypophysis
anlage of normal zebrafish expresses lim3 and six3 but in yot(ty119) mutants the 
anterior part of the anlage lacks lim3 expression, and instead produces a
crystallin-expressing cell population which develops into a large lens structure 
expressing beta and gamma-crystallins, but is not associated with retina tissues.
Among the zebrafish mutants with midline defects, midline lenses were observed in
two mutant alleles of yot and an allele of igu, but not in other mutants (syu,
con, smh, dtr, uml, spi and lok). Two yot mutant alleles with midline lenses
likely encode dominant negative forms of the Gli2 protein which will interfere
with transcriptional activation by other Gli proteins. The observation argues
that overall inhibition of Shh-Gli signaling leads the adenohypophysis anlage to 
transdifferentiate into lens.

PMID: 10960781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mech Dev. 2000 Jun;94(1-2):117-32.

Indian hedgehog signaling in extraembryonic endoderm and ectoderm differentiation
in ES embryoid bodies.

Maye P(1), Becker S, Kasameyer E, Byrd N, Grabel L.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459-0170, USA.

We previously demonstrated that a member of the Hedgehog gene family, Indian
hedgehog (Ihh), is expressed in the visceral endoderm of EC and ES cell embryoid 
bodies and mouse embryos. Overexpression studies suggested that Ihh was involved 
in visceral endoderm differentiation. We now provide evidence for a Hh response
in the embryoid body core and in the mesothelial layer of the visceral yolk sac. 
We also demonstrate that treatment of ES embryoid bodies with the Hh antagonists 
cAMP and forskolin results in downregulation of the Hh response and altered
embryoid body differentiation. The outer endoderm layer undergoes a transition to
parietal endoderm while formation of an embryonic ectoderm layer surrounding a
cavity is inhibited. These treatments also result in a decrease in the expression
of markers for the mesoderm derivatives, blood and endothelial cells. We present 
a model to explain how Ihh and BMP signaling may regulate extraembryonic endoderm
and embryonic ectoderm differentiation.

PMID: 10842064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nat Cell Biol. 2000 May;2(5):310-2.

Gli regulation by the opposing activities of fused and suppressor of fused.

Murone M(1), Luoh SM, Stone D, Li W, Gurney A, Armanini M, Grey C, Rosenthal A,
de Sauvage FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.

PMID: 10806483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Development. 2000 May;127(10):2075-87.

Shh and Wnt signaling pathways converge to control Gli gene activation in avian
somites.

Borycki A(1), Brown AM, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, BRBII/III, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

The regulation of the Gli genes during somite formation has been investigated in 
quail embryos. The Gli genes are a family encoding three related zinc finger
transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, which are effectors of Shh signaling 
in responding cells. A quail Gli3 cDNA has been cloned and its expression
compared with Gli1 and Gli2. These studies show that Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 are
co-activated at the time of somite formation, thus providing a mechanism for
regulating the initiation of Shh signaling in somites. Embryo surgery and
paraxial mesoderm explant experiments show that each of the Gli genes is
regulated by distinct signaling mechanisms. Gli1 is activated in response to Shh 
produced by the notochord, which also controls the dorsalization of Gli2 and Gli3
following their activation by Wnt signaling from the surface ectoderm and neural 
tube. This surface ectoderm/neural tube Wnt signaling has both negative and
positive functions in Gli2 and Gli3 regulation: these signals repress Gli3 in
segmental plate mesoderm prior to somite formation and then promote somite
formation and the somite-specific activation of Gli2 and Gli3. These studies,
therefore, establish a role for Wnt signaling in the control of Shh signal
transduction through the regulation of Gli2 and Gli3, and provide a mechanistic
basis for the known synergistic actions of surface ectoderm/neural tube and
notochord signaling in somite cell specification.

PMID: 10769232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Development. 2000 Apr;127(8):1593-605.

Mouse Gli1 mutants are viable but have defects in SHH signaling in combination
with a Gli2 mutation.

Park HL(1), Bai C, Platt KA, Matise MP, Beeghly A, Hui CC, Nakashima M, Joyner
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and
Neuroscience, New York University Medical School, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The secreted factor Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is both required for and sufficient to
induce multiple developmental processes, including ventralization of the CNS,
branching morphogenesis of the lungs and anteroposterior patterning of the limbs.
Based on analogy to the Drosophila Hh pathway, the multiple GLI transcription
factors in vertebrates are likely to both transduce SHH signaling and repress Shh
transcription. In order to discriminate between overlapping versus unique
requirements for the three Gli genes in mice, we have produced a Gli1 mutant and 
analyzed the phenotypes of Gli1/Gli2 and Gli1/3 double mutants. Gli3(xt) mutants 
have polydactyly and dorsal CNS defects associated with ectopic Shh expression,
indicating GLI3 plays a role in repressing Shh. In contrast, Gli2 mutants have
five digits, but lack a floorplate, indicating that it is required to transduce
SHH signaling in some tissues. Remarkably, mice homozygous for a Gli1(zfd
)mutation that deletes the exons encoding the DNA-binding domain are viable and
appear normal. Transgenic mice expressing a GLI1 protein lacking the zinc fingers
can not induce SHH targets in the dorsal brain, indicating that the Gli1(zfd
)allele contains a hypomorphic or null mutation. Interestingly,
Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+), but not Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli3(zfd/+) double mutants have 
a severe phenotype; most Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+) mice die soon after birth and 
all have multiple defects including a variable loss of ventral spinal cord cells 
and smaller lungs that are similar to, but less extreme than, Gli2(zfd/zfd)
mutants. Gli1/Gli2 double homozygous mutants have more extreme CNS and lung
defects than Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+) mutants, however, in contrast to Shh
mutants, ventrolateral neurons develop in the CNS and the limbs have 5 digits
with an extra postaxial nubbin. These studies demonstrate that the zinc-finger
DNA-binding domain of GLI1 protein is not required for SHH signaling in mouse.
Furthermore, Gli1 and Gli2, but not Gli1 and Gli3, have extensive overlapping
functions that are likely downstream of SHH signaling.

PMID: 10725236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):216-7.

Basal cell carcinomas in mice overexpressing Gli2 in skin.

Grachtchouk M(1), Mo R, Yu S, Zhang X, Sasaki H, Hui CC, Dlugosz AA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of
Dermatology, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

PMID: 10700170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cell. 2000 Feb 18;100(4):423-34.

Hedgehog-regulated processing of Gli3 produces an anterior/posterior repressor
gradient in the developing vertebrate limb.

Wang B(1), Fallon JF, Beachy PA.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Ci/Gli zinc finger proteins mediate the transcriptional effects of Hedgehog
protein signals. In Drosophila, Ci action as transcriptional repressor or
activator is contingent upon Hedgehog-regulated, PKA-dependent proteolytic
processing. We demonstrate that PKA-dependent processing of vertebrate Gli3 in
developing limb similarly generates a potent repressor in a manner antagonized by
apparent long-range signaling from posteriorly localized Sonic hedgehog protein. 
The resulting anterior/posterior Gli3 repressor gradient can be perturbed by
mutations of Gli3 in human genetic syndromes or by misregulation of Gli3
processing in the chicken mutant talpid2, producing a range of limb patterning
malformations. The high relative abundance and potency of Gli3 repressor suggest 
specialization of Gli3 and its products for negative Hedgehog pathway regulation.

PMID: 10693759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Feb;35(2):227-30; discussion 230-1.

New mouse models of congenital anorectal malformations.

Kimmel SG(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Research Institute, Infection, Immunity,
Injury, and Repair, University of Toronto, Department of Surgery, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The genetic, embryological, and pathogenetic aspects of
hindgut development remain poorly understood. Recently, the morphogenetic pathway
involving the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene has been shown essential to the normal
development of many midaxial organs, including the foregut. This study reports
genetically based murine models of congenital anorectal malformations (CAM)
involving the Shh-responsive transcription factors, Gli2 and Gli3. Its purpose is
to show the necessity of these 2 factors to normal hindgut development.
METHODS: Gli2-/- mutants were generated by a targeted deletion. Gli3-/- mutants
are spontaneous mutants involving the Gli3 gene. Gli2-/- Gli3+/- mutants were
generated by intercrossing double heterozygotes. Whole-mount midsagittal sections
of the embryos were analyzed on embryonic days (E) 11.5 and E13.5.
RESULTS: Gli3-/- mutants had anal stenosis and ectopic anus, and Gli2-/- mutants 
showed imperforate anus and rectourethral fistula. Gli2-/- Gli3+/- mutants had a 
cloacal abnormality.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotypic abnormalities observed in these mutant mice are
identical to the spectrum of human CAM. The severity of the phenotype appears to 
reflect the gene dose. Gli2 and Gli3 play an important role in the normal
development of murine hindgut. The results of this study provide, for the first
time, a molecular basis for CAM.

PMID: 10693670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 15;216(2):469-80.

Control of muscle cell-type specification in the zebrafish embryo by Hedgehog
signalling.

Lewis KE(1), Currie PD, Roy S, Schauerte H, Haffter P, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Krebs Institute, University of Sheffield, United Kingdom.

The specification of different muscle cell types in the zebrafish embryo requires
signals that emanate from the axial mesoderm. In previous studies we and others
have shown that overexpression of different members of the Hedgehog protein
family can induce the differentiation of two types of slow-twitch muscles, the
superficially located slow-twitch fibres and the medially located muscle pioneer 
cells. Here we have investigated the requirement for Hedgehog signalling in the
specification of these distinct muscle cell types in two ways: first, by
characterising the effects on target gene expression and muscle cell
differentiation of the u-type mutants, members of a phenotypic group previously
implicated in Hedgehog signalling, and second, by analysing the effects of
overexpression of the Patched1 protein, a negative regulator of Hedgehog
signalling. Our results support the idea that most u-type genes are required for 
Hedgehog signalling and indicate that while such signalling is essential for slow
myocyte differentiation, the loss of activity of one signal, Sonic hedgehog, can 
be partially compensated for by other Hedgehog family proteins.

PMID: 10642786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Curr Biol. 1999 Nov 18;9(22):1319-22.

Distinct and regulated activities of human Gli proteins in Drosophila.

von Mering C(1), Basler K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Universität Zürich, Zürich, 8057, Switzerland.

In both vertebrates and Drosophila, limb development is organized by a
posteriorly located source of the signalling protein Hedgehog (Hh) [1] [2] [3]
[4]. In Drosophila, the expression of Hh target genes is controlled by two
opposing activities of the transcriptional regulator Cubitus interruptus (Ci),
which activates target genes in response to Hh signalling but is converted into a
repressor form in the absence of Hh [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]. Three homologs of
Ci (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) have been implicated in mediating responses to Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) in vertebrates [11] [12]. Much attention has been devoted to the
expression pattern of GLI genes; GLI1 is induced by Shh, whereas GLI3
transcription appears to be repressed by Shh signalling [13] [14] [15]. The
regulation of GLI gene expression is therefore one important mechanism by which
GLI genes organize pattern. It is not well understood, however, whether Shh
signalling also controls the activities of Gli proteins post-translationally and 
whether these activities have activating or repressing effects on target genes in
vivo. Here, we have subjected the human proteins Gli1 and Gli3 to the precise and
well-defined Hh signalling assay of Drosophila wing development and established
that Gli1 functions as an activator and Gli3 as a repressor of Hh target genes;
that the activating transcriptional activity of Gli1 and the repressing activity 
of Gli3 are both subject to Hh regulation in vivo; and that the combined
activities of Gli1 and Gli3 can substitute for Ci in controlling Hh target gene
expression during embryonic and larval development.

PMID: 10574767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Cell Sci. 1999 Dec;112 ( Pt 23):4437-48.

Characterization of the human suppressor of fused, a negative regulator of the
zinc-finger transcription factor Gli.

Stone DM(1), Murone M, Luoh S, Ye W, Armanini MP, Gurney A, Phillips H, Brush J, 
Goddard A, de Sauvage FJ, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, Genentech, Inc. 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco,
CA 94080, USA.

Drosophila Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)) encodes a novel 468-amino-acid
cytoplasmic protein which, by genetic analysis, functions as a negative regulator
of the Hedgehog segment polarity pathway. Here we describe the primary structure,
tissue distribution, biochemical and functional analyses of a human Su(fu)
(hSu(fu)). Two alternatively spliced isoforms of hSu(fu) were identified,
predicting proteins of 433 and 484 amino acids, with a calculated molecular mass 
of 48 and 54 kDa, respectively. The two proteins differ only by the inclusion or 
exclusion of a 52-amino-acid extension at the carboxy terminus. Both isoforms
were expressed in multiple embryonic and adult tissues, and exhibited a
developmental profile consistent with a role in Hedgehog signaling. The hSu(fu)
contains a high-scoring PEST-domain, and exhibits an overall 37% sequence
identity (63% similarity) with the Drosophila protein and 97% sequence identity
with the mouse Su(fu). The hSu(fu) locus mapped to chromosome 10q24-q25, a region
which is deleted in glioblastomas, prostate cancer, malignant melanoma and
endometrial cancer. HSu(fu) was found to repress activity of the zinc-finger
transcription factor Gli, which mediates Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates, and
to physically interact with Gli, Gli2 and Gli3 as well as with Slimb, an F-box
containing protein which, in the fly, suppresses the Hedgehog response, in part
by stimulating the degradation of the fly Gli homologue. Coexpression of Slimb
with Su(fu) potentiated the Su(fu)-mediated repression of Gli. Taken together,
our data provide biochemical and functional evidence for the hypothesis that
Su(fu) is a key negative regulator in the vertebrate Hedgehog signaling pathway. 
The data further suggest that Su(fu) can act by binding to Gli and inhibiting
Gli-mediated transactivation as well as by serving as an adaptor protein, which
links Gli to the Slimb-dependent proteasomal degradation pathway.

PMID: 10564661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Mech Dev. 1999 Nov;88(2):173-81.

Syndactyly of Ft/+ mice correlates with an imbalance in bmp4 and fgf8 expression.

Heymer J(1), Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.

The most obvious phenotype of Ft/+ mice is a syndactyly of fore limbs
characterised by a fusion of the tips of digits 1 to 4. The tempospatial
expression of genes involved in limb development revealed that patterning of Ft/+
limb buds is not affected by the mutation. However, an upregulation of Bmp4 in
the anterior-distal region of the limb bud at d12.0 of embryonic development is
accompanied by a loss of Fgf8 expression in the distal part of the AER.
Downstream target genes of Bmp action such as Msx1 and 2 are upregulated. This
induction of the signalling cascade indicates ectopic expression of functional
Bmp4. Nevertheless, analysis of physical parameters of bones from adult mice
revealed a reduction of the bone mass of the autopod. The data suggest a negative
effect of Bmp4 on Fgf8 expression and a positive influence on the induction of
bone elements.

PMID: 10534616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Curr Biol. 1999 Oct 7;9(19):1119-22.

Mouse suppressor of fused is a negative regulator of sonic hedgehog signaling and
alters the subcellular distribution of Gli1.

Ding Q(1), Fukami Si, Meng X, Nishizaki Y, Zhang X, Sasaki H, Dlugosz A, Nakafuku
M, Hui Cc.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology The Hospital for Sick Children Department of 
Molecular and Medical Genetics University of Toronto 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has critical functions during embryogenesis
of both invertebrate and vertebrate species [1]; defects in this pathway in
humans can cause developmental disorders as well as neoplasia [2]. Although the
Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 zinc finger proteins are known to be effectors of Hh
signaling in vertebrates, the mechanisms regulating activity of these
transcription factors remain poorly understood [3] [4]. In Drosophila, activity
of the Gli homolog Cubitus interruptus (Ci) is likely to be modulated by its
interaction with a cytoplasmic complex containing several other proteins [5] [6],
including Costal2, Fused (Fu), and Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)), the last of
which has been shown to interact directly with Ci [7]. We have cloned mouse
Suppressor of fused (mSu(fu)) and detected its 4.5 kb transcript throughout
embryogenesis and in several adult tissues. In cultured cells, mSu(fu)
overexpression inhibited transcriptional activation mediated by Sonic hedgehog
(Shh), Gli1 and Gli2. Co-immunoprecipitation of epitope-tagged proteins indicated
that mSu(fu) interacts with Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3, and that the inhibitory effects
of mSu(fu) on Gli1's transcriptional activity were mediated through interactions 
with both amino- and carboxy-terminal regions of Gli1. Gli1 was localized
primarily to the nucleus of both HeLa cells and the Shh-responsive cell line
MNS-70; co-expression with mSu(fu) resulted in a striking increase in cytoplasmic
Gli1 immunostaining. Our findings indicate that mSu(fu) can function as a
negative regulator of Shh signaling and suggest that this effect is mediated by
interaction with Gli transcription factors.

PMID: 10531011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):567-78.

The Shh signalling pathway in early tooth development.

Hardcastle Z(1), Hui CC, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, Kings College,
Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signalling pathway has been proposed to play an
important role in mammalian tooth development. We describe the spatial and
temporal expression of genes in this pathway during early tooth development and
interpret these patterns in terms of the likely roles of Shh signalling. We show 
that the two putative receptors of the Shh ligand, Ptc and Ptch-2, localise in
different cells, suggesting Shh may function in different ways as an epithelial
and mesenchymal signal. Shh signalling has previously been shown, in other
organs, to stimulate cell proliferation. In this paper we analyse the Fgf
signalling pathway in Gli-2 mutants and propose a mechanism as to how Gli-2 may
regulate cell proliferation in tooth development.

PMID: 10512189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3915-24.

Regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 activities by an amino-terminal repression domain:
implication of Gli2 and Gli3 as primary mediators of Shh signaling.

Sasaki H(1), Nishizaki Y, Hui C, Nakafuku M, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
hsasaki@imcb.osaka-u.ac.jp

Gli family zinc finger proteins are mediators of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
in vertebrates. The question remains unanswered, however, as to how these Gli
proteins participate in the Shh signaling pathway. In this study, regulatory
activities associated with the Gli2 protein were investigated in relation to the 
Shh signaling. Although Gli2 acts as a weak transcriptional activator, it is in
fact a composite of positive and negative regulatory domains. In cultured cells, 
truncation of the activation domain in the C-terminal half results in a protein
with repressor activity, while removal of the repression domain at the N terminus
converts Gli2 into a strong activator. In transgenic mouse embryos, N-terminally 
truncated Gli2, unlike the full length protein, activates a Shh target gene,
HNF3beta, in the dorsal neural tube, thus mimicking the effect of Shh signal.
This suggests that unmasking of the strong activation potential of Gli2 through
modulation of the N-terminal repression domain is one of the key mechanisms of
the Shh signaling. A similar regulatory mechanism involving the N-terminal region
was also found for Gli3, but not for Gli1. When the Shh signal derived from the
notochord is received by the neural plate, the widely expressed Gli2 and Gli3
proteins are presumably converted to their active forms in the ventral cells,
leading to activation of transcription of their target genes, including Gli1.

PMID: 10433919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Development. 1999 Aug;126(16):3649-59.

Ventral midline cells are required for the local control of commissural axon
guidance in the mouse spinal cord.

Matise MP(1), Lustig M, Sakurai T, Grumet M, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Skirball Institute of Biomolecular
Medicine, Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016, USA. matise@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Specialized cells at the midline of the central nervous system have been
implicated in controlling axon projections in both invertebrates and vertebrates.
To address the requirement for ventral midline cells in providing cues to
commissural axons in mice, we have analyzed Gli2 mouse mutants, which lack
specifically the floor plate and immediately adjacent interneurons. We show that 
a Dbx1 enhancer drives tau-lacZ expression in a subpopulation of commissural
axons and, using a reporter line generated from this construct, as well as DiI
tracing, we find that commissural axons projected to the ventral midline in
Gli2(-/-) embryos. Netrin1 mRNA expression was detected in Gli2(-/-) embryos and,
although much weaker than in wild-type embryos, was found in a dorsally
decreasing gradient. This result demonstrates that while the floor plate can
serve as a source of long-range cues for C-axons in vitro, it is not required in 
vivo for the guidance of commissural axons to the ventral midline in the mouse
spinal cord. After reaching the ventral midline, most commissural axons remained 
clustered in Gli2(-/-) embryos, although some were able to extend longitudinally.
Interestingly, some of the longitudinally projecting axons in Gli2(-/-) embryos
extended caudally and others rostrally at the ventral midline, in contrast to
normal embryos in which virtually all commissural axons turn rostrally after
crossing the midline. This finding indicates a critical role for ventral midline 
cells in regulating the rostral polarity choice made by commissural axons after
they cross the midline. In addition, we provide evidence that interactions
between commissural axons and floor plate cells are required to modulate the
localization of Nr-CAM and TAG-1 proteins on axons at the midline. Finally, we
show that the floor plate is not required for the early trajectory of motoneurons
or axons of the posterior commissure, whose projections are directed away from
the ventral midline in both WT and Gli2(-/-) embryos, although they are less well
organized in Gli2(-/-)mutants.

PMID: 10409510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3205-16.

Gli proteins encode context-dependent positive and negative functions:
implications for development and disease.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Several lines of evidence implicate zinc finger proteins of the Gli family in the
final steps of Hedgehog signaling in normal development and disease. C-terminally
truncated mutant GLI3 proteins are also associated with human syndromes, but it
is not clear whether these C-terminally truncated Gli proteins fulfil the same
function as full-length ones. Here, structure-function analyses of Gli proteins
have been performed using floor plate and neuronal induction assays in frog
embryos, as well as induction of alkaline phosphatase (AP) in SHH-responsive
mouse C3H10T1/2 (10T1/2) cells. These assays show that C-terminal sequences are
required for positive inducing activity and cytoplasmic localization, whereas
N-terminal sequences determine dominant negative function and nuclear
localization. Analyses of nuclear targeted Gli1 and Gli2 proteins suggest that
both activator and dominant negative proteins are modified forms. In embryos and 
COS cells, tagged Gli cDNAs yield C-terminally deleted forms similar to that of
Ci. These results thus provide a molecular basis for the human Polydactyly type A
and Pallister-Hall Syndrome phenotypes, derived from the deregulated production
of C-terminally truncated GLI3 proteins. Analyses of full-length Gli function in 
10T1/2 cells suggest that nuclear localization of activating forms is a regulated
event and show that only Gli1 mimics SHH in inducing AP activity. Moreover,
full-length Gli3 and all C-terminally truncated forms act antagonistically
whereas Gli2 is inactive in this assay. In 10T1/2 cells, protein kinase A (PKA), 
a known inhibitor of Hh signaling, promotes Gli3 repressor formation and inhibits
Gli1 function. Together, these findings suggest a context-dependent functional
divergence of Gli protein function, in which a cell represses Gli3 and activates 
Gli1/2 prevents the formation of repressor Gli forms to respond to Shh.
Interpretation of Hh signals by Gli proteins therefore appears to involve a fine 
balance of divergent functions within each and among different Gli proteins, the 
misregulation of which has profound biological consequences.

PMID: 10375510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3089-100.

Sonic hedgehog regulates the growth and patterning of the cerebellum.

Dahmane N(1), Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

The molecular bases of brain development and CNS malignancies remain poorly
understood. Here we show that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling controls the
development of the cerebellum at multiple levels. SHH is produced by Purkinje
neurons, it is required for the proliferation of granule neuron precursors and it
induces the differentiation of Bergmann glia. Blocking SHH function in vivo
results in deficient granule neuron and Bergmann glia differentiation as well as 
in abnormal Purkinje neuron development. Thus, our findings provide a molecular
model for the growth and patterning of the cerebellum by SHH through the
coordination of the development of cortical cerebellar cell types. In addition,
they provide a cellular context for medulloblastomas, childhood cancers of the
cerebellum.

PMID: 10375501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Curr Opin Pediatr. 1999 Jun;11(3):188-92.

Current concepts on lung development.

Warburton D(1), Lee MK.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles Research Institute, CA 90027, USA.
dwarburton@chlais.usc.edu

Recent molecular genetic and embryonic organ culture studies have implicated
several novel regulatory processes in the coordination of lung development.
Failure of pulmonary initiation results from interruptions of the sonic
hedgehog/patched/Gli and Nkx 2.1 signaling pathways. Sonic hedgehog null mutants 
and Gli2/Gli3 compound null mutants each exhibited failed tracheoesophageal
septation. However, proximodistal epithelial differentiation is disrupted by
compound Gli mutation, but is preserved in sonic hedgehog mutants. Null mutation 
of Nkx 2.1 also abrogates tracheoesophageal septation in association with thyroid
and pituitary agenesis. Primary tracheal branching is regulated by fibroblast
growth factor-10 signaling; in the murine fibroblast growth factor-10 null
phenotype, the lung fails to separate from the foregut and morphogenesis is
arrested distal to the trachea. Several genes in the fibroblast growth factor-10 
pathway have homologous roles in fruit fly tracheal organogenesis, and
corresponding Drosophila mutations yield strikingly similar phenotypes. Recent
data also indicate that airway branching can be regulated by vascular endothelial
growth factor, suggesting mutual regulation of airway and vascular development.
The bases of pulmonary left-right asymmetry and laterality have also been
investigated. The transforming growth factor-beta superfamily members Lefty-1,
Lefty-2, and nodal comprise a regulatory pathway whose function is required for
the development of left-right asymmetry, whereas left-right laterality is
dependent on regulation of dynein expression by the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4. Terminal lung differentiation is modulated by yet
another set of signals. Hoxa5 null mutants exhibit tracheal occlusion and
surfactant protein deficiency, whereas fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 and -4
compound null phenotypes include abrogated neonatal alveolization, perturbed
alveolar myofibroblast differentiation, and persistent neonatal elastin
deposition. These new contributions represent substantial advances toward a
comprehensive molecular model of pulmonary development.

PMID: 10349094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Am J Physiol. 1999 May;276(5 Pt 1):L697-704.

Molecular embryology of the lung: then, now, and in the future.

Warburton D(1), Zhao J, Berberich MA, Bernfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program and Department of Surgery, Childrens Hospital
Los Angeles Research Institute, Los Angeles, California 90027, USA.
dwarburton@chla.usc.edu

Complementary molecular and genetic approaches are yielding information about
gain- versus loss-of-function phenotypes of specific genes and gene families in
the embryonic, fetal, neonatal, and adult lungs. New insights are being derived
from the conservation of function between genes regulating branching
morphogenesis of the respiratory organs in Drosophila and in the mammalian lung. 
The function of specific morphogenetic genes in the lung are now placed in
context with pattern-forming functions in other, better understood morphogenetic 
fields such as the limb bud. Initiation of lung morphogenesis from the floor of
the primitive foregut requires coordinated transcriptional activation and
repression involving hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta, Sonic hedgehog, patched,
Gli2, and Gli3 as well as Nkx2.1. Subsequent inductive events require
epithelial-mesenchymal interaction mediated by specific fibroblast growth factor 
ligand-receptor signaling as well as modulation by other peptide growth factors
including epidermal growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor-A and
transforming growth factor-beta and by extracellular matrix components. A
scientific rationale for developing new therapeutic approaches to urgent
questions of human pulmonary health such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia is
beginning to emerge from work in this field.

PMID: 10330024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Virol. 1999 Apr;73(4):3258-63.

Interaction of Gli2 with CREB protein on DNA elements in the long terminal repeat
of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 is responsible for transcriptional
activation by tax protein.

Dan S(1), Tanimura A, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108, Japan.

The long terminal repeat (LTR) of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) has
two distinct DNA elements, one copy of TRE2S and three copies of a 21-bp sequence
that respond to the viral trans-activator protein, Tax. Either multiple copies of
the 21-bp sequence or a combination of one copy each of TRE2S and 21-bp sequence 
is required for efficient trans activation by Tax. In the trans activation of
multiple copies of 21-bp sequence, CREB/ATF protein plays an essential role in
forming a complex with Tax. To understand the role of TRE2S in trans activation
of one copy of 21-bp sequence, we examined protein binding to the DNA elements by
DNA affinity precipitation assay including Gli2 protein binding to TRE2S and CREB
protein binding to 21-bp sequence. Binding of CREB to a DNA probe containing both
elements, TRE2S-21bp probe, was dependent on Gli2 protein under restricted
conditions and was enhanced in a dose-dependent fashion by the binding of Gli2
protein to the same probe. Mutation in either element abolished the efficient
binding of CREB. A glutathione S-transferase fusion protein of a fragment of Gli2
was able to bind to CREB. Therefore, Gli2-CREB interaction on the DNA probe is
proposed to stabilize CREB binding to DNA. Tax can bind to CREB protein on the
DNA; therefore, stabilization of DNA binding of CREB results in more recruitment 
of Tax onto DNA. Conversely, Tax increased the DNA binding of CREB, although it
had almost no effect on the binding of Gli2. These results suggest that Gli2
binds to the DNA element and interacts with CREB, resulting in more recruitment
of Tax, which in turn stabilizes DNA binding of CREB. Similar cooperation of the 
protein binding to TRE2S-21bp probe was also observed in nuclear extract of an
HTLV-1-infected T-cell line. Consistent with the Gli2-CREB interaction on the DNA
elements, Tax-mediated trans activation was dependent on the size of the spacer
between TRE2S and 21-bp sequence. The effective sizes of the spacer suggest that 
TRE2S in the LTR would cooperate with the second and third copies of the 21-bp
sequence and contribute to trans activation of the viral gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC104089
PMID: 10074179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Genes Dev. 1999 Feb 15;13(4):388-93.

Comparative synteny cloning of zebrafish you-too: mutations in the Hedgehog
target gli2 affect ventral forebrain patterning.

Karlstrom RO(1), Talbot WS, Schier AF.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10016 USA. karlstrom@bio.umass.edu

Zebrafish you-too (yot) mutations interfere with Hedgehog (Hh) signaling during
embryogenesis. Using a comparative synteny approach, we isolated yot as a zinc
finger transcription factor homologous to the Hh target gli2. Two alleles of yot 
contain nonsense mutations resulting in carboxy-terminally truncated proteins. In
addition to causing defects in midline development, muscle differentiation, and
retinal axon guidance, yot mutations disrupt anterior pituitary and ventral
forebrain differentiation. yot mutations also cause ectopic lens formation in the
ventral diencephalon. These findings reveal that truncated zebrafish Gli2
proteins interfere with Hh signaling necessary for differentiation and axon
guidance in the ventral forebrain.

PMCID: PMC316467
PMID: 10049354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):54-7.

Essential function of Gli2 and Gli3 in the formation of lung, trachea and
oesophagus.

Motoyama J(1), Liu J, Mo R, Ding Q, Post M, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):7-8.

Foregut malformations (oesophageal atresia, tracheo-oesophageal fistula, lung
anomalies and congenital stenosis of the oesophagus and trachea) are relatively
common anomalies occurring in 1 in 2,000-5,000 live births, although their
aetiology is poorly understood. The secreted glycoprotein Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
has been suggested to act as an endodermal signal that controls hindgut
patterning and lung growth. In mice, three zinc-finger transcription factors,
Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, have been implicated in the transduction of Shh signal. We
report here that mutant mice lacking Gli2 function exhibit foregut defects,
including stenosis of the oesophagus and trachea, as well as hypoplasia and
lobulation defects of the lung. A reduction of 50% in the gene dosage of Gli3 in 
a Gli2-/- background resulted in oesophageal atresia with tracheo-oesophageal
fistula and a severe lung phenotype. Mutant mice lacking both Gli2 and Gli3
function did not form oesophagus, trachea and lung. These results indicate that
Gli2 and Gli3 possess specific and overlapping functions in Shh signalling during
foregut development, and suggest that mutations in GLI genes may be involved in
human foregut malformations.

PMID: 9731531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):7-8.

A lungful of transcription factors.

Whitsett J.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):58-61.
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):54-7.

PMID: 9731520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Clin Genet. 1998 Jun;53(6):488-9.

Identification of microsatellite markers tightly linked to the Gli2 putative zinc
finger transcription factor gene.

Stone DL(1), Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Disease Research, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

PMID: 9712541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3123-32.

Evidence that preaxial polydactyly in the Doublefoot mutant is due to ectopic
Indian Hedgehog signaling.

Yang Y(1), Guillot P, Boyd Y, Lyon MF, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Patterning of the vertebrate limb along the anterior-posterior axis is controlled
by the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) located at the posterior limb margin.
One of the vertebrate Hh family members, Shh, has been shown to be able to
mediate the function of the ZPA. Several naturally occurring mouse mutations with
the phenotype of preaxial polydactyly exhibit ectopic Shh expression at the
anterior limb margin. In this study, we report the molecular characterization of 
a spontaneous mouse mutation, Doublefoot (Dbf). Dbf is a dominant mutation which 
maps to chromosome 1. Heterozygous and homozygous embryos display a severe
polydactyly with 6 to 8 digits on each limb. We show here that Shh is expressed
normally in Dbf mutants. In contrast, a second Hh family member, Indian hedgehog 
(Ihh) which maps close to Dbf, is ectopically expressed in the distal limb bud.
Ectopic Ihh expression in the distal and anterior limb bud results in the ectopic
activation of several genes associated with anterior-posterior and
proximal-distal patterning (Fgf4, Hoxd13, Bmp2). In addition, specific components
in the Hedgehog pathway are either ectopically activated (Ptc, Ptc-2, Gli1) or
repressed (Gli2). We propose that misexpression of Ihh, and not a novel
Smoothened ligand as recently suggested (Hayes et al., 1998), is responsible for 
the Dbf phenotype. We consider that Ihh has a similar activity to Shh when
expressed in the early Shh-responsive limb bud. To determine whether Dbf maps to 
the Ihh locus, which is also on chromosome 1, we performed an interspecific
backcross. These results demonstrate that Dbf and Ihh are genetically separated
by approximately 1.3 centimorgans, suggesting that Dbf mutation may cause an
exceptionally long-range disruption of Ihh regulation. Although this leads to
ectopic activation of Ihh, normal expression of Ihh in the cartilaginous elements
is retained.

PMID: 9671585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Development. 1998 Aug;125(15):2803-11.

The Shh signalling pathway in tooth development: defects in Gli2 and Gli3
mutants.

Hardcastle Z(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, UMDS, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge,
London SE1 9RT, UK.

The expression of genes involved in the Sonic Hedgehog signalling pathway,
including Shh, Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, were found to be expressed in
temporal and spatial patterns during early murine tooth development, suggestive
of a role in early tooth germ initiation and subsequent epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions. Of these Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 were expressed in epithelium
and mesenchyme whereas Shh was only detected in epithelium. This suggests that
Shh is involved in both lateral (epithelial-mesenchymal) and planar
(epithelial-epithelial) signalling in early tooth development. Ectopic
application of Shh protein to mandibular mesenchyme induced the expression of Ptc
and Gli1. Addition of exogenous Shh protein directly into early tooth germs and
adjacent to tooth germs, resulted in abnormal epithelial invagination, indicative
of a role for Shh in epithelial cell proliferation. In order to assess the
possible role of this pathway, tooth development in Gli2 and Gli3 mutant embryos 
was investigated. Gli2 mutants were found to have abnormal development of
maxillary incisors, probably resulting from a mild holoprosencephaly, whereas
Gli3 mutants had no major tooth abnormalities. Gli2/Gli3 double homozygous
mutants did not develop any normal teeth and did not survive beyond embryonic day
14.5; however, Gli2(-/-); Gli3(+/-) did survive until birth and had small molars 
and mandibular incisors whereas maxillary incisor development was arrested as a
rudimentary epithelial thickening. These results show an essential role for Shh
signalling in tooth development that involves functional redundancy of downstream
Gli genes.

PMID: 9655803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Development. 1998 Aug;125(15):2759-70.

Gli2 is required for induction of floor plate and adjacent cells, but not most
ventral neurons in the mouse central nervous system.

Matise MP(1), Epstein DJ, Park HL, Platt KA, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Medical Center,
New York, NY 10016, USA.

Induction of the floor plate at the ventral midline of the neural tube is one of 
the earliest events in the establishment of dorsoventral (d/v) polarity in the
vertebrate central nervous system (CNS). The secreted molecule, Sonic hedgehog,
has been shown to be both necessary and sufficient for this induction. In
vertebrates, several downstream components of this signalling pathway have been
identified, including members of the Gli transcription factor family. In this
study, we have examined d/v patterning of the CNS in Gli2 mouse mutants. We have 
found that the floor plate throughout the midbrain, hindbrain and spinal cord
does not form in Gli2 homozygotes. Despite this, motoneurons and ventral
interneurons form in their normal d/v positions at 9.5 to 12.5 days postcoitum
(dpc). However, cells that are generated in the region flanking the floor plate, 
including dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons, were greatly reduced in number
or absent in Gli2 homozygous embryos. These results suggest that early signals
derived from the notochord can be sufficient for establishing the basic d/v
domains of cell differentiation in the ventral spinal cord and hindbrain.
Interestingly, the notochord in Gli2 mutants does not regress ventrally after
10.5 dpc, as in normal embryos. Finally, the spinal cord of Gli1/Gli2
zinc-finger-deletion double homozygous mutants appeared similar to Gli2
homozygotes, indicating that neither gene is required downstream of Shh for the
early development of ventral cell fates outside the ventral midline.

PMID: 9655799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2533-43.

Diminished Sonic hedgehog signaling and lack of floor plate differentiation in
Gli2 mutant mice.

Ding Q(1), Motoyama J, Gasca S, Mo R, Sasaki H, Rossant J, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology and Division of Endocrinology, Research
Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Floor plate cells at the midline of the neural tube are specified by high-level
activity of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) secreted by notochord, whereas motor neurons are
thought to be specified by a lower level activity of Shh secreted in turn by
floor plate cells. In Drosophila, the Gli zinc finger protein Cubitus interruptus
functions as a transcription factor activating Hedgehog-responsive genes. We
report that the expression of known Shh-responsive genes such as Ptc and Gli1 is 
downregulated in mutant mice lacking Gli2 function. Gli2 mutants fail to develop 
a floor plate yet still develop motor neurons, which occupy the ventral midline
of the neural tube. Our results imply that Gli2 is required to mediate high level
but not low level Shh activity and show that the development of motor neurons can
occur in the absence of floor plate induction.

PMID: 9636069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Development. 1998 Jun;125(12):2203-12.

Combinatorial Gli gene function in floor plate and neuronal inductions by Sonic
hedgehog.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Within the developing vertebrate nervous system, it is not known how progenitor
cells interpret the positional information provided by inducing signals or how
the domains in which distinct groups of neural cells differentiate are defined.
Gli proteins may be involved in these processes. In the frog neural plate, we
have previously shown that the zinc finger transcription factor Gli1 is expressed
in midline cells and mediates the effects of Shh inducing floor plate
differentiation. In contrast, Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed throughout the neural
plate except for the midline. Here, it is shown that Gli3 and Shh repress each
other whereas Gli2, like Gli1, is a target of Shh signaling. However, only Gli1
can induce the differentiation of floor plate cells. In addition, Gli2 and Gli3
repress the ectopic induction of floor plate cells by Gli1 in co-injection assays
and inhibit endogenous floor plate differentiation. The definition of the floor
plate domain, therefore, appears to be defined by the antagonizing activities of 
Gli2 and Gli3 on Gli1 function. Because both Gli1 and Gli2 are induced by Shh,
these results establish a regulatory feedback loop triggered by Shh that
restricts floor plate cells to the midline. We have also previously shown that
the Gli genes induce neuronal differentiation and here it is shown that there is 
specificity to the types of neurons the Gli proteins induce. Only Gli1 induces
Nkx2.1/TTF-1(+) ventral forebrain neurons. Moreover, Gli2 and Gli3 inhibit their 
differentiation. In contrast, the differentiation of spinal motor neurons can be 
induced by the two ventrally expressed Gli genes, Gli1 and Gli2, suggesting that 
Gli2 directly mediates induction of motor neurons by Shh. In addition, Gli3
inhibits motor neuron differentiation by Gli2. Thus, combinatorial Gli function
may pattern the neural tube, integrating positional information and cell type
differentiation.

PMID: 9584120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Virol. 1998 May;72(5):3958-64.

Cloning of novel isoforms of the human Gli2 oncogene and their activities to
enhance tax-dependent transcription of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1
genome.

Tanimura A(1), Dan S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The expression of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is activated by
interaction of a viral transactivator protein, Tax, and cellular transcription
factor, CREB (cyclic AMP response element binding protein), which bind to a 21-bp
enhancer in the long terminal repeats (LTR). THP (Tax-helping protein) was
previously determined to enhance the transactivation by Tax protein. Here we
report novel forms of the human homolog of a member of the Gli oncogene family,
Gli2 (also termed Gli2/THP), an extended form of a zinc finger protein, THP,
which was described previously. Four possible isoforms (hGli2 alpha, beta, gamma,
and delta) are formed by combinations of two independent alternative splicings,
and all the isoforms could bind to a DNA motif, TRE2S, in the LTR. The longer
isoforms, alpha and beta, were abundantly expressed in various cell lines
including HTLV-1-infected T-cell lines. Fusion proteins of the hGli2 isoforms
with the DNA-binding domain of Gal4 activated transcription when the reporter
contained a Gal4-binding site and one copy of the 21-bp sequence, to which CREB
binds. This activation was observed only in the presence of Tax. The 21-bp
sequence in the reporter was also essential for the activation. These results
suggest that simultaneous binding of hGli2 and CREB to the respective sites in
the reporter seems to be critical for Tax protein to activate transcription.
Consequently, it is probable that the LTR can be regulated by two independent
signals through hGli2 and CREB, since the LTR contains the 21-bp and TRE2S
sequences in the vicinity.

PMCID: PMC109622
PMID: 9557682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Development. 1998 Feb;125(4):777-90.

Control of somite patterning by Sonic hedgehog and its downstream signal response
genes.

Borycki AG(1), Mendham L, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Universityof Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

In the avian embryo, previous work has demonstrated that the notochord provides
inductive signals to activate myoD and pax1 regulatory genes, which are expressed
in the dorsal and ventral somite cells that give rise to myotomal and sclerotomal
lineages. Here, we present bead implantation and antisense inhibition experiments
that show that Sonic hedgehog is both a sufficient and essential notochord signal
molecule for myoD and pax1 activation in somites. Furthermore, we show that genes
of the Sonic hedgehog signal response pathway, specifically patched, the Sonic
hedgehog receptor, and gli and gli2/4, zinc-finger transcription factors, are
activated in coordination with somite formation, establishing that Sonic hedgehog
response genes play a regulatory role in coordinating the response of somites to 
the constitutive notochord Sonic hedgehog signal. Furthermore, the expression of 
patched, gli and gli2/4 is differentially patterned in the somite, providing
mechanisms for differentially transducing the Sonic hedgehog signal to the
myotomal and sclerotomal lineages. Finally, we show that the activation of gli2/4
is controlled by the process of somite formation and signals from the surface
ectoderm, whereas upregulation of patched and activation of gli is controlled by 
the process of somite formation and a Sonic hedgehog signal. The Sonic hedgehog
signal response genes, therefore, have important functions in regulating the
initiation of the Sonic hedgehog response in newly forming somites and in
regulating the patterned expression of myoD and pax1 in the myotomal and
sclerotomal lineages following somite formation.

PMID: 9435297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 6;273(6):3496-501.

GLI activates transcription through a herpes simplex viral protein 16-like
activation domain.

Yoon JW(1), Liu CZ, Yang JT, Swart R, Iannaccone P, Walterhouse D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Medical School,
Developmental Systems Biology, Children's Memorial Institute for Education and
Research, Children's Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

Three proteins have been identified in mammals, GLI, GLI2, and GLI3, which share 
a highly conserved zinc finger domain with Drosophila Cubitus interruptus and are
believed to function as transcription factors in the vertebrate Sonic
hedgehog-Patched signaling pathway. To understand the role GLI plays in the Sonic
hedgehog-Patched pathway and mechanisms of GLI-induced transcriptional
regulation, we have characterized its transcriptional regulatory properties and
contributions of specific domains to transcriptional regulation. We have
demonstrated that GLI activates expression of reporter constructs in HeLa cells
in a concentration-dependent manner through the GLI consensus binding motif and
that a GAL4 binding domain-GLI fusion protein activates reporter expression
through the GAL4 DNA binding site. GLI-induced transcriptional activation
requires the carboxyl-terminal amino acids 1020-1091, which includes an 18-amino 
acid region highly similar to the alpha-helical herpes simplex viral protein 16
activation domain, including the consensus recognition element for the human
TFIID TATA box-binding protein-associated factor TAFII31 and conservation of all 
three amino acid residues believed to contact directly chemically complementary
residues in TAFII31. The presence of this region in the GLI activation domain
provides a mechanism for GLI-induced transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 9452474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jan;211(1):88-96.

Expression profile of Gli family members and Shh in normal and mutant mouse limb 
development.

Büscher D(1), Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

Gli genes represent a small family, encoding zinc-finger proteins of the
Krüppel-type. The family consists of Gli(1), Gli2, and Gli3, all of which are
expressed in the developing mouse limb bud. To assess the role of the Gli family 
and Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in mouse limb development, we compared the expression
domains of all three Gli genes and of Shh. Although each Gli gene has its own
distinct expression pattern in limb buds, at 10.5-11.5 dpc all three genes were
found not to be expressed in the posterior region, the presumptive Shh expression
domain. This transient mutually exclusive expression suggested a potential
interaction between Gli genes and Shh. To address this matter, we analysed the
expression of Gli genes and Shh in two polydactyly mouse mutants, Extra toes (Xt)
and Hemimelic-extra toes (Hx) which express Shh ectopically in the anterior
region of the limb field. Since Xt mice lack Gli3 expression, the ectopic Shh
expression is genetically linked to the absence of Gli3. In Hx mice we found a
down-regulation of Gli3 in the anterior region of the limb bud. In both mutants
Gli2 expression pattern was not altered, whereas Gli1 expression was anteriorly
up-regulated adjacent to the ectopic Shh domain. These results strongly suggest a
positive regulation of Gli1 by Shh and a negative interaction between Shh and
Gli3.

PMID: 9438426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nat Genet. 1997 Nov;17(3):259-60.

Strike three for GLI3.

Biesecker LG.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1998 Jan;18(1):88.

PMID: 9354780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Dev Biol. 1997 Aug 15;188(2):337-48.

Evidence for the involvement of the Gli gene family in embryonic mouse lung
development.

Grindley JC(1), Bellusci S, Perkins D, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, 37232-2175, USA.

Murine Gli, Gli2, and Gli3 are zinc finger genes related to Drosophila cubitus
interuptus, a component of the hedgehog signal transduction pathway. In the
embryonic lung, all three Gli genes are strongly expressed at the pseudoglandular
stage, in distinct but overlapping domains of the mesoderm. Expression of Gli and
Gli3, but not of Gli2, is subsequently downregulated at the canalicular stage,
coincident with a decline in the expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the
hedgehog receptor gene, patched (Ptc). Overexpression of Shh in the lung results 
in increased levels of Ptc mRNA. Gli, but not Gli2, is also upregulated,
suggesting a differential involvement of the Gli genes in the regulation of Ptc
by SHH during lung development. Gli3 is not upregulated by Shh overexpression.
However, its importance for lung development is shown by the finding that Gli3XtJ
embryos, homozygous for a mutation involving a deletion of the Gli3 gene, have a 
stereotypic pattern of abnormalities in lung morphogenesis. The pulmonary defects
in these embryos, consisting of localized shape changes and size reductions,
correlate with normal Gli3 expression. Thus, our data indicate that one of the
Gli genes, Gli3, is essential for normal lung development, and that another, Gli,
can be placed downstream of Shh signaling in the lung.

PMID: 9268579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Development. 1997 Jul;124(13):2537-52.

Gli1 is a target of Sonic hedgehog that induces ventral neural tube development.

Lee J(1), Platt KA, Censullo P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The vertebrate zinc finger genes of the Gli family are homologs of the Drosophila
gene cubitus interruptus. In frog embryos, Gli1 is expressed transiently in the
prospective floor plate during gastrulation and in cells lateral to the midline
during late gastrula and neurula stages. In contrast, Gli2 and Gli3 are absent
from the neural plate midline with Gli2 expressed widely and Gli3 in a graded
fashion with highest levels in lateral regions. In mouse embryos, the three Gli
genes show a similar pattern of expression in the neural tube but are coexpressed
throughout the early neural plate. Because Gli1 is the only Gli gene expressed in
prospective floor plate cells of frog embryos, we have investigated a possible
involvement of this gene in ventral neural tube development. Here we show that
Shh signaling activates Gli1 transcription and that widespread expression of
endogenous frog or human glioma Gli1, but not Gli3, in developing frog embryos
results in the ectopic differentiation of floor plate cells and ventral neurons
within the neural tube. Floor-plate-inducing ability is retained when cytoplasmic
Gli1 proteins are forced into the nucleus or are fused to the VP16
transactivating domain. Thus, our results identify Gli1 as a midline target of
Shh and suggest that it mediates the induction of floor plate cells and ventral
neurons by Shh acting as a transcriptional regulator.

PMID: 9216996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Oncogene. 1997 May 15;14(19):2259-64.

Gli family members are differentially expressed during the mitotic phase of
spermatogenesis.

Persengiev SP(1), Kondova II, Millette CF, Kilpatrick DL.

Author information: 
(1)Worcester Foundation for Biomedical Research, Neurobiology Group, Shrewsbury, 
Massachusetts 01545, USA.

The Gli family of DNA binding proteins has been implicated in multiple neoplasias
and developmental abnormalities, suggesting a primary involvement in cell
development and differentiation. However, to date their specific roles and
mechanisms of action remain obscure, and a drawback has been the lack of a model 
system in which to study their normal function. Here we demonstrate that Gli
family members are differentially expressed during spermatogenesis in mice.
Specifically, Gli and Gli3 mRNAs were detected in mouse germ cells, while Gli2
was not. Further, both Gli and Gli3 exhibited stage-dependent patterns of
expression selectively in type A and B spermatogonia. Gli expression was somewhat
higher in type B spermatogonia while the abundance of Gli3 transcripts was
similar in type A and B cells. Gel-shift analyses also demonstrated the
enrichment of DNA binding activity specific for the Gli target sequence in
spermatogonial cells. These results indicate a selective role for Gli and Gli3
during mitotic stages of male germ cell development. Spermatogenesis may thus
provide a unique opportunity to identify downstream targets and explore the
normal function of Gli family proteins.

PMID: 9178901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Development. 1997 Apr;124(7):1313-22.

A binding site for Gli proteins is essential for HNF-3beta floor plate enhancer
activity in transgenics and can respond to Shh in vitro.

Sasaki H(1), Hui C, Nakafuku M, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
hsasaki@imcb.osaka-u.ac.jp

The floor plate plays important roles in ventral pattern formation and axonal
guidance within the neural tube of vertebrate embryos. A critical event for floor
plate development is the induction of a winged helix transcription factor,
Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-3beta (HNF-3beta). The enhancer for floor plate
expression of HNF-3beta is located 3' of the transcription unit and consists of
multiple elements. HNF-3beta induction depends on the notochord-derived signal,
Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Genetic analysis in Drosophila has led to the
identification of genes involved in the Hh signalling pathway, and cubitus
interruptus (ci), encoding a protein with five zinc finger motifs, was placed
downstream. In the present work, we test the involvement of Gli proteins, the
mouse homologues of Ci, in activation of the floor plate enhancer of HNF-3beta.
Transgenic analysis shows that a Gli-binding site is required for the activity of
the minimal floor plate enhancer of HNF-3beta in vivo. Three Gli genes are
differentially expressed in the developing neural tube. Gli expression is
restricted to the ventral part, while Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed throughout the 
neural tube and dorsally, respectively. Strong Gli and Gli2, and weak Gli3
expressions transiently overlap with HNF-3beta at the time of its induction.
Consistent with ventrally localized expression, Gli expression can be
up-regulated by Shh in a cell line. Finally, the Gli-binding site acts as a Shh
responsive element, and human GLI, but not GLI3, can activate this binding site
in tissue culture. Taken together, these findings suggest that Gli, and probably 
also Gli2, are good candidates for transcriptional activators of the HNF-3beta
floor plate enhancer, and the binding site for Gli proteins is a key element for 
response to Shh signalling. These results also support the idea that Gli/Ci are
evolutionary conserved transcription factors in the Hedgehog signalling pathway.

PMID: 9118802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Genomics. 1997 Jan 15;39(2):205-15.

Cloning and sequencing of the mouse Gli2 gene: localization to the Dominant
hemimelia critical region.

Hughes DC(1), Allen J, Morley G, Sutherland K, Ahmed W, Prosser J, Lettice L,
Allan G, Mattei MG, Farrall M, Hill RE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 
davidh@ihr.mrc.ac.uk

The GLI family of zinc finger genes has been implicated in both neoplastic and
developmental disorders. We have cloned and sequenced the mouse homolog of the
zinc finger gene Gli2 and demonstrated significant similarity to the human GLI3
gene. We have also localized Gli2 to mouse chromosome 1, in the vicinity of the
morphogenetic mutation Dominant hemimelia (Dh), which is characterized by tibial 
hemimelia, poly/oligodactyly, and a number of visceral abnormalities, most
strikingly absence of the spleen. Using a Gli2-associated microsatellite, we
demonstrated no recombination between Dh and Gli2 in a Dh intraspecific
backcross. Gli2 is expressed in Dh heterozygotes and homozygotes. However, using 
a combination of mismatch analysis and direct sequencing, we have failed to
identify any mutations in the coding sequence of Gli2 from Dh. We have also
demonstrated that it is unlikely that there are any Gli genes in the mouse genome
in addition to the previously described Gli, Gli2, and Gli3.

PMID: 9027508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Development. 1997 Jan;124(1):113-23.

Specific and redundant functions of Gli2 and Gli3 zinc finger genes in skeletal
patterning and development.

Mo R(1), Freer AM, Zinyk DL, Crackower MA, Michaud J, Heng HH, Chik KW, Shi XM,
Tsui LC, Cheng SH, Joyner AL, Hui C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology and Division of Endocrinology, Research
Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The correct patterning of vertebrate skeletal elements is controlled by inductive
interactions. Two vertebrate hedgehog proteins, Sonic hedgehog and Indian
hedgehog, have been implicated in skeletal development. During somite
differentiation and limb development, Sonic hedgehog functions as an inductive
signal from the notochord, floor plate and zone of polarizing activity. Later in 
skeletogenesis, Indian hedgehog functions as a regulator of chondrogenesis during
endochondral ossification. The vertebrate Gli zinc finger proteins are putative
transcription factors that respond to Hedgehog signaling. In Drosophila, the Gli 
homolog cubitus interruptus is required for the activation of hedgehog targets
and also functions as a repressor of hedgehog expression. We show here that Gli2 
mutant mice exhibit severe skeletal abnormalities including cleft palate, tooth
defects, absence of vertebral body and intervertebral discs, and shortened limbs 
and sternum. Interestingly, Gli2 and Gli3 (C.-c. Hui and A. L. Joyner (1993).
Nature Genet. 3, 241-246) mutant mice exhibit different subsets of skeletal
defects indicating that they implement specific functions in the development of
the neural crest, somite and lateral plate mesoderm derivatives. Although Gli2
and Gli3 are not functionally equivalent, double mutant analysis indicates that, 
in addition to their specific roles, they also serve redundant functions during
skeletal development. The role of Gli2 and Gli3 in Hedgehog signaling during
skeletal development is discussed.

PMID: 9006072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Genomics. 1996 Aug 15;36(1):220-1.

Assignment of the human GLI2 gene to 2q14 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Matsumoto N(1), Fujimoto M, Kato R, Niikawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Sakamoto
1-12-4, Nagasaki, 852, Japan.

PMID: 8812445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1995;121(9-10):521-8.

HTLV-1 oncoprotein Tax deregulates transcription of cellular genes through
multiple mechanisms.

Yoshida M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Infection of a human retrovirus HTLV-1 induces adult T cell leukemia and a
neurological disease, HAM/TSP. Regulatory protein Tax of HTLV-1 is thought to
contribute to the pathogenesis. We have studied the mechanism of transcriptional 
activation induced by Tax protein and identified two independent mechanisms: (a) 
binding to the enhancer-binding proteins, CREB, CREM, NF-kappa B and SRF,
resulting in the activation of these factors through indirect binding to each
specific DNA sequence, and (b) binding to I kappa B protein resulting in the
suppression of the negative regulator I kappa B, which binds to NF-kappa B. In
addition to these factors, a new protein GLI/THP is also involved in the
transactivation. On the basis of these mechanisms, gene regulations in vitro and 
in vivo in HTLV-1-infected cells are discussed.

PMID: 7559731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Virol. 1993 Sep;67(9):5375-82.

A new regulatory element that augments the Tax-dependent enhancer of human T-cell
leukemia virus type 1 and cloning of cDNAs encoding its binding proteins.

Tanimura A(1), Teshima H, Fujisawa J, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The Tax protein of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) trans activates
the 21-bp enhancer of HTLV-1. A sequence of more than two copies of the 21-bp
enhancer is efficiently activated by Tax, but one copy is not activated
extensively. Another sequence (TRE-2, positions -163 to -117) adjacent to the
21-bp enhancer in the long terminal repeat of HTLV-1 can enhance a single copy of
the 21-bp enhancer activity in trans activation by Tax. This sequence contains
motifs related to the Ets- and NF-kappa B-binding sequences, but mutations at
these sites indicated that neither is responsive to cooperation with the 21-bp
enhancer. A deletion mutation of TRE-2 identified 25 bases at positions -158 to
-134 (TRE-2S) as an essential sequence, and TRE-2S was sufficient to give maximum
cooperation with one copy of the 21-bp enhancer in trans activation by Tax
protein. Using TRE-2S as a probe, we screened a cDNA library of HUT102 cells by
the Southwestern (DNA-protein) procedure and isolated two cDNA clones, THP-1 and 
-2. These two clones encode TRE-2S-binding proteins, and they differ by only an
extra 17 amino acids in THP-2. Both THP proteins contain five zinc finger motifs 
which are strikingly similar to those of the GLI family, an amplified gene
product in glyoma cells. The binding site of THP-1 and -2 was GAACCACCCA in
TRE-2S, which is highly homologous to the GLI-binding site. These results suggest
that binding of THP to TRE-2S may be involved in cooperation with one copy of the
21-bp enhancer in responding to Tax trans activation.

PMCID: PMC237938
PMID: 8350401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Z Rechtsmed. 1977 Jan 21;79(1):13-5.

Population genetics of glyoxalase I (E.C.4.4.1.5) in human erythrocytes.

Berg K, Rodewald A, Schwarzfischer F, Wischerath H.

1025 individuals from Southern Germany were examined. The gene frequencies for
GLI1 are 0.4235 and for GLI2 0.5765. These frequencies are compared with those of
other authors.

PMID: 848131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


